UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
GOVERNING COUNCIL

REPORT NUMBER 293 OF THE ACADEMIC APPEALS COMMITTEE
December 16, 2004
To the Academic Board,
University of Toronto.
Your Committee reports that it held a hearing on Monday, November 22nd 2004, at which the
following were present:
Assistant Dean Bonnie Goldberg, Chair
Professor Pamela Catton
Ms Françoise Ko
Professor John Furedy
Professor Ian McDonald
Mr. Paul Holmes, Judicial Affairs Officer
In Attendance:
Mr. C., the Appellant
Ms Brenda Thrush, Registrar, Faculty of Pharmacy
Dean Wayne Hindmarsh, Faculty of Pharmacy
The Appeal
The student is appealing the September 1st, 2004 decision of the Faculty of Pharmacy’s Appeals
Committee, dismissing the student’s request to proceed to Year 3 of the Pharmacy program,
although he failed to successfully complete PHM222Y1 in Year 2 of the program.
Facts
The student was enrolled in Year 2 of the Bachelor of Science in Pharmacy (B.Sc.Phm.) program
in 2003-2004. He was informed in a letter from the Faculty of Pharmacy Registrar, dated June 4,
2004, that he had failed to successfully complete PHM222Y1 Medical Chemistry, having
obtained a total cumulative grade of 38%. As per Faculty policy, on August 3, 2004, the student

Report Number 293 of the Academic Appeals Committee
wrote a supplemental examination in the course. He received a letter on August 18, 2004
indicating that he had obtained a grade of 44% and thus failed the supplemental examination.
The student was not permitted to proceed to Year 3 and was required to repeat the course during
the 2004-2005 session.
The student met with the Faculty’s Registrar on Monday August 23rd to discuss his situation.
The student explained the financial hardship he would encounter if he was required to re-take
Medicinal Chemistry as a part-time student in 2004-2005. The student had had to reduce his
summer work hours in order to study for the supplemental examination, which put financial
pressure on his family. He contributes financially to his family, which includes three brothers, a
mother who does not work outside of the home and a father who is on a fixed income disability
pension. The student would incur commuting costs between London and Toronto. His OSAP
funding would be in jeopardy as a part-time student, and he would be required to pay back his
undergraduate OSAP loan as a part-time student.
The Registrar advised the student that he was still eligible for OSAP and that the Faculty would
consider him for bursary support. The student was advised to investigate an “interest relief” loan
program. The student inquired about appealing the decision. After consulting with the Dean, the
Registrar indicated that although the Appeals Committee does not typically consider financial
hardship as a ground of appeal, and despite the fact that he had not previously submitted a
petition, as is ordinarily required, he was permitted to appeal to the decision. The student was
informed that the Appeals Committee was meeting on September 1st.
On August 26th, the student submitted an appeal asking the Appeals Committee to allow him to
enter Year 3 without having met the academic requirements specified by the Faculty of
Pharmacy. He also noted in an email to the Registrar that he would be willing to write a second
supplemental exam in the course. On August 30th, the student received a letter indicating that his
appeal would be heard on September 1st in Toronto.
Previous Decision
Due to a conflict with work, the student did not attend the Appeals Committee hearing on
September 1st, nor did he advise the Faculty that he would not attend. The Committee gave the
student a thirty-minute grace period to appear, and attempted unsuccessfully to contact him by
telephone. Having received no indication of why the student failed to appeal, the Committee
considered the appeal in the student’s absence. Based on the student’s grounds of appeal, the
Committee found that “there was no substance to the request in terms of the mandate of the
Appeals Committee.” The Appeals Committee considers requests for relief by unsuccessful
students who fail as a result of extenuating circumstances. The student in this case was appealing
on purely financial grounds unrelated to the failing grade.

Page 2 of 4

Report Number 293 of the Academic Appeals Committee
On September 2nd, the student was informed that his appeal had been dismissed and informed of
his right to appeal to the Academic Appeals Committee of Governing Council. On September
14th, the student wrote to Dean Hindmarsh requesting a reversal of the Faculty of Pharmacy
Appeal Committee decision. In a September 17th letter, the Dean responded that academic
performance, not individual students’ financial hardship, determines whether a student proceeds
in the program.
Decision
Your Committee is unanimously of the view that the student’s appeal should be dismissed and
agrees with the Appeal Committee’s decision that there is no merit to the student’s appeal.
Students enrolled in the Bachelor of Science in Pharmacy program must successfully complete
all of the academic requirements of the previous year before proceeding to the next year.
Specifically, students must earn a passing grade in each course and obtain an annual grade point
average of at least 1.7. If a student fails a course, but meets the minimum GPA, the student must
write the first offered supplementary examination in that course and obtain a grade of at least
50%. If the student fails the supplemental examination, the student must successfully complete
the course requirements before proceeding.
The Pharmacy program is rigorously structured so that each year of the program feeds into the
next year. Students are required to complete all the courses as scheduled, many of which
comprise pre-requisites or important building blocks for the work that follows. Year 3 of the
program is made up of 11 courses, 8 of which began on September 9th and none of which the
student has started. The student has not completed the pre-requisites for the 3 courses which
begin in January. One of the courses conflicts with PHM222Y1 that the student is currently
taking. Your Committee agrees with the Faculty’s contention that it would be extremely
difficult, if not impossible, for the student to make up more than two months of missed lectures,
laboratories, mid-term examinations, and other course evaluations.
In October, the student began attending lectures in PHM222Y1, commuting between London and
Toronto. The Faculty provided him with $500 in emergency financial assistance to assist with
commuting costs. The student was offered further financial assistance from the Faculty to
subsidize his interest payments. The Faculty also approved a tuition fee deferral. The student was
advised to negotiate a line of credit through the Scotia Professional Student Plan. The student
indicated that although he met with a Scotia bank representative, he has not pursued this option.
The Faculty of Pharmacy offered this student extraordinary and valuable assistance. In particular,
the Faculty allowed the student to appeal his decision despite irregularities and his failure to
follow procedure. The Appeals Committee gave the student the benefit of the doubt when he
failed to appear at the hearing. The Faculty met with the student at least twice to provide him
Page 3 of 4

Report Number 293 of the Academic Appeals Committee
with concrete and appropriate methods and resources to ameliorate his financial situation. The
Faculty continues to provide the student with assistance and has also provided the student with
monetary assistance.
Your Committee has sympathy for the appellant’s financial difficulties. We appreciate that he
was performing adequately to above average in his other courses, and the failure (two times) of
this course came as a surprise. However, the student did not take proactive steps to improve his
performance in the supplemental exam, nor had he sought out academic assistance from the
Faculty when he first began to experience difficulties in the course. The student has also not
exhausted all available means of financial support.
At the hearing, the student alleged that the Faculty has treated other students differently. Your
Committee accepts the Faculty’s submission that any student treated differently after failing a
supplemental examination experienced extenuating circumstances directly related to academic
performance. Your Committee finds that the Faculty has treated this student as fairly as possible,
even when he did not attend the hearing, and provided him with every opportunity to both have
his case heard and continue in the program on a part-time basis.
The Appeals Committee had no jurisdiction to offer academic relief due to financial
considerations that had no bearing on his previous performance in the course. We heard no
evidence of any other extenuating circumstances that would enable this Committee to come to a
different conclusion. For these reasons, the appeal is dismissed.

Paul Holmes
Secretary

Bonnie Goldberg
Chair

#32409v3

Page 4 of 4

