Case #785

   DATE:Â March 24, 2016
   PARTIES: University of Toronto v S.J.P.
   Hearing Date(s): December 4, 2015 and January 15, 2016
   Members of the Panel:
   Sana Halwani, Chair
   Chris Koenig-Woodyward, Faculty Member
   Alice Zhu, Student Member
   Appearances:
   Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel
   Tegan OâBrien, Counsel for Mr. S.J.P.
   Lawrence Veregin, Counsel for Mr. S.J.P.
   Rabiya Mansoor, Counsel for Mr. S.J.P.
   Steve Joordens, Professor of the Course
   Ada Le, Invigilator for the Final Exam in the Course
   Ainsley Lawson, Undergraduate Course Coordinator, Department of
   Psychology & Neuroscience
   Wayne Dowler, Deanâs Designate, University of Toronto Scarborough
   Emily Dies, Law Student, University of Toronto Faculty of Law
   Kinson Leung, Invigilator for the Final Exam in the Course
   In Attendance:
   Hayley Ossip, Articling Student, Gilbertâs LLP
   Christopher Lang, Director, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances
   Krista Osbourne, Administrative Assistant, Appeals, Discipline and
   Faculty Grievances
   Tracey Gameiro, Observer
   Nisha Panchal, Observer, Student Conduct & Academic Integrity Officer
   Mr. S.J.P., the Student
   Mr. S.H.L., the suspected collaborator
   NOTE: Heard together with Case #786
   Trial Division â s. B.i.1(b), s. B.i.3(b) of the Code â unauthorized
   aid and academic dishonesty â Student accused of producing an
   unauthorized aid during an exam for another student in the Course â the
   students wrote the exams in different locations â finding on evidence â
   insufficient evidence to find the Student guilty â finding on innocence
   Student charged under s. B.i.1(b) and, in the alternative, s. B.i.3(b)
   of the Code . The charges related to allegations that the Student
   knowingly provided unauthorized aid to another student in connection
   with the final exam in the Course or, in the alternative, that the
   Student knowingly engaged in a form of cheating, academic dishonesty or
   misconduct, fraud or misrepresentation not otherwise described in the
   Code .
   The Student wrote the exam in a different location from the student who
   was charged with the related academic offence. The University theorized
   that the Student ripped the corner off of one of his exam booklet
   pages, wrote down the Exam answers, and then left the torn paper in the
   bathroom for the other student to use as an unauthorized aid.
   The Student was found not guilty of the charges. The Panel found
   insufficient evidence to warrant finding, on a balance of
   probabilities, that the Student was the origin of the cheat sheet, or
   that he was involved in any way with the other studentâs cheating. The
   Universityâs theory with respect to the Studentâs involvement required
   that the Student left the room before the end of the exam. The Panel
   heard no evidence to support such a finding of fact. The Panel also
   took into account the fact that the students were mere acquaintances
   rather than close friends with an incentive to help one another cheat.
   The Panel also considered the evidence of a ripped page in the
   Studentâs exam booklet corresponding to the size and shape of the
   unauthorized aid found with the other accused student, but accepted the
   Studentâs clear and consistent explanation that he had ripped the
   corner in order to spit out a piece of gum. Although the evidence that
   no other booklets from the Exam were found with a ripped corner was
   compelling, it did not sufficiently link the cheat sheet to the
   Student. The Panel also emphasized that there was no evidence that the
   Student was acting suspiciously during the exam, no evidence that the
   Student had an opportunity to deliver the cheat sheet, and no evidence
   that the Student would know which bathroom to plant the cheat sheet in.
   The Panel placed no weight on non-expert statistical analyses of the
   studentsâ answers. The Panel found the Student not guilty on all
   charges.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12918
