Case 870

DATE:

   October 31, 2016

PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v. J.O. (âthe Studentâ)

Hearing Date(s):

   September 22, 2016

Panel Members:

   Paul Michell, Chair
   Dr. Chris Koening-Woodyard, Faculty Panel Member
   Sean McGowan, Student Panel Member

Appearances:

   Ms. Tina Lie, Assistant Discipline Counsel for the University
   Professor Luc De Nil, Deanâs Designate, Vice-Dean, Students and Deanâs
   Designate for Academic Integrity, School of Graduate Studies
   Mr. Victor Kim, Law Student, Downtown Legal Services, for the Student

In Attendance:

   Mr. Christopher Lang, Director, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty
   Grievances
   The Student
   Mr. John Darmondy, Recording Technologist, Live Media
   Ms. Vicki Vokas, Manager, Portfolio Services

   Student charged with one count of forgery under s. B.i.1(a) of the Code
   and two counts of plagiarism under s. B.i.1(d) of the Code as well as
   four alternative charges of academic dishonesty and unauthorized
   assistance under s. B.i.1(b) and s.B.i.3(b) of the Code . The hearing
   proceeded by an Agreed Statement of Facts wherein the student admitted
   to forging a reference letter in a scholarship application, as well as
   to plagiarising assignments that she had submitted for course credit in
   two different courses. The Student was present at the hearing. Â The
   Student pled guilty to one charge of forgery and two plagiarism
   charges. Â Upon the Panel finding the Student guilty of these charges,
   the University withdrew four charges that had been made in the
   alternative.

   The student testified at the penalty phase of the hearing, which
   focused on whether an expulsion was an appropriate penalty. The Panel
   looked to the principles and factors described in University of Toronto
   and Mr. C. (November 5, 1976/77-3). The Student was of generally good
   character â a professional, single mother of four children in her 30s
   who had been working as a nurse for ten years prior to starting her
   graduate studies at the University. She had expressed remorse for her
   actions and concerns about their effect on her professional standing.
   She also pled guilty, which saved the University time and expense.
   These were the Studentâs first offences at the University, however the
   Student had forged the reference letter within a month of starting her
   program and she used the same forged reference letter five months
   afterwards, which undermined the Studentâs assertion that she was
   acting rashly. The Panel took into account a number of aggravating
   factors; namely, that both forgery and plagiarism are very serious
   offences; that the plagiarism here was intentional, extensive, and
   deliberate; that the Student had derived financial gain by being
   awarded a $10,000 scholarship that she had used the forged reference
   letter to apply for; at the same time, she deprived another student
   from being awarded that scholarship on a legitimate basis. She offered
   to return the money, but had not taken any steps to actually do so in
   the months since the forgery had been uncovered. Â The Panel also
   weighed the detriment to the University and the need to deter others
   from committing the same offence. Â The Panel acknowledged extenuating
   circumstances surrounding the commission of the offence including the
   Studentâs difficult upbringing, family responsibilities, financial
   hardships, and health issues to be mitigating circumstances to varying
   degrees.
   The Panel considered other cases where recommendation for expulsion had
   been made and found that forgery was a most serious academic offence,
   and usually warranted expulsion except in circumstances where there is
   a Joint Submission on Penalty or significant mitigating factors which
   were not present here. Â The Panel held the âsecond chanceâ principle
   did not apply on these facts given the seriousness of the offences,
   their detriment to the University, and need for general and specific
   deterrence. Â The Panel found that the commission of two other serious
   academic offences on top of forgery weighed in favor of expulsion in
   this case.
   The Panel imposed a recommendation to the President that the Student be
   expelled, a grade of zero in the courses where the student had
   submitted the plagiarized assignments, immediate suspension for a
   period of five years with a corresponding notation on the Studentâs
   record pending expulsion, a permanent notion of the sanction on the
   Studentâs transcript, and a report to the Provost.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12921
