Report 288

DATE:

   December 16, 2003

PARTIES:

   Mr. Y. (the Student) v. UTSC

Hearing Date(s):

   November 28, 2003

Committee Members:

   Professor Ed Morgan, Chair
   Mr. Sachin Aggarwal
   Dr. Alice Dong
   Professor John Furedy
   Professor Jake Thiessen

Secretary:

   Mr. Paul Holmes, Judicial Affairs Officer

Appearances:

For the Student:

   Mr. Y. (the ‚Student‚)
   Ms. Erica Toews, Downtown Legal Services
   Ms. Marisa Wyse, Downtown Legal Services

For UTSC:

   Professor Ian McDonald, Associate Dean, UTSC

   Request for a deferred examination. The Student missed both term tests.
   The final exam was reweighted to constitute 100% of the course grade.
   The Student did not attend the examination and failed the course. The
   Student claimed that allergic rhinitis suffered the day of the final
   examination prevented him from attending and writing the exam. The
   Student had submitted fourteen prior medical petitions during the
   course of his four years at UTSC. The Faculty claimed that the
   Student‚s recurrent pattern of behaviour should be taken into account
   by the Committee. The Committee found that, while each petition must be
   evaluated on its own merits, the Student‚s history of complaints could
   be looked at in order to help assess the credibility of his claim of
   illness. The Committee found that the Student‚s record of complaints
   showed no evidence of a single, chronic ailment, that the medical
   certificates supporting the different petitions came from a variety of
   doctors, and that the Student had never visited the UTSC Health Centre
   or the University‚s AccessAbility Services. The Committee considered
   the Student‚s medical certificates and the Faculty regulations on
   deferred examinations and found that the Student suffered from symptoms
   of a relatively minor ailment and that he could have attended at and
   should have written the exam on the scheduled date. The Student claimed
   that his medical condition was a ‚disability‚ as defined in the Ontario
   Human Rights Code, and that the failure of the Faculty to agree to a
   deferred examination represented a failure to accommodate a person with
   a disability as required by the Code. The Committee found that there
   was no evidence that the Student suffered anything beyond a de minimis
   type of illness and that the ailment was not sufficient to be a
   disability within the meaning of the Code. Appeal dismissed.
   [1]View Report

References

   1. file:///media/12554
