Case 619

   [1]Case 619 - Sanction

DATE:

   February 7, 2012 (Finding), June 20, 2012 (Sanction)

PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v. O.S.

Hearing Date(s):

   November 30, 2011 (Guilt), May 9, 2012 (Sanction)

Panel Members:

   Ms. Roslyn Tsao, Chair
   Prof. Graeme Hirst, Faculty Member
   Ms. Vy Nguyen, Student Member

Appearances:

   Ms. Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel for the University
   Mr. Danny Kastner, Associate, Paliare Roland Barristers
   Mr. Edward F. Hung, Counsel for theÂ Student
   Ms. O.S., the Student
   Ms. Kathrin Herzhoff, Course TA (Guilt)
   Prof. Jennifer Tackett, Course Instructor (Guilt)
   Prof. John Browne, Dean's Designate (Guilt)

In Attendance:

   Dr. Kristi Gourlay, Manager of Office of Academic Integrity
   Ms. Amanda Guo, Law Clerk to Mr. Edward F. Hung (Guilt)
   Mr. Christopher Lang, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances

   Student charged under s. B.i.1(a) of the Code . The charges related to
   allegations that the Student altered an answer on her scantron answer
   sheet and submitted it for re-grading during a review session. The
   Student denied the allegations. After considering the evidence
   submitted by both parties, the Panel concluded that the Studentâs
   explanation was suspect and the change made to the scantron could not
   be attributed to a source other than the Student herself. Only the TA,
   the course instructor, and the Student had the opportunity to alter the
   scantron but only student had both the opportunity and the motive. The
   Panel found the Student guilty under s. B.i.1(a) . The Panel, in
   considering penalty, viewed the Studentâs misconduct not just as a
   deliberate act of academic dishonesty but also as an inexplicable lapse
   in judgment by the Student. The Student had attempted to reverse her
   actions by sending an email to her TA, cancelling her request to
   re-grade the exam. The Panel stated, however, that the Student could
   have taken steps to acknowledge her error in judgment when the
   allegations were brought to her attention. The Panel stated the
   objective of specific deterrence had been achieved as the Student had
   indicated her acceptance and respect of its findings. As for general
   deterrence, the Panel agreed with the University that it was a
   secondary concern in this case. Regarding the appropriate term of
   suspension, the Panel stated that it had discretion to consider the
   Studentâs personal circumstances and was not bound by precedents to
   impose a minimum two year suspension for this type of offence. Finally,
   the Panel stated that while pleading guilty may be a mitigating factor,
   pleading not guilty by itself is not an aggravating factor. The Panel
   imposed a grade assignment of zero in the course; a four month
   suspension with an adjusted start date to allow the Student to finish
   her exchange program; a three-year notation on the Studentâs
   transcript; and a report be issued to the Provost.
   [2]View Case

References

   1. http://live-the-office-of-the-governing-council.pantheonsite.io/media/12847
   2. file:///media/12846
