THE UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO

IN THE l\t{ATTER of charges of academic dishonesty made on January 7, 2011
AND TN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic lvfalfers,
1995,

AND IN THE MATTER OF the Universily o/Toronto Act, 1971, S.O. 1971, c. 56 as amended
S.Q. 1978, C. 88

BETWEEN:
UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO (the 11 Unive1·sity")
- and-

<11111111. (the ''Student")
Hearing Date: November 30, 2011

Panel Members:
Ms. Roslyn M. Tsao, Barrister and Solicitor, Chair
Professor Graeme Hirst, Department Computer Science, Faculty Panel Member
Ms.Vy Nguyen, Student Panel Member
Appearances:

Ms. Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel for the University, Paliare Roland Banisters
Mr. Danny Kastnel', Associate, Paliare Roland Barristers
Mr. Edward F. Hung, Law Office of Edward Hung, Counsel for the Student
Ms. Kathrin Herzhoff, Teaching Assistant, PSY240F: Introduction to Abn0tmal Psychology
Professor Jermifer Tackett, Instructor, PSY240F: Introduction to Abnormal Psychology
Professor John Browne, Dean's Designate, Faculty of Arts and Science
Ms. ~ SI, the Student

In Attcndaace:
Dr. Kristi Gourlay, Manager of Office of Academic Integrity, Faculty of A11s and Science
Ms. Amanda Guo, Law Clerk to Mr. Edward F. Hung
Mr. Christopher Lang) Director, AppeaJs) Discipline and Faculty Grievances

Reasons for Decision
Delivered bv Ms. Roslyn M. Tsao

1.

The Trial division of the Tribunal heard this matter on November 30, 20 I 1. The Student
was charged on January 7, 2011 of the following:
(a)

On or about October 14, 2010, the Student knowingly forged or in any other way
altered or falsified a document or evidence required by the University of Toronto,
or uttered, circulated and made use of any such forged, altered or falsified
document, namely a scantron answer sheet submitted for re-grading in a mid-term
test in PSY240H IF, contrary to section B.I. l(a) of the Code;

(b)

In the alternative, on or about October 14, 2010, the Student knowingly engaged
in a form of cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or
misrepresentation in order to obtain academic credit or other academic advantage
of any kind, by submitting an altered mid-tenn test for regarding in PSY240Hl F,
contrary to section B.l.3(b) of the Code.

DECISION OF THE TRIBUNAL

2.

The University bears the onus of proving the elements of the offence, namely, submission
of concocted statements of fact or matetial, based "on clear and convincing evidence"
(Code: s. C.II.(a) 9.).

3.

The evidence, in particular, the scantron evidence (both the answer sheet and the re-nm
scantron results), leads to the conclusion that the answer sheet was altered after its
original submission at the mid-term test.

4.

The only parties who had the opportunity to alter the scantron after the mid-term test
were the Student, the Teaching Assistant, Professor Tackett or the Scantron machine
operator. We find that the Student had the opportunity and motive to alter the scantron
and that all the evidence when considered as a whole lead to a finding that the Student
committed the alteration.

2

5.

Accordingly, the Panel finds the Student guilty of the first charge and we presume the
alternative charge to be withdrawn by the University.

SUMMARY OF EVIDENCE AND REASONS FOR DECISION

6.

·witnesses were excluded during the hearing. The Teaching Assistant, Kathrin Herzhoff:
Professor Tackett and the Dean's Designate involved, Professor Browne testified on
behalf of the University. Ms.

7.

SI testified on her own behalf.

The Student was, at the matetial time, a em·olled in PSY240F - Introduction to Abnormal
Psychology in the fall of the 20I0/2011 academic year.

REVIEW SESSION WITH TEACHING ASSISTANT ("TA")
8.

Professor Tackett was the course professor and there were 2 teaching assistants, Kathrin

Herzhoff and another.

There was a mid-term test on October 4, 20 IO which was

comprised of 44 multiple choice questions and 3 sh01i answer questions. The answers to
the mid-term test were recorded on a scantron fonn vis-a-vis the multiple choice answers
and on examination booldet which, in addition to setting out the multiple choice
questions, had space for handwritten answers to the sho1t answer questions.

9.

Ms. Herzhoff testified that she was one of the TAs for the course's approximately 180
students. Her responsibilities included grading of mid-term tests and papers, holding
office hours for review, etc.

l 0.

For the mid-term in question, there were two "Forms" of the test, Form A and Fo1m B to
reflect 2 different sets/orders of multiple choice questions to prevent cheating during the
test. The Student had Form B of the test.

l J.

Ms. Herzhoffs review session for the mid-term test was on October 14th • She testified
that the review session was held at Sidney Smith building, Room 4004, a small room
with one large rectangular table. Ms Herzhoff acknowledged that this was only her 2 nd
office hours session that she had ever held. Ms. Herzhoff stated that she limited the
number of students in the room to 8 at any given time.

3

12.

Ms. Herzhoff and the Student differ in their description of the events during this review
session. The Student stated that there were more than 8 people in the room at a time.
The Student and Ms. Herzhoff agreed that the Student's test was misfiled because her
middle name was used to alphabetize the tests. The Student stated lhat because of this
misfiling mix-up, she later had concerns about whether her test was properly graded.

13.

Ms. Herzhoff stated that that she noticed the Student writing (crossing or underlining)

dming the review session but that she could not do anything about it because the Student
was sitting at the furthest point from her at the table. Ms. Herzhoff recalls telling the
students that they were not allowed to have any writing utensils while they reviewed their
test. However, Ms. Herzhoff acknowledges that she may have pennitted students to use
pen to calculate their totals since the tests were in pencil. The Student testified that she
asked permission to copy the answers to her clipboard from the only l or 2 answers keys

in the room and that Ms. Herzhoff agreed.
14.

The Student testified expressly that she did not make any markings on her examination
booldet or on the scantron sheet during the review session. This denial is discussed

fm1her below in the review of the examination booklet.
15.

The Panel finds that Ms. Herzhoffs recollection of the review session to have been
inconsistent and tentative in parts. For example, Ms. Herzhoff recollects the Student

"walking out" with her and another student, P. W., at the end of the session but easily
agreed that the Student may have left earlier upon cross-examination.

16.

Ms. Herzhoff also acknowledged that other students had identified errors with the posting
of the grades to Blackboard (the onJine student portal for grades) for this nlid-term in the
first review session. These en-ors related to the other TA mixing up the results for 3
students who shared the same last name. This mix up was conected afterwards but

caused concern for the Panel that such errors occmTed in the first place.
l 7.

Although Ms. Herzhoffs testimony was, in patts, lacking in reliability, we find that in the
areas that are most germane to the charge, Ms. Herzhofrs recollections are corroborated

by her email of that evening to Professor Tackett (Exhibit 3-3) which is reviewed below.
4

PROBLEMS WITH STUDENT'S EXPLANATION
Review of Testimonial Evidence

18.

For reasons below, the Panel cannot reconcile the Student's version with Ms. Herzhoft's
evidence (where we find it to be reliable) and Professor Tackett's evidence. In particular:
(a)

Ms. Herzhoff stated that the Student approached her during the review session on
October 14, 2010 to query whether the scantron may have misread the answer to
Question 35 because bubble "A" was erased. Ms. Herzhoff is consistent that there
was no discussion about an inconsistency between what the Student's Blackboard
grade was and a tally of the score at the review session because the Student did
not know what her Blackboard score was at the session. Ms. Herzhoff testified
that that Student was seeking a regrading of the scantron results.

(b)

In contrast, the Student insists that she did ask about the scantron having misread
the answer to Question 35 because it was clearly "double-darkened" 1 to her and
would have been scored as an incon-ect answer. The Student testified that she had
tallied up her total without Question 35 and counted a score of 56%. The Student
testified that, at the time, she believed that her Blackboard score was 54% from
her recollection (which she stated was based on her confusion that she got a 54/60
on a test in her sociology course that she wrote the same week2) and, as such, the
Student testified that she asked the TA whether the double-darkened answer
would have resulted in a penalty (ie., reducing her 56% to 54%).

(c)

Ms. Herzhoff denies that the issue about a double-darkened answer to Question
35 was raised by the Student as the fonn appeared then as it did at the hearing
with an empty bubble "A" (erased) and with bubble "B" filled in.

(d)

There was no dispute at the hearing that the scantron sheet presented to the
Tribunal had an empty though erased bubble "A" and filled in bubble "B".

1 "double-darkened" in the sense that both bubbles "A" and "B" were filled in a way that would result in a "wrong"

answer.
2 The Panel notes that no corroborating evidence was adduced by the Student regarding this other 54% test result.

5

(e)

Ms. Hcrzhoft's email to Professor Tackett of that evening at 10:02 p.m. (Exhibit
3-3) is, in the Panel's view, reliable evidence of her recollection from the review
session and it stated:

Hi Jenn(fer,
I had my second set qf Midterm I office hours today and something
came up that [other TAJ suggested I talk to you about. A student
showed me an ansiver on her scantron sheet for which one choice
was erased and the other bubbled in. She commenled that she
didn't knmv whether the scantron machine had read that answer
properly. I didn't rep(y to her comment because she went on to ask
me questions about her short answers. At the end, she came back
to the scantron issue and I asked her whether she had calculated
her score and compared it to the one posted on blackboard. She
denied that, so I told her that I lvould check her scantron after the
office hours and get back to her because other students had
questions and I didn't have lime to check it right away. When I
checked it after the q[flce hours, it looked like the scantron
machine hadn't correct(y counted that answer. I think, however,
that this is unlikely to have been the case because the erased
bubble is erased ve1J1 neatly and from what I've been told, a
scantron machine ·would read this correctly. Furthermore, on her
actual midterm, she had checked off the supposed(J1 "incorrect"
choices, which included the actually correct choice. The correct
choice, however, was also circled 011 her midterm. So, it was
checked a.ff together with the other incorrect choice and also
circled, whereas the supposed(v ''correct" choice was left blank.
Finally, during the office hours, it appeared to me as (f she used a
pencil/pen for something; however, I didn't react to it promptly
because I was answering another student's questions at the other
end of the room and it was generally busy so I didn't end up asking
her whether she was taking any notes. How should I proceed with
this case? ...
(f)

On the instmctions of Professor Tackett, Ms. Herzhoff emailed the Student the
next morning at I 0:28 a.m. advising the Student that she would have to follow-up
with Professor Tackett during her office hours.

(g)

The Student testified that she checked her Blackboard score after her statistics
class which was right after the review session and confirmed that Blackboard did
reflect the "correct" 56% score. However, she did not email the TA that evening

6

because she was busy with a statistics assignment and instead replied to Ms.
Herzhoffs email of October 15th at 12:21 p.m as follows:

Hi Kat,
After talking to you yesterday, I have double checked with my
grades on blackboard, and I think my problem is solved now. I
think I have made a wrong calc11/atio11 yesterday. Son:v for the
inconvenience caused.
Thank you! (emphasis added)
(h)

Professor Tackett contacted the Student by email to request a meeting.

The

Student's emails with Professor Tackett between October 18 and 20 (Exhibit 3-5)
included the following:

[October 18]
... Sony that i have miscalculate,I the mark that day lvhen I met
Kathrin at SS 4004, I thought I would be having a higher mark
than it is I stated on ROSI, but when I double checked with the
mark on ROSI after meeting Kathrin, I realised the calculation is
correct ... (emphasis added)
[October 20]
... I know my misca/c11latio11 for the test has been causing you and
the TAs a lot of trouble ... (emphasis added)
(i)

Professor Tackett met with the Student on October 27'h (Professor Tackett
initially believed the date to be October 20th until other evidence was put to her)
and testified that she admittedly wanted to give the Student the chance to admit
the academic offence. During the meeting, Professor Tackett testified that the
Student never raised the "double-darkened" issue and that she only learned of this
issue after her involvement in the matter ended. The Student maintained that she
did not do anything.

(j)

The Panel notes that, although Professor Tackett claimed that she had not prejudged the circumstances and, therefore did not wish to run the re-scan of the
scantron answer sheet before she interviewed the Student, she had likely already
7

concluded that the Student had made an alteration before the meeting and was
hoping that the Student would acknowledge having done so.
(k)

After the meeting, Professor Tackett did, in fact, re-rnn the scantron and the only
change from the Student's original results was that the answer to Question 35
went from a "wrong" answer to a "correct" one.

(l)

Because the Student did not admit that she had altered the Question 35 answer,
Professor Tackett had no choice but to fmward the documentation to a centralized
committee at the university since she suspected that an academic offence had been
committed.

(m)

Professor John Browne was the Dean's Designate for the meetings held with the
Student pursuant to the Code when there is an investigation into academic
misconduct. Professor Browne met with the Student on 3 occasions, November
17, 20 I 0, November 22, 2010 and again on June 24, 2011.

(n)

Professor Browne confirmed that the Student attended at the November 17, 2010
meeting with a friend and met with him and Dr. Gourlay.

The Student was

cautioned about her rights in the normal course. The Student denied that she had
committed any academic misconduct. Professor Browne recalls being puzzled
about how, at the time of writing the test and at the review session, the bubble had
been double darkened. The Student said that she had filled in both bubbles A and
B for Question 35 and that bubble A was much darker when she submitted her
scantron for the test.
(o)

Professor Browne asked the Student "who" would have changed the scantron after
the TA session from having a double-darkened answer to Question 35 to having a
clear bubble B answer. The Student's only answer, consistent with her answer at
this hearing, was that she did not know but that it was not her. The Student, at no
time, accused Ms. Herzhoff or Professor Tackett.

(p)

Professor Browne adjourned the meeting to November 22 nd as he wanted to
clarify some information from the faculty.

8

Both Ms. Herzhoff and Professor

Tackett were asked whether they recalled any discussion with the Student about
the double-darkened bubbles. By emails (Exhibits 3-12 and 3-13) of November
18, 2010 (again, relatively contemporaneous to the meetings in October 14 and
27, respectively), each confirmed that the double-darkened issue had not been
raised by the Student to either of them.
(q)

The further meetings between the Dean's Designate and the Student of November
22, 2010 and June 24, 2011 (with new counsel) resulted in the same exchanges.
The Student did provide a written statement to the Dean's Designate (Exhibit 3-8)
sh011ly before this June 24th meeting which was consistent with her testimony at
this hearing.

(r)

The matter was refen-ed to the next level by the Dean's Designate since no
resolution was possible.

Observations About The Scantron Sheet And Examination Booklet

19.

The scantron answer at issue was Question 35. From the original scantron form provided
to the Panel (Exhibit 4 ), bubble "A" of this question was filled in at some point and then
erased cleanly and bubble "B" is filled in. In a like manner, the original scantron fonn
also showed an erasure of bubble "B" for Question 43 with its bubble "C" filled in. The
Panel notes that there are no other erasures apparent on the form and that each filled in
bubble is very neat and complete except for Question 35, bubble ''B" which is different
than the others in its completeness and that it goes outside of the bubble. This difference
is not a definitive observation leading to a finding of guilt but is one fact to consider. In
short, from the scantron sheet presented to the Panel, there is no doubt that bubble "B" to
Question 35 is clearly the selected answer and that bubble "A" has been erased as
confinned from the re-run results.

20.

It is a review of the examination booklet coupled with the Student's denial of altering
the examination booklet during the review session that causes the Panel to most seriously
doubt the Student's explanation:

9

(a)

Upon close examination of the examination booklet, it is noted that there are a
number of notations (in pencil) throughout the multiple choice questions. These
notations include:
(i)

circles around the question number;

(ii)

circles around some of the letters of the choices;

(iii)

underlining of parts of the question or pat1s of the multiple choice
answers;

(iv)

checkmarks beside some of the multiple choice answers - sometimes to
the left of the answer, sometimes to the right;

(v)

11

x" marks -- sometimes beside multiple choice answers, directly on the

text of an answer or directly on the letters of the choices;

(b)

(vi)

atTows ("f- 1') or line("---") to some of the multiple choice answers;

(vii)

scribbles beside an answer; and

(viii)

sometimes, combinations of some of the above.

Counsel for the Student provided a summary chart of the notations as Exhibit "5 11 •
The Panel also closely examined the examination booklet to review notations.

(c)

The Student testified that, during the test, she would have circled the question
numbers of those questions that she was not sure about. Checkmarks beside
answers and 11 x "s beside answers did not necessarily mean she was excluding or
including them as possible correct answers. In sh011, the Student would not or
could provide a coherent explanation for her notations on the examination sheet.

(d)

The student had 25 correct multiple choice answers in her original scantron score
and, therefore, 19 wrong answers.

10

(e)

Out of the 19 questions which were wrongly answered, 13 of them improbably
have only one answer circled in the examination booklet which circled answer
conesponds to the correct answer3•

(f)

Out of the remaining 6 questions which were wrongly answered, 4 of them had

the con-ect answer marked (Q. 14: correct a. was circled and incorrect b. was
circled but also crossed out over circle; Q. I 5: only mark was an "x" beside the
correct answer; Q. 40: atTow pointing to correct answer; Q. 43: arrow pointing to
correct answer).
(g)

The remaining 2 questions which were wrongly answered (Q. 11 and Q. 13) do
not have a definitive mark for the correct answer.

(h)

After considering (e), (t) and (g) above, it is the conclusion of the Panel that the
Student circled the correct answers on the examination booklet at the review
session for, at least, the questions noted in (e) above. The only other explanation
would be that the Student, during the test, managed to circle 13 co1Tect answers
but ultimately answered them all incorrectly on the scantron. In particular, i11 Q.
16, the only notation in the choices is a circle around the correct answer regardless, the student filled in an incorrect answer on her scantron sheet.

CONCLUSION

21.

The explanation offered by the Student is suspect and cannot be accepted as we believe
and accept the following:
(a)

that Ms. Herzhoffs and Professor Tackett were not alerted to any doubledarkened issue by the Student in their discussions/meetings with the Student;

(b)

that the scantron sheet submitted at the test and the scantron sheet which was
evidence at the hearing had been altered after the test vis-a-vis Question 35;

3

Questions 5, 6, I 6, 20, 23, 25, 30, 31, 32, 35, 37, 41 and 42.

11

(c)

that the Student had the only motive to change the scantron sheet after it was
retumed during the review session and that she had the opportunity;

(d)

it is highly unlikely and improbable that either the TA or Professor would have
changed the scantron sheet which the Studenl adamantly maintains was changed
after the review session;

(e)

some of the Panel doubted whether a second year Student would question whether
a double-darkened bubble answer attracted a deduction when a "wrong11 answer
did not (however, the Panel can acknowledge that in a moment of panic, a Student
could have such a question); and

(f)

that a review of the Student's examination booklet leads to the clear and
compelling conclusion thnt the Student marked the conect answers in the
examination booklet dming the review session from the answer key contrary to

her sworn testimony that she did not.

This puts into doubt the Student's

evidence on all other relevant matters.
22.

The Panel finds the Student guilty of altering the scantron sheet, in pai1icular Question

35.
Penalty
23.

A hearing date is to be scheduled for penalty submissions unless both parties agree to
proceeding by way of written submissions only.

24.

We thank both counsel for their assistance in this case.

Dated at Toronto, this 7 th day of February, 2012.

Co-Chair

12

