Case 808

DATE:

   February 1, 2016

PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v L.M.

Hearing Date(s):

   October 13, 2015

Panel Members:

   Sana Halwani, Chair
   Markus Bussmann, Faculty Member
   Jeffery Couse, Student Member

Appearances:

   Rob Centa, Assistant Discipline Counsel
   Lauren Pearce, Articling Student, Paliare Roland
   Tegan O‚Brien, Counsel for the Student, Downtown Legal Services
   Rabiya Mansoor, Counsel for the Student, Downtown Legal Services
   Donald Dewees, Dean‚s Designate, Faculty of Arts and Science
   Shelly Cornack, Registrar, University College
   Linda Nauman, Associate Registrar, University College
   Ms. L.M., the Student

In Attendance:

   Christopher Lang, Director, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances
   Patrick McNeill, Observer, Secretary, College of Electors, Assistant
   Secretary of the Governing Council
   Student charged with two offences under s. B.i.1(a) and, in the
   alternative, an offence under s. B.i.3(b) of the Code . The charges
   related to allegations that the Student knowingly forged, altered or
   falsified two documents provided to the University in support of her
   Application requesting grant assistance. The Panel took into account
   evidence supporting the inference that the Student‚s documents
   purporting to show payments made to the University and OSAP were forged
   or altered, including that the math on the Student‚s bank account
   statements did not add up, the writing in some of the entries was
   askew, the receipts for a single transaction differed, and the bank did
   not have any records of the purported payments.
   Student was found guilty with respect to two counts of knowingly
   forging, altering or falsifying a document or evidence required by the
   University. The University then withdrew the alternative charge of
   academic dishonesty not otherwise described. The Panel noted the
   Provost‚s recommendation of expulsion in cases of fraud attempts by
   students absent exceptional circumstances. The Panel took into account
   a number of aggravating factors, including that the Student had
   previously been found guilty of two charges associated with the use of
   an unauthorized aid during an exam, that the nature of the current
   offence was very serious, and that the Student‚s conduct prior to and
   throughout the proceeding was egregious and unremorseful. The Panel
   recognized a number of mitigating factors, including that the Student
   was experiencing significant financial hardship as an immigrant and
   single mother. However, the Panel emphasized that the mitigating
   factors did not outweigh the Student‚s deceitful actions prior to and
   during the proceeding. The Panel also noted that simply appearing at a
   hearing is not a mitigating factor; had the Student chosen to cooperate
   with the University, those actions might have acted as mitigating
   factors. The Panel accept the University‚s submissions on penalty and
   imposed a 5-year suspension; a recommendation that the Student be
   expelled; and that the case be reported to the Provost for publication.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12892
