Case 833

DATE:

   April 27, 2016

PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v S.R.

Hearing Date(s):

   March 8, 2016

Panel Members:

   Johanna Braden, Chair
   Michael Evans, Faculty Member
   Adam Wheeler, Student Member

Appearances:

   Robert Centa, Assistant Discipline Counsel
   Lauren Pearce, Student-at-Law, Paliare Roland Barristers
   Laura Ferlito, Office of the Registrar, University of Toronto
   Mississauga

In Attendance:

   Lucy Gaspini, Manager, Academic Integrity & Affairs, Office of the
   Dean, University of Toronto Mississauga
   Tracey Gameiro, Office of Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances

   Student charged under s. B.i.3(a) of the Code . The charge related to
   allegations that the Student knowingly forged, altered, or falsified a
   Letter purported to be from the Registrarâs Office in order to
   represent that she was enrolled as a full-time student and had
   completed three years of studies when in fact this was not the case,
   and that the Student circulated this falsified Letter to her employer.
   The Student was not present at the hearing. The Panel concluded that
   the efforts made to contact the Student by email and courier were
   reasonable pursuant to sections 6 and 7 of the Statutory Powers
   Procedure Act and the University Tribunal Rules of Practice and
   Procedure. The Panel ordered that the hearing proceed in the Studentâs
   absence.
   Student found guilty of the forged academic record charge. The Panel
   took into account evidence that clearly established that the Letter was
   false. The Panel noted that though the evidence about the purpose for
   which the Letter was forged and circulated was unclear and the Panel
   could therefore not conclude that the Letter was submitted in support
   of an employment application, the essential elements of the forged
   academic record were proven on a balance of probabilities. In
   determining the appropriate sanction, the Panel took into account as an
   aggravating factor that during the time period supposedly confirmed by
   the letter, the Student was not enrolled at the University and was in
   fact suspended because of admitted academic dishonesty charges. The
   Panel emphasized that this made the likelihood of repetition high. The
   Panel also noted that the falsification of the Letter was deliberate
   and careful, showing calculated dishonesty. Additionally, the Panel
   noted there was detriment to the University as the Student
   misrepresented her academic status to an outside party which undermines
   the publicâs perception of the integrity of the Universityâs academic
   records. Â The Panel further noted that the need to deter others from
   committing similar offences was high because confirmation of enrolment
   letters are sent to third parties and are therefore hard for the
   University to police. The Panel concluded that a 5-year suspension
   would not be a sufficient sanction given the Studentâs prior academic
   offence and lack of evidence of mitigating circumstances. The Panel
   imposed a 5-year suspension; a recommendation of expulsion, and that
   the case be reported to the Provost for publication.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12903
