Case #538

   DATE: August 14, 2009
   PARTIES: University of Toronto v. N.B.
   Hearing Date(s): March 11, 2008; September 18, 2008; April 1, 2009
   Panel Members:
   Ms. Janet Minor, Chair
   Prof. James Rini, Faculty Member
   Mr. Sara Ageorloo, Student Member
   Appearances:
   Ms. Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel for the University
   Mr. Nick Shkordoff and Mike Hamilton, DLS for the Student
   In Attendance:
   N.B., the Student

   Trial Division â s.B.i.1(a) and s.B.i.3(b) of the Code â forged
   documents â unauthorized aids â course work â finding of guilt â prior
   offence âevidence of dishonest conduct prior to adn during the hearing
   â Student voluntarily left Hearing by falsifying a bad Skype connection
   â Student caused a long adjournment by falsely claiming to be overseas
   â no mitigating factors -- grade of zero in course; recommendation of
   expulsion; 5 year suspension pending expulsion; and report to Provost
   with name of Student withheld

   The Student was charged under s.B.i.1(a) and s.B.i.3(b) of the Code.
   The charges related to allegations of altering answers on a midterm
   test that the Student submitted for regarding. The Student admitted
   amending the test paper but claimed that she only wished to resubmit
   the paper to have a discussion with the Professor, not to have a
   remark, and that she had included an additional looseleaf sheet of
   paper with the resubmitted test that indicated the alterations she had
   made The hearing was adjourned at the close of evidence and adjourned.
   During the adjournment Downtown Legal Services advised the Judicial
   Affairs Office that they were no longer representing N.B. The panel
   reconvened on September 18, 2008, at which Hearing the Student was
   self-represented and appeared via Skype. The Student wished to call a
   friend as a witness to corroborate her claim of submitting a looseleaf
   sheet; however her friend was unavailable. The Hearing was adjourned
   again and reconvened on April 1, 2009, when the Studentâs witness was
   called. The Panel found the Student guilty of altering or falsifying a
   document and believed the TAâs evidence that she did not receive an
   additional looseleaf sheet from the Student. The Panel found that the
   Student resubmitting the test with a view to obtaining additional
   marks. After a recess the Skype connection with the Student ended. The
   Panel found that the Student sought to interrupt the proceedings by
   pretending to have a bad Skype connection and that therefore she left
   the Hearing voluntarily. The Panel proceeded with the sanctioning
   hearing in the Studentâs absence. The Universityâs evidence with
   respect to sanctioning was heard. A period of 3 weeks was granted to
   the Student in order for her to provide a motion to address the
   circumstances of the Skype disconnection and the Tribunalâs conclusion
   that she voluntarily left the proceeding. There was no further
   communication from the Student. The sentencing factors in Mr. C
   (November 1976) were considered. The Student had previously plead
   guilty to the offence of submitting another studentâs answer book as
   her own. Evidence was heard that the matter had been adjourned for a
   long period due to the Studentâs claim that she was overseas, even
   though it was found that she had been enrolled in two courses and had
   been present to write the examinations. The Panel found the above to
   indicate a pattern of dishonest conduct. The Panel noted the
   seriousness of the offence. The Panel ordered: a grade of zero in the
   course; a recommendation of expulsion; a 5 year suspension pending the
   expulsion recommendation; and a report to the Provost.

   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12832
