Case 492

DATE:

   July 31, 2008

PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v. S.K.

Hearing Date(s):

   June 18, 2008

Panel Members:

   Mr. Andrew Pinto, Chair
   Professor Bruno Magliocchetti, Faculty Panel Member
   Ms. Melany Bleue, Student Panel Member

Appearances:

   Ms. Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel for the University
   Mr. Danny Kasnter, Assistant Discipline Counsel for the University
   Ms. Lucy Gaspini, Academic Affairs Officer, UTM
   Mr. Max Shapiro, Legal Representative for the Student
   S.K., the Student, did not attend

   The Student was charged with two offences under s. B.i.3(a), and
   alternatively, s. B.i.3(b) of the Code. The charges related to
   allegations that the Student submitted to a potential employer a forged
   University degree certificate purporting to confer a Bachelor of
   Science degree, and a falsified curriculum vitae indicating that the
   Studentâs formal education consisted of an Honours Bachelor of Science
   and an Honours Bachelor of Arts. The Panel was provided with an Agreed
   Statement of Facts in which the Student admitted to the allegations.
   The Student did not attend but was represented by counsel. The Panel
   noted that the Student had not been registered at the University for a
   number of years and sought clarification on its jurisdiction relative
   to former students. The Panel found that Appendix A, s. 2(s) of the
   Code conferred its jurisdiction relative to former students. Based on
   the Agreed Statement of Facts, the Panel found the Student guilty of
   the charges under s. B.i.3(a) of the Code. A Joint Submission on
   Penalty was submitted to the Panel. The Panel considered the
   consequence of expulsion with respect to the Studentâs academic
   achievements and found that the credits earned by the Student while at
   the University would not be affected by expulsion. The Panel observed
   that the forgery of a University document required a significant amount
   of deliberation and that the Studentâs fabricated resume listed two
   bachelor degrees from the University. The Panel found that the Student
   made a poor decision in giving in to the factors in his personal life
   that tempted him to misrepresent his academic achievements. The Panel
   accepted the Joint Submission on Penalty and recommended to the
   President, further to s. C.ii.(b)(i) of the Code, that the Student be
   expelled from the University; a suspension of up to five-years pending
   the expulsion decision; and that a report be issued to the Provost.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/13057
