Case #572

   DATE: January 11, 2010
   PARTIES: University of Toronto v. F.Z.
   Hearing Date(s): January 5, 2010
   Panel Members:
   Clifford Lax, Chair
   Graeme Hirst, Faculty Member
   Jamon Camisso, Student Member
   Appearances:
   Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel for the University
   Kristi Gourlay, Office of Student Academic Integrity, Faculty of Arts
   and Science
   Michael Nicholson, University College Registrar
   In Attendance:
   Sam Solecki, Dean's Designate, Office of Student Academic Integrity
   Betty-Ann Campbell, Law Clerk, Paliara Roland Barristers
   Natalie Ramtajal, Coordinator, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty
   Grievances, Office of the Governing Council
   The Student was not in attendance

   Trial Division â s.B.i.3(a) of CodeÂ â forging academic record â
   forging a University of Toronto degree â hearing not attended â
   reasonable notice of hearing provided â finding of guilt â forgery of
   academic records is one of the most serious of offences â typical
   sanction of expulsion â Panel imposed: 1) a 5 year suspension; 2) a
   recommendation of expulsion; and 3) a report to the Provost. The Panel
   recommended to the Provost and Governing Council that the Code be
   amended to allow for the names of expelled students to be published, in
   the interest of deterrence

   The Student was charged under s.B.i.3(a) of the Code . The charge
   stemmed from an allegation that the Student forged or altered or
   falsified a degree from the University of Toronto. The panel noted that
   the purported Honours Bachelor of Commerce degree was prima facie
   forged because the University did not grant such a degree. Moreover,
   the font was inconsistent and the Studentâs academic record indicates
   that he did not have the credits necessary to graduate. The Panel found
   that, although the Student left Canada, the Student received reasonable
   notice of the hearing on the basis of evidence that the Student had
   reviewed and deleted emails containing notice of the hearing. After
   noting that forgery of an academic record is one of the most serious
   offences, which typically results in expulsion, the Panel imposed: 1) a
   5 year suspension; 2) a recommendation to the President that the
   Student be expelled; and 3) a report to the Provost with the Studentâs
   name withheld. In addition, the Panel recommended that the Provost and
   Governing Council amend the Code to allow for the names of expelled
   students to be published, in the interest of deterrence.

   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12744
