THE UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
IN THE MATTER OF charges of academic dishonesty made on August 11, 2009;
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic
Matters, 1995;
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Act, 1971, S.O. 1971, c. 56 as
amended S.O. 1978, c. 88
BETWEEN:
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO

- and-

Hearing date: Thursday, January 5, 2010
PANEL:
•
•
•

Mr. Clifford Lax, Barrister and Solicitor, Chair
Professor Graeme Hirst, Faculty Panel Member
Mr. Jamon Camisso, Student Panel Member

APPEARANCES:
•
•

•

Ms. Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel for the University, Paliare Roland
Barristers
Ms. Kristi Gourlay, Manager, Office of Student Academic Integrity, Faculty of
Arts and Science
Mr. Michael Nicholson, University College Registrar

IN ATTENDANCE:
•
•
•

Professor Sam Solecki, Dean's Designate, Office of Student Academic Integrity
Ms. Betty-Ann Campbell, Law Clerk, Palaire Roland Barristers
Ms. Natalie Ramtahal, Coordinator, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances,
Office of Governing Council

•

Mr. F.ZIII, the Student, not in attendanc~

2

Finding of Guilt:

[1] The panel is satisfied that Mr. Zlll,committed the offence for which he is charged
in count number one.
Transcription of Reasons Delivered by Chair at the Conclusion of the Hearing:

[2] Mr. flllztlllis charged with an offence contrary to the Code of Behaviour on
Academic Matters of the University of Toronto.
[3] It is alleged that he forged or altered or falsified an academic record of the University
which, in this case, was a degree from the University of Toronto.
[4] In the evidence (Exhibit five), is a photocopy of what purports to be a University of
Toronto degree. The evidence clearly indicates that it was not a degree issued by the
University. In particular, the University of Toronto does not grant an Honours Bachelor
of Commerce degree as this purported degree claims. So primafacie, the degree, was not
one that the University of Toronto offers and certainly was never granted to Mr. FIii

ZIii-

[5] There are other indicia indicating that the alleged degree was forged. In particular,
the print font used for the word "Commerce" as part of the purported Honours Bachelor
of Commerce degree, is not the same as the font used for the preceding words "Honours
Bachelor of .......... ", indicating the alteration of a commerce degree.
[6] The panel is satisfied that Mr. Zllllleither directly or indirectly caused this
document to be forged to give the indication that he had graduated with a degree from the
University of Toronto.
[7] In fact, he did not graduate at all from the University of Toronto. His academic
credits while a student at the University of Toronto fell well short of entitling him to
graduate.
[8] As is often the case with students who leave Canada in the face of these kinds of
charges, the University has to establish that the student received actual notice of the
pending charges. This is not easily done. However, in this case, by an examination of the
university website and the student's personal internet mailbox, the panel is satisfied that
the notices that were provided to Mr. Z. . . electronically were in fact received and
subsequently deleted by someone having access to the student's personal mailbox. The
inference can be drawn that it was Mr. Z_, who reviewed the charges and deleted the
relevant documents from his internet mailbox.

3

[9] We therefore conclude that he received proper notice of the charge a..11.d of this
hearing.
[l OJ Forgery of an academic record is one of the most serious offences set out in the
Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters. In line -with prior decisions of this Tribunal,
the author of forged documents or the person responsible for causing the forgeries to be
made is typically expelled from the University. There is no reason to deviate from such
penalty, in this case.
[11] Therefore:
1. Mr. Z - shall be immediately suspended from the University for a period of
up to five years; and

2. This Tribunal recon:unends to the President of the University that the President
recommend to governing council that :rvfr. Zllllbe expelled from the
University; and,
3. This Tribunal reports this case to the Provost for publication of a notice of this
decision, or of the sanction imposed by this Tribunal to be published in the
university newspapers vvith Mr. z••s name v.itbheld.
[12] The Tribunal -wishes to note its concern over the existing provision in the Code of
Behaviour on Academic !>/fatters which grants the guilty student anonymit<;. We are told
that expulsion is primarily sought for its deterrent value. If that is the primary goal, the
Tribunal believes that the deterrent value would be significantly enhanced if the student
once found guilty, was subsequently identified by name. 01i'ler students would then
appreciate the seriousness of the offence. \\'hile we have no power to amend the existing
code, we hope that the Provost and the Governing Council will ta.1<:e seriously our
recommendation that students, once expelled from the university, are no longer entitled to
anony1nity.

Date: January 11, 2010
Clifford

