Case 00-01-01

DATE:

   March 16, 2001

PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v. R.D. and University of Toronto v. K.U.

Hearing Date(s):

   information not available

Panel Members:

   C. Anthony Keith, Q.C., Senior Chair

   Disposition of Presiding Chair on a point of law, pursuant to s. 22(a)
   of the Code, which arose out of the hearing of charges in Case
   #00-01-02. The charges related to allegations that the two, co-accused
   Studentâs engaged in inappropriate communications during the final
   examinations of two courses, in an attempt to cheat or obtain
   unauthorized assistance. The Students objected to some of the
   Universityâs evidence as not being properly admissible. The disputed
   evidence consisted of allegedly extraordinarily similar patterns of
   responses by the two accused in two tests in one of the courses at
   issue. No charges had been laid with respect to the Studentâs
   participation in the tests. The University asked for a ruling on the
   admissibility of the evidence in advance, and asserted that the
   information should be admitted as similar fact evidence. The Chair
   considered submission from counsel, the decision of the Supreme Court
   in Arp v. The Queen, (1998) 129 C.C.C. (3d) 321, and s. 15 of the
   Statutory Powers Procedure Act, and found that it was incumbent upon
   him to make the determination identified in Arp v. The Queen, and give
   his ruling as to the evidenceâs admissibility. The Chair considered the
   alleged similar fact evidence and the course professorâs testimony, and
   found that the course professor had no qualifications or expertise
   which would enable her to give opinion evidence as to similarity,
   probability or statistical analysis, and that the comparators which she
   had selected for her purposes were arbitrary, and the validity of which
   broke down on cross-examination. The Chair found that the evidence was
   adduced for the purpose of confirming that the accused committed the
   offences with which they were charged and that the evidence had little,
   to no, probative value. The analysis and comparisons in the evidence
   were significantly flawed, unreliable and demonstrated the intention of
   the course professor to find a basis for bolstering the suspicions of
   the final exam invigilator that the two accused had engaged in improper
   communication or cheating. The Chair found that there was no basis for
   finding that there was a degree of similarity between the alleged
   similar facts and the facts in issue in the hearing which would satisfy
   the test of objective improbability of coincidence laid down in Arp v.
   The Queen, or that their probative value significantly outweighed the
   prejudice to the accused. The Chair found that the admission of the
   disputed evidence would cause prejudice in that neither accused faced
   any charges with respect to the two term tests, andÂ  therefore
   evidence relating to those tests was irrelevant and, if admitted, would
   lead the Tribunal into areas of inquiry to which the accused had not
   been called upon to respond. The Chair directed that the evidence
   relating to the two term tests was inadmissible and would be
   disregarded by the Panel in disposing of the charges.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/13066
