FILE: 2000/01-01
PRELIMINARY MATTER
(see trial decision at 2000/01-02)
UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
THE UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
BETWEEN:
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
and
R.D.
and
K.U.

RULING ON ADMISSIBILITY OF EVIDENCE
The following are my reasons with respect to the disposition by me, as the Chair of a panel of the
Tribunal convened to hear certain charges under the Code of Academic Behaviour (“the Code”),
of a point of law which arose during the course of the hearing with respect to those charges.
Section 22(a) of the Code requires the presiding Chair to deal with such matters alone.
Before commencing the examination in chief of Professor Lilian U. Thompson, a witness called
by the University to testify at the hearing, counsel for the University informed the panel that
there were some parts of the evidence to be given by Professor Thompson to which the defence
objected as not being properly admissible. The disputed evidence consisted of what was seen by
the University as extraordinarily similar patterns of responses by the two accused in two earlier
tests administered in course NHS 386 during the fall of 1999, prior to the final examination
which is the subject of the first two charges against the two accused. It was asserted that this
information should be admitted as similar fact evidence in that it would tend to show that the
accused had committed the offences with which they are charged; it was further asserted that the
probative value of this evidence would outweigh any prejudice which might result to the accused
by reason of its admission.
University Counsel asked for a ruling on the admissibility of this evidence in advance, and relied
upon the decision of the Supreme Court of Canada in Arp v. The Queen, (1998) 129 C.C.C. (3d)
321. At p.338 Cory J., speaking for the Court, stated that

The University of Toronto and R.D. and K.U.
The rule allowing for the admissibility of similar fact evidence is perhaps best
viewed as an ‘exception to an exception’ to the basic rule that all relevant
evidence is admissible. Relevance depends directly on the facts in issue in any
particular case. The facts in issue are in turn determined by the charge in the
indictment and the defence, if any, raised by the accused
To be logically
relevant, an item of evidence does not have to firmly establish, on any standard,
the truth or falsity of a fact in issue. The evidence must simply tend to ‘increase or
diminish the probability of the fact in issue.
At page 340, after observing that evidence which merely would tend to show that the accused is
the sort of person likely to have committed the alleged offence is not admissible, Cory, J.
continued:
It can be seen that in considering whether similar fact evidence should be
admitted, the basic and fundamental question that must be determined is whether
the probative value of the evidence outweighs its prejudicial effect.
And again at page 341,
Because similar fact evidence is admitted on the basis of an objective
improbability of coincidence, the evidence necessarily derives its probative value
from the degree of similarity between the acts under consideration. The probative
value must, of course, significantly outweigh the prejudice to the accused for the
evidence to be admissible………….A principled approach to the admission of
similar fact evidence will in all cases rest on the finding that the accused’s
involvement in the alleged similar acts or counts is unlikely to be the product of
coincidence. This conclusion ensures that the evidence has sufficient probative
force to be admitted and will involve different considerations in different
contexts.” (My emphasis)
He concludes at page 344 by saying:
Thus, where similar fact evidenced is adduces to prove a fact in issue, in order to
be admissible, the trial judge should evaluate the degree of similarity of the
alleged acts and decide whether the objective improbability of coincidence has
been established. Only then will the evidence have sufficient probative value to
be admitted.
The accused are charged with the offences of obtaining or attempting to obtain unauthorized
assistance, assisting or attempting to assist another person to obtain unauthorized assistance, and
knowingly engaging in a form of cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or
misrepresentation in order to obtain academic credit or advantage, with respect to two specific
examinations which took place on April 24,2000 and December21, 1999 in courses BIO 351 Y
- Page 2 of 5 -

The University of Toronto and R.D. and K.U.
and NFS 3 86H respectively. The panel was informed that the evidence of alleged similar facts
related to two term tests in course NHS 3 86H written in October and November, 1999. No
charges have been laid against either accused with respect to their participation in those tests.
After hearing submissions from all counsel, I ruled initially that it was incumbent upon me to
hear the disputed evidence in order to be able to make the determination identified by Cory, J. in
Arp v. The Queen. I was further mindful of the provisions of section 15 of the Statutory Powers
Procedure Act which gives some considerable latitude to tribunals as to the evidence which they
may receive. I further ruled that I would not require the other members of the panel to retire
while the disputed evidence was being heard, although it is the function only of the Chair to rule
on questions of law. Indeed they were not asked to do so. I indicated that having heard the
disputed evidence, I would give my ruling as to its admissibility at the appropriate time
thereafter.
Professor Thompson then proceeded to testify in chief and was cross-examined by counsel for
the accused. She was the professor who had taught course NHS 3 86H in the fall of 1999 and
who had prepared the final examination and term test questions. Her evidence as to the two term
tests consisted of presenting and discussing the following documents which were marked as
exhibits:
Exhibit 19

-

a copy of the question paper comprising term test 2 in NHS 386H
dated November 17, 1999 written by the accused K.U.

Exhibit 20

-

a copy of the question paper comprising term test 2 in NTIS 386H
dated November 17, 1999 written by the accused R.D.

Exhibit 21

-

a copy of the scantron sheet for term test 2 handed in by the accused
R.D.

Exhibit 22

-

a copy of the scantron sheet for term test 2 handed in by the accused
K.U.

Exhibit 23

-

a copy of a handwritten comparison prepared by Professor
Thompson with respect to wrong answers made by the two accused
to certain questions on term test 2, with a further comparison to the
overall class results on those questions

Exhibit 24

-

a copy of a computer analysis of examination questions for term test
2

Exhibit 25

-

a copy of a handwritten comparison prepared by Professor
Thompson made between the wrong answers made by the two
- Page 3 of 5 -

The University of Toronto and R.D. and K.U.
accused and those made by certain selected other members of the
class who also wrote the examination
Exhibit 26

-

a copy of a computer analysis of candidate incorrect responses
found in the answers submitted by students re term test 2

Exhibit 27

-

a copy of the signature sheets collected from certain students who
wrote term test 2

Exhibit 28

-

a copy of the signature sheets collected from certain students who
wrote term test 1

It was established at once, and university counsel so conceded, that Professor Thompson had no
qualifications or expertise which would enable her to give opinion evidence as to similarity,
probability or statistical analysis. Her expertise lies in the field of food chemistry wherein she
has taught at the University for over thirty years and in which subject she holds an earned
doctorate.
Regretfully, it was clear from her evidence that as a result of comments made by the invigilator
at the final course examination in December, 1999 she formed the suspicion that the two accused
had engaged in some form of improper communication or cheating during that examination and
then went looking for some other evidence which would back up those suspicions. Her
investigation led her to compare the answers submitted by the accused on the two earlier term
tests to those of other students who wrote those tests.
The so-called similar fact evidence, put at its highest, would establish that during each of the two
term tests the two accused might have been sitting in the same area of the examination room
(exhibits 27 and 28), and that their answers to the questions on term test 2 might be seen as
showing a unique pattern. She acknowledged that she had no recollection of the exact seating
pattern on those days and that there were some empty desks which may have physically
separated the accused from one another. As to there being a unique pattern of answers, the
comparison which she presented shows that the answers provided by the two accused to the
questions on term test 2 were nearly identical and did not exactly match those of any other
students or group of students, although in some respects there were certain similarities. However
she was hesitant to acknowledge the rather obvious fact, as disclosed by the relevant exhibit, that
unique patterns of similarity were also displayed among the answers submitted by other students
whose performance she had chosen to include as part of her comparison, but which for some
reason did not arouse the same sort of suspicions.
As to the comparators which she selected for her purposes, her choice was clearly an arbitrary
one, and its validity broke down on cross-examination. She also acknowledged that on the whole
the two accused had scored well throughout her course, although they had fallen back in the
- Page 4 of 5 -

The University of Toronto and R.D. and K.U.
second term test which she had deliberately made harder than the first. She also acknowledged
that at least one of them was a “bright student”.
The alleged similar fact evidence is adduced for the sole purpose of tending to confirm that the
accused committed the offences with which they are charged. Having considered carefully all of
the disputed evidence, I am unable to find that there is very little, if any, probative value in the
evidence tendered. The analysis and comparisons put forward are significantly flawed and in my
view clearly demonstrate the intention of Professor Thompson to find some basis for bolstering
the suspicions raised by the invigilator at the time of the final examination on December 21,
1999. As far as being helpful as “similar facts” I find that they are unreliable and therefore of no
assistance to the Tribunal.
Having made the above determination, it is clear that there is no basis for making a finding that
there is such a degree of similarity between the alleged similar facts and the facts in issue in this
hearing which would satisfy the test of objective improbability of coincidence laid down in Arp
v. The Queen, or that their probative value “significantly outweighs the prejudice to the
accused”. As to the latter, I am satisfied that the admission of the disputed evidence would
indeed cause significant prejudice in that neither accused presently faces any charges with
respect to the two term tests; therefore evidence relating to those tests is quite irrelevant and if
admitted would lead the tribunal into areas of inquiry to which the accused have not been called
upon to respond.
I therefore direct that the evidence relating to the two term tests, including both the oral evidence
of Professor Thompson and the Exhibits above listed, is inadmissible in this hearing and will be
disregarded by the panel in disposing of the charges. The remaining portions of the evidence
given by Professor Thompson will be considered at the proper time as part of the totality of the
evidence in this ease.
I had indicated to counsel upon adjourning at the end of the day on March 14 that I would
probably give my ruling on this point as part of the overall disposition of the charges. Upon
further reflection I concluded that it was important to dispose of the matter immediately so that
both counsel for the University and for the accused will know what evidence is being considered
by the Tribunal and what evidence must be met and dealt with; and so that the other members of
the panel may be aware of what evidence may and may not be considered in disposing of this
case. In closing, I wish to thank all counsel for their assistance in this matter.

March 16, 2001

C. Anthony Keith
______________________
C. Anthony Keith, Q.C.
Senior Chair
- Page 5 of 5 -

