DISCIPLINE APPEAL BOARD
THE UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO

IN THE MATTER of charges of academic dishonesty made in October 26, 2005;
AND IN THE MATTER of the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on
Academic Matters, 1995;
IN THE MATTER of the University of Toronto Act, 1971, S.O. 1971, c. 56, as
amended S.O. 1978, C.88;
B E T W E E N:
UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
Appellant
- and Mr. D.S.
Respondent

Members of the panel:
•
•
•
•

Coralie D’Souza
Professor Clare Beghtol
Professor Ian McDonald
Janet E. Minor

Appearances:
• Linda Rothstein; Lily Harmer for the University of Toronto
• Mr. D. S., The Student
• Stewart Thom, Law Student, Downtown Legal Services for the Student

REASONS FOR DECISION

1.

The University of Toronto (the “University”) appeals the penalty portion of the
decision of the trial division (the “Tribunal”) relating to charges that Mr. D. S. (the

40277 v1

1

“Student”) contravened the Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters 1 (the “Code”)
under the University of Toronto Act 2 . The charges allege plagiarism in three (3) full
courses taken by the Student in the 2004-2005 Fall/Winter sessions.

THE HEARING
2.

The matter proceeded by way of an Agreed Summary of Facts. The Tribunal
accepted the Student’s plea of guilty to 11 of the charges:

(a) nine charges of plagiarism contrary to section B.1.l.(d) of the Code of
Behaviour on Academic Matters (the “Code”), concerning three essays and six
reports submitted in POL478, POL440 and POL200; and
(b) two charges of concocting sources, contrary to section B.1.l.(f) of the
Code, concerning two of the plagiarized essays submitted in POL478 and
POL440.

3.

The hearing then proceeded on the issue of sanction, the University seeking a five
(5) year suspension; notation on the Student’s transcript for a period of five (5)
years; a mark of zero (0) in POL440Y5Y, POL200Y5Y, and POL478Y5Y; and
publication of a notice of the decision of the Tribunal and the sanction imposed
with the Student’s name withheld.

The Student’s submission was that an

appropriate sanction would be a one (1) year suspension from the period when he
was last enrolled (May 2005); a notation on his transcript until his graduation; a
mark of zero (0) in the three courses; and publication of a notice of the decision of
the Tribunal and the sanction imposed with the Student’s name withheld.

1
2

University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters, 1995
University of Toronto Act, 1971, S.O. 1971, c.56, as amended S.O. 1978, C.88

40277 v1

2

4.

The University called no witnesses on sanction. The Student called four witnesses:
the parents of the Student, a friend and employer of the Student, and an
administrative assistant for the Department of Political Science at the University of
Toronto Mississauga.

5.

The Tribunal concluded that the Student should be suspended until the
commencement of the 2007 Fall session. It ordered that:
“
1. The Student is suspended from the University for a period of
27 months from May 16, 2005.
2. The record of sanction shall be imposed on the Student’s
academic record for a period of 39 months from May 16, 2005
or until graduation, whichever is earlier.
3. There will be a grade of zero assigned to courses
No.POL478Y5Y, POL440Y5Y, and POL200Y5Y.
4. This matter should be reported to the Provost to be published
and the notice of decision and the sanctions imposed in the
University’s newspaper with the name of the Student
withheld.” 3

6.

The University appeals from the Tribunal’s decision to suspend the Student for a
period of twenty-seven (27) months retroactive to May 16, 2005 or until graduation,
and its decision to record the sanction for a period of thirty-nine (39) months
retroactive to May 16, 2005, or until graduation.

7.

The University argues that the Tribunal erred in principle and in law, in imposing
an effective period of suspension of sixteen (16) months, and an effective notation

3

University of Toronto, The University Tribunal Decision, dated June 2006, page. 14, para. 40

40277 v1

3

of suspension for twenty-eight (28) months. The grounds may be summarized as
follows:
(a) the Tribunal did not apply the appropriate principles for sanctions in
academic matters;
(b) the Tribunal erred in its findings on evidence and conclusions with respect
to potential mitigating circumstances;
(c) the Tribunal improperly relied on decanal level decisions;
(d) the Tribunal mis-assessed the character of the Student, and the likelihood
of reoccurrence;
(e) the Tribunal erred in its consideration of the appropriate time period, by
concluding that a sanction of longer than a three (3) year suspension
should only be granted where there is no possibility of rehabilitation; and
(f) the Tribunal’s sanction was inconsistent, and against the weight of
Tribunal jurisprudence when it determined the starting date for the
suspension retroactively to May 2005.

JURISDICTION OF THE APPEAL PANEL

8.

The Code provides that the Discipline Appeals Board has authority
(a) to dismiss an appeal summarily and without formal hearing if it
determines that the appeal is frivolous, vexatious or without
foundation;
(b) in circumstances which the Tribunal members hearing the appeal
consider to be exceptional, to order a new hearing; and
(c) in any case, to affirm, reverse, quash, vary or modify the verdict,
penalty or sanction appealed from the substitute any verdict
penalty or sanction that could have been given or imposed at trial. 4

9.

Section E of the Code 5 , confirms that the appeal is not a trial de novo, although
fresh evidence may be allowed in some circumstances.

4
5

The Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters, June 1, 1995, Section E. Appeals, Part E
Supra, The Code, Section E. Appeals, Part E

40277 v1

4

10. The Student argues that the Appeal Panel should only reverse or modify an order of
the Tribunal when the Tribunal has made a palpable and overriding error, pointing
to the test in Housen 6 , applied by appellate courts on appeal from trial courts. In
our view, this case is not totally helpful in the context of administrative
proceedings. The imposition of a second review by an administrative panel before
a review by the court provides an opportunity for the administrative appeal panel to
develop appropriate principles and policies to be applied within this specialized
context, to develop its own jurisprudence, and in turn to foster principled and
consistent decision making. The appeal panel has broad jurisdiction, and may apply
a somewhat less deferential approach than the Housen 7 test. The appeal panel has
authority to quash or modify a Tribunal decision when there are errors of law, and
significant errors of fact.

THE TRIBUNAL DECISION
11. The Tribunal first considered the principles to be applied in determining an
appropriate sanction. They set out, and later applied the criteria identified and
elaborated by Mr. Sopinka in the Mr. C. 8 case:
(a) the character of the person charged;
(b) the likelihood of a repetition of the offence;
(c) the nature of the offence committed;
(d) any extenuating circumstances surrounding commission of the offence;
(e) the detriment to the University occasioned by the offence;
(f) the need to deter others from committing a similar offence.

6

Housen v. Nikolaisen [2002] S.C.J. No. 31 (SCC)
supra, Housen
8
In the Matter of the University of Toronto, Code of Behaviour & Mr. C., November 5, 1976
7

40277 v1

5

12.

The Tribunal identified and discussed these criteria as originating as sentencing
guidelines in criminal law. It went on to discuss other principles in criminal law
sentencing, apparently adopting those principles.

13.

However, while the criteria in Mr. C. 9 had their origins in criminal law, the general
principles and considerations of courts in criminal law matters are different than
those in an administrative law context. Most obviously, the liberty of the person
being sentenced in a criminal matter is in issue, but in an administrative law
context, it is not.

14.

The principles to be applied by this Tribunal are those found in administrative law,
and particularly, those developed in the University setting. Having said this, it is
not clear from the reasons of the Tribunal, how the Tribunal applied the additional
criminal law principles or considerations, or how they affected their ultimate
determination of sanction. As a result, we would not interfere with the sanction on
this ground alone.

THE TRIBUNAL’S CONSIDERATION OF THE CRITERIA

1.Character of Student, and likelihood of repetition

15.

The Tribunal described the Student as a first offender, and found there was no
evidence that the Student was a chronic cheater. This finding is correct in the sense
that the Student had no history of discipline before these charges in 2005.

9

supra, Mr. C.

40277 v1

6

16.

However, the Tribunal reached other conclusions of fact respecting the Student for
which we can find no evidentiary support.

17.

The Tribunal’s consideration of both the Student’s character, and mitigating factors
were hampered by the Student’s choice not to testify. As a result, there was no
direct evidence about the Student’s perception of his family circumstances, his
beliefs about the necessity of assisting his mother, or any direct evidence about any
financial strain that he himself was under. Clearly, evidence from the Student
himself would have been the best source of evidence on these issues.

18.

The Tribunal found that in the winter term 2005, the Student believed he had no
alternative but to complete his degree. In fact, it was open to the Student to seek
permission to delay or extend his courses. As the Student did not give any evidence
either with respect to his personal circumstances, or about what he believed his
options were with respect to completion of his degree, there is no basis to support
the Tribunal’s conclusions respecting the Student’s state of mind - particularly that
there was no alternative.

19.

The evidence from the Student’s parents supported the Tribunal’s conclusions that
the parents were separated; that his father made no direct financial contribution to
either the Student or his mother; that the Student provided financial assistance to his
mother, and that his mother considered herself in very precarious financial
circumstances.

20.

The evidence of the Student’s mother respecting her financial situation was sketchy.
It was clear that she did consider herself to be in financial difficulty, and that she
was suffering stress sufficient to require her to take a leave from her employment.

40277 v1

7

21.

Nic Jezdovic, a friend of the Student also gave evidence. He testified that he had
been a friend of the Student for approximately 8-10 years and had employed him in
2005, when he believed that the Student needed to earn extra money.

He

considered the Student to be reliable and of good character.
22.

It was clear from all the witnesses that the Student did work long hours, and that he
made a financial contribution to his mother. Thus, while the evidence is overstated
respecting the student’s state of mind, nonetheless, the number of hours worked
does explain why the Student would have found his studies difficult.

His

willingness to work and provide monies to his mother, we accept as some evidence
of good character.
23. The Tribunal found that the Student had expressed remorse, and had appreciated the
gravity of his misconduct. The Tribunal relied on the fact that the Student pleaded
“guilty” to conclude that he recognized the seriousness of the offence, and that there
was little likelihood of repetition.
24.

In our view, a guilty plea is a mitigating factor, as is an agreed summary of fact.
They reflect an acknowledgement that the Student appreciates that he contravened
the Code 10 , and reduce the time and expense of a hearing. However, a guilty plea
in and of itself, is not an expression of remorse or an indication of appreciation of
the level of gravity of an offence.

It does not speak to the likelihood of its

repetition.
25.

The Tribunal also took into account the Student’s conduct at the decanal level
respecting one of the essays said to be plagiarized. The Tribunal considered the
Student’s misleading the Dean’s designate, with a fabricated explanation of his

10

supra, the Code

40277 v1

8

roommate printing a wrong copy, and his submission of a more recently prepared
essay as an aggravating factor, rather than a separate charge warranting a separate
penalty. We agree with this conclusion. It is not clear from the decision what
weight the Tribunal gave to this conduct.
26.

In addition, the Tribunal should have noted that at a meeting on May 6, 2005,
respecting the Student’s submission of a paper on Hobbes in POL200, he told
Professor Beck that he did not knowingly hand in plagiarized work, and that the
meat of the essay was quotes from Hobbes. The Student admitted in the agreed
summary of fact, that he was not being truthful with Professor Beck.

27.

The panel should have also taken into account the fact that the Student was a senior
Student, in fourth year, and admittedly well informed about the nature of, and
prohibition against plagiarism.

28.

The Tribunal’s errors outlined above resulted in their characterizing the Student
more positively than the evidence permitted.

2.Character of the Offence

29.

The Tribunal correctly characterized plagiarism as a serious breach of the
University’s Code 11 . However, the Tribunal erred when it found the offences
should be treated as one continuous act.

30. The charges relate to plagiarized work in three (3) courses submitted between
January 27 and April 1st, 2005:

11

supra, Code

40277 v1

9

(a) in POL478, six short papers, each worth 1.43% of the final mark, and one
longer paper worth 50% of the final mark,
(b) in POL 440, one paper worth 30% of the final mark, and
(c) in POL200, a paper worth 30% of the final mark
31.

Other than the fact that all incidents of plagiarism occurred during the winter term,
and the plagiarism relied on Internet sources, the Tribunal offered no analysis or
support from other cases as to why these separate events should be considered one
continuous act. It is clear that the Tribunal considered a less severe sanction should
be imposed when the offence was one continuous act.

32.

Even accepting that the six short papers were worth small portions of the final
mark, and were returned together at the end of the course, the Tribunal erred in
considering plagiarism in three courses as one continuous act.

33. We also find that the Tribunal did not appear to take into account or give sufficient
weight to the fact that the work submitted was plagiarized in its entirety. The
Student admitted he had contributed no meaningful work. In some cases, he had
made minor word changes, deletions, and additions to disguise his actions.
34.

These factors would point towards a more severe sanction.

3.Extenuating or mitigating circumstances

35.

The Tribunal was correct in its finding that the Student was engaged in full-time
work, at the same time that he was a full-time Student. As we noted earlier, there is
no evidence at all, of the Student’s own perception of his mother’s financial
problems, nor on the effect of those perceived problems on the Student. However,

40277 v1

10

it is clear he did provide financial support to his mother, and we agree that this
effort demonstrates some measure of character, although it does not excuse his
academic dishonesty. We found no evidence of other possibly mitigating
circumstances, such as language or cultural barriers.

4.

Detriment to the University and deterrence

36.

The Tribunal noted that plagiarism was a serious matter, and that there was a need
for personal and general deterrence. In this context, the Tribunal discussed its view
of the impact of a five-year suspension, concluding that a five-year suspension
would effectively end the Student’s career, and that a suspension of this period
should be imposed only when a Student should have no entitlement to a second
chance, and where there is no opportunity for rehabilitation.

37.

The Tribunal’s view that a five-year suspension would effectively end the Student’s
academic career is not supported by any evidence in this case.

The general

conclusions about the effect of a five-year suspension and the view that it should be
reserved for cases where there is no opportunity for rehabilitation, find no support
either in evidence, or in the jurisprudence of the University Tribunal.
38.

We consider this analysis of the five-year suspension to be a very serious error.
The Code’s 12 provision of a suspension of up to five years ensures that students
may enroll and complete their degrees, if they so wish, and are otherwise entitled.
A suspension provides a second chance for a student who has engaged in
misconduct. A long suspension is not founded on any assumption that there is no

12

supra, the Code

40277 v1

11

hope of rehabilitation. To the contrary, expulsion, the most severe sanction, denies
a Student any such opportunity.
39.

The Tribunal recognized that plagiarism, especially plagiarism using the Internet, is
a significant and increasing problem for the University. Plagiarism strikes at the
core of academic integrity, so important to a University. The sanction must also act
as a general deterrent.

In our view, the sanction imposed by the Tribunal is

insufficient to convey to others the seriousness of this misconduct.

5.

Consistency of sanction with other decisions

(a)
40.

Decanal level

Mr. Thom, on behalf of the Student, argued that the sanction imposed by the
Tribunal was appropriate when comparing it to sanctions imposed for plagiarism at
the divisional level.

41.

The Code 13 establishes procedures wherein Code issues are initially dealt with at the
Divisional level. These are set out in Part C of the Code 14 . Issues are first dealt
with at the instructor level, and if unresolved are referred to the Dean of the division
or his designate.

42.

The provisions permit Deans to impose sanctions up to a one (1) year suspension, to
those Students who admit their misconduct. If a Dean does not consider a one (1)
year suspension sufficient, or if the Student does not admit misconduct, the Dean

13
14

supra, the Code
supra, the Code

40277 v1

12

may refer the matter to the Provost. In this case, the Dean had no choice but to
refer the matters to Provost, because there was no admission of misconduct.
43.

We do not find a review of letters sent at the decanal level helpful to the
determination of sanction in this case. Lack of detail in the letters makes it difficult
to assess and characterize them in a way in which any reliable general principles
could be extracted. However, more importantly, even if such characterization were
possible, decanal sanctions must be viewed differently, than sanctions of the
Tribunal. Procedures at the decanal level are designed to foster early resolution of
the issues, where possible, through a relatively informal and speedy process. We
agree that this is right in principle and that this policy should be preserved. The
potential for a lenient sanction, at that stage, encourages this resolution. Such a
sanction, however, can only be imposed where a Student admits misconduct.

44.

We agree with the University submission that a Student should not be penalized for
not admitting his misconduct at the decanal level.

However, sanctions at the

decanal level must be viewed as lenient in the context of promoting early
resolution.

Tribunal sanctions should be reviewed for consistency with other

Tribunal sanctions.
(b)

Tribunal Decisions

45. Tribunals must fashion the appropriate sanction based on the individual
circumstances of each case. There is no matrix, formula, or chart, in which a
Tribunal can determine that one particular act, must receive one particular sanction.

40277 v1

13

46.

At the same time, it is important that students are treated fairly and equitably when
receiving a sanction, and that there is general consistency in the approach of
Tribunals in imposing them.

47.

Provost’s Guidelines on Sanction, Offences and Suggested Penalties for Students
(Appendix ‘C’ to the Code) 15 , provides some assistance in this respect, but are
suggestions only, and state they are subject to the particular circumstances of each
case.

48.

We have reviewed the cases referred to us by the Student and the University. We
have concluded that the sanction imposed in this case is materially inconsistent with
the weight of other Tribunal and appeal decisions.

49.

We observe that students who are first offenders committing one act of plagiarism,
generally have received sanctions in a range of one to two (1-2) years. Mitigating
or aggravating factors have decreased or increased this range. The approach taken
by the Tribunal in more serious cases is typified in Baksh 16 where a fourth year
student committed serious acts of plagiarism in one major essay, and in a series of
short papers. She had committed another act of plagiarism in a previous year. The
plagiarism was compounded by further dishonesty in an attempt to graduate. There
were no mitigating circumstances found by the Tribunal.

The sanction was

expulsion.
50.

The misconduct of the Student in this case, the character of the offences which
occurred on a number of occasions, and the other factors previously discussed, are

15
16

supra, the Code
In the matter of the University of Toronto and Baksh, February 15, 2007

40277 v1

14

not substantially similar to those who received a range of suspension from 1-2
years.
51.

At the same time, the conduct of the Student, while extremely serious, falls short of
deserving expulsion.

52. In our view, the appropriate period of suspension, taking into account all the factors
discussed above, is four years.

6.

53.

Commencement date for sanction

In general, sanctions should commence from the date the sanction is imposed by the
Tribunal.

54.

It is possible, in exceptional circumstances, for the commencement of a sanction to
date back earlier. However, some principled reason must be given for doing so; to
do otherwise would result in a wide disparity among sanctions. In this case, the
Tribunal determined that its sanction should run from the Student’s first meeting
with the Dean on May 16, 2005,

55.

Although the Tribunal panel considered that a penalty of more than two (2) years
was appropriate in these circumstances because of multiple offences and the attempt
to mislead the Dean, at the same time, and in our view inconsistently, the Tribunal
wished the Student to be able to register for courses in September 2007.

56.

Accordingly, the Tribunal concluded the suspension should include the period when
the Student had voluntarily removed himself from the University community, by
not enrolling in further courses. This backdating effectively shaved eleven months

40277 v1

15

from the period of suspension and thus undermined their conclusions that more than
a two (2) year penalty was appropriate.
57.

There was no evidence why the Student had not registered, or analysis of why his
voluntary absence from the University community should be considered the
equivalent of a sanction of a one (1) year suspension.

58. We also find surprising the choice of May 16, 2005, as the date for commencement,
as this was the date on which the Student denied his misconduct in POL478Y5Y,
fabricated a story about the wrong essay being printed, and submitted a new essay
to Professor Beck. More importantly, at that date there had not yet been a decanal
meeting with regard to the offences committed in POL200Y5Y and POL440Y5Y;
these were not addressed until two meetings on July 6, 2005.
59.

In our view, the sanction imposed on the Student should commence April 13, 2006,
the date of the Tribunal order.

CONCLUSION

60.

As a result, we allow the appeal, and order:
(a) a four-year suspension, commencing April 13, 2006;
(b) an assignment of a grade of zero (0) in courses: POL478Y5Y,
POL440Y5Y, POL200Y5Y
(c) that the record of the sanction be noted on the Student’s academic record
for a period of five (5) years from April 13, 2006, or until graduation,
whichever is earlier.

40277 v1

16

(d) that the matter be reported to the Provost, who may publish a notice of the
decision and sanctions in the University’s newspapers, with the name of
the Student withheld.

40277 v1

17

