Case 1138

   DATE: May 27, 2021
   PARTIES: University of Toronto v. S.T.

   HEARING DATE: March 1, 2021, via Zoom

   Panel Members:
   Ms. Sabrina Bandali, Chair
   Dr. Pascal van Lieshout, Faculty Panel Member
   Ms. Yusra Qazi, Student Panel Member

   Appearances:
   Mr. Robert Centa, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland
   Rosenberg Rothstein LLP
   Mr. Daniel Walker, Representative for the Student, Bobila Walker Law
   LLP

   In Attendance:
   Mr. Christopher Lang, Director,Â Appeals, Discipline and Faculty
   Grievances

   Not in Attendance:
   The Student

   OnÂ three occasions,â¯theÂ StudentÂ was charged underâ¯s. B.i.1(d) of
   theâ¯Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters, 1995â¯(the âCodeâ) on the
   basis thatâ¯sheâ¯knowingly represented an idea or expression of an idea
   or work of another asâ¯herâ¯own inÂ two essaysÂ and an examâ¯to obtain
   an academic credit.â¯She was charged alternatively under s.Â B.i.3(b)
   of theâ¯Codeâ¯for theseÂ threeÂ offences.

   The parties provided an Agreed Statement of Facts (âASFâ) and a Joint
   Submission on Penalty (âJSPâ).â¯TheÂ StudentÂ pled guilty to all six
   charges, inclusive of the alternative charges. The Panel was satisfied
   that theÂ StudentâsÂ admissions were voluntary, informed, and
   unequivocal.Â The Panel noted that the ASF outlined
   thatÂ theÂ StudentÂ submittedÂ two essays and an exam that were copied
   verbatim or near verbatim from outside sources. TheÂ ASF also outlined
   that the one of theÂ StudentâsÂ essays and the exam returned an
   Originality Report from Turnitin of 31% and 29%,Â respectively.Â The
   ASF also outlined that theÂ Student,Â accompaniedÂ by
   counsel,Â attended a meeting with the Deanâs DesignateÂ (âDeanâs
   Meetingâ).Â The Panel noted that during the Deanâs MeetingÂ the Student
   admitted that she plagiarized the two essays and the exam.Â Based on
   the admissionÂ of theÂ Student,Â the evidence,Â and supporting
   documentation contained within the ASF, the Panel acceptedâ¯theâ¯guilty
   pleaâ¯with respect to the three charges under s. B.i.1(d) of
   theâ¯Code.â¯The University withdrew the alternative charges.

   In determining sanction, the Panel noted that in accordance with the
   guidance in the Discipline Appeals Board decision inÂ The University of
   Toronto and M. A.Â (Case No. 837 - Appeal, December 22, 2016), a JSP
   may be rejected only in circumstances where the penalty is contrary to
   the publicÂ interest,Â or it would bring the administration of justice
   into disrepute. The Panel found that the JSP in this case was
   reasonable. Furthermore, the Panel considered the factors and
   principles relevant to sanction set out inÂ University of Toronto and
   Mr. CÂ (Case No. 1976/77-3, November 5, 1976). The Panel considered the
   serious nature of the offence and the fact thatÂ thisÂ was not
   theÂ StudentâsÂ first academic offence. Balanced against these factors
   is theÂ StudentâsÂ cooperation in the process and signing the
   ASFÂ andÂ JSP, which shows insight and that she is taking
   responsibility for her actions. TheÂ StudentâsÂ admission of guilt and
   expression of remorse for her actions along with her personal
   challenges during the period leading up to and including the commission
   of the offences were also considered in relation to factors relevant to
   sanction. Having regardÂ toÂ all these factors, the Panel accepted the
   penalty outlined in the JSP. The Panel imposed the following
   sanctions:Â a final grade of zero in all three courses;
   aÂ three-and-a-half-yearÂ suspension;
   aÂ three-and-a-half-yearÂ notation on the transcript; andÂ aÂ report to
   theÂ ProvostÂ forÂ publication.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/29900
