Case 491

DATE:

   November 5, 2008

PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v. Student

Hearing Date(s):

   October 30, 2008

Panel Members:

   Ronald G. Slaght, Q.C., Chair
   Graham Trope, Faculty Panel Member
   Melany Bleue, Student Panel Member

Appearances:

   Robert Centa, Counsel for the University
   Zak Muscovitch, Counsel for the Student

   The Student was charged with three offences under s. B.i.1(a) and
   alternatively, with three offences under s. B.i.3(b) and one offence
   under s. B.i.3(a) of the Code.Â  The charges concerned allegations that
   the Student had forged and falsified three documents which she
   submitted in an application to obtain Post Admission Transfer Credits.
   The matter proceeded on a plea of guilty and a contested hearing on
   sanction. The Panel accepted the guilty plea based on the Agreed
   Statement of Facts. The Student claimed that she created the false
   documents with the assistance of her friend and that no money changed
   hands. The Student claimed that she had suffered symptoms of depression
   and anxiety that were triggered by the requirements of class
   participation. She supported her claim with letters from health
   practitioners. The Student claimed that the course requirements in one
   of the courses for which she sought a post admission transfer credit
   was too heavy for her and that she believed that she could not meet the
   demands of the course. The course was a requirement for the Studentâs
   degree. The Panel found that at the material time when the false
   documents were created, the Student was physically and mentally well
   and that any mental or physical disabilities were not causative of her
   conduct but rather a reason for it. The Panel considered the planned
   and deliberate nature of the offence, the circumstances which had
   permitted the Student to have withdrawn from her plan at any time, the
   Studentâs involvement of a third party, and her continued deceptions
   when first confronted with the allegations, and found that the
   Universityâs recommendation of expulsion should be accepted. The Panel
   found that while the falsified transcript was in respect of two courses
   and not an entire academic record, the effect of the Studentâs actions
   was in the nature of a fabricated degree or University transcript. It
   was designed to accomplish the same purpose of obtaining a degree that
   otherwise would not be obtained. The Panel recommended to the
   President, further to s. C.ii.(b)(i) of the Code, that the Student be
   expelled from the University; and that a permanent notation of the
   expulsion be recorded on her academic record and transcript.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12706
