UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
IN THE MATTER OF charges of academic dishonesty made on March 26, 2008;
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic
Matters, 1995;
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Act, 1971, S.O. 1971, c.56 as
amended S.O. 1978, c. 88

BETWEEN:
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO

and

REASONS FOR DECISION

Members of the Panel:
Chair

Ronald G. Slaght, Q.C.
Graham Trope
Melany Bleue

Student Panel Member

A1wearances:
Robert A. Centa

Counsel for the University of Toronto

Zak Muscovitch

Counsel f o r ~ K -

Faculty Panel Member

-2-

Introduction
[1]

The trial division of the University Tribunal held a hearing on Thursday, October

30, 2008 into a series of charges brought by the University against Ms. K - . A
copy of the Charges is annexed to these Reasons as Appendix "A".

[2]

The charges concern allegations that Ms. ~ had forged and falsified three

documents, all dated July 10, 2007, found at Tabs 8, 9 and 10 of the Joint Book of
Documents, Exhibit 2, which she had then submitted as part of an application made to
obtain Post Admission Transfer Credits (PATC). The documents included what was
purp01ted to be a ce1tified transcript of an academic record from Ivan Franko National
University in the Ukraine ("IFNU"), what purpo1ted to be a certified cull'iculum for a
course, "Cervantes", from IFNU and a document purporting to be a ce1tified syllabus for
"Politics and Society in Latin America" also from IFNU, all documents of the nature and
kind that are required by the Transfer Credits Section Office of the University of Toronto
when considering an application for PATC.

[3]

The matter proceeded on a plea of guilty to Charges 1, 4 and 6 and a contested

hearing on the sanction to be imposed.

Mr. Centa, for the University, reviewed the

Agreed Statement of Facts, which had been signed by Ms. K
acknowledged the truth of the Statement, and the Tribunal accepted the guilty plea and
entered a finding of guilty to Charges 1, 4 and 6. The University then withdrew the other
charges.

-3[4]

The matter then continued with a hearing into the appropriate sanction. The

University advised the Panel it was seeking the ultimate penalty, expulsion from the
University. The University called no evidence but relied upon the Agreed Statement of
Facts.

[5]

Mr. Muscovitch for Ms. ~advised the Panel that his client would make

no attempt to justify her conduct or admit to anything less than the most serious offence
but, in all the circumstances, the need to protect the integrity of the academic setting, and
satisfy the general principles of sentencing adopted by the Tribunal in other cases, could
be satisfied here by a lengthy suspension in the range of fom· to five years.

Mr.

Muscovitch argued that Ms. ~ was but one credit from obtaining her degree, and
having regard to the evidence that the Panel would hear, expulsion was not a sanction the
Tribunal should impose.
[6]

Ms. ~ gave evidence and Mr. Muscovitch filed an outline of her

evidence with the Tribunal.

As well, three letters were entered on consent, a letter

(Exhibit 3) dated October 7, 2008 from Vasily Hnatov, a doctor ofnaturopathic medicine,
a letter (Exhibit 4) dated August 22, 2008 from Dr. Romana Fagan, Ms. ~ • s
family physician, and a character reference (Exhibit 5) dated October 2, 2008 from
Natalia Yatsenko who is the superintendent of the building where Ms. K-lives.
[7]

Following the evidence, the Panel heard comprehensive submissions from

Messrs. Centa and Muscovitch and after a period of deliberation advised the parties it
was reserving its decision and would release its decision and Reasons as soon as possible.

-4Background and Agreed Facts

[8]

The essential facts of this matter were contained in the Agreed Statement of Facts

and can be stated briefly.
[9]

~ ~ first registered at the University of Toronto in the Faculty of

Arts and Science in 2001, planning to complete a Specialist Program in Spanish. The
Panel was provided with a copy of Ms. ~ • s academic record in the Joint Book of
Documents.

As at October 30, 2008, the date of the hearing, Ms. K - - had

completed 19 of 20 academic credits needed to graduate in her selected program.

[1 0]

In the course of obtaining her credits, in September 2005, Ms.

had

enroJled in POL 305Y - Politics and Society in Latin America. She had obtained a copy
of the course outline hut subsequently dropped that course after about one month of
classes. The course outline was provided to us at Tab 4 of the Joint Book of Documents.

( 11]

In Winter 2007, Ms. ~ had registered in SP A 454 HIS - Cervantes and

the Golden Age of Narrative, and had obtained a copy of the course outline for that
course (available only to those registered in the course). That outline was provided to us
at Tab 5 of the Joint Book of Documents.
[12]

As emerged as an important fact, Ms. -

Cervantes course.

attended only one class in the

Successful completion of SPA 454 HIS was a prerequisite and

compulsory in order to graduate with the specialist designation in Spanish, the program in
which she was emoHed.

K-

Post Admission Transfer Credits

[13]

Ms.

had come with her family to Saskatchewan from the Ukraine

when she was 17. The evidence showed that she has returned to the Ukraine on a number
of occasions, and she expressed in her evidence a wish ultimately to live and work in that
country. She had studied both at the University of Saskatchewan and at INFU in the
Ukraine prior to enrolling at the University of Toronto.
[14]

The University of Toronto will, in appropriate circumstances, grant students credit

for academic work completed at other institutions. The usual practice is that students will
apply for transfer credits when granted admission to the University, but the University
will also grant credit, known as a Post Admission Transfer Credits (P ATC), after a
student has been admitted to the University.
[15]

There is an on-line process in place and a Transfer Credit Office to which

applications are made. An application for PATC must include a copy of the course
description for each course for which the student is seeking credit, an official transcript
from the institution where the student took the course, a certification that all the
information being provided is true, accurate and complete, and a consent that the
University of Toronto may confirm the accuracy of any information with the other
institution.
lies fo1· PATCs

[ 16]

In August 2007 Ms.

obtained information from the TCS office about

how to apply for a PATC. There was email messaging back and forth about the process.

-6On September 10, 2007 Ms.

made an application for PA TC and asked that the

University provide her with academic credit for two courses, Cervantes, and Politics and
Society in Latin America, courses that she claimed to have taken between May and July
2007 at IFNU in L'viv, Ukraine.

[ 17]

In suppo1t of her application, she certified that the information she was providing

was true, accurate and complete and consented to the University of Toronto confirming
the accuracy of the information. She submitted the three documents, dated July 10, 2007
described in these Reasons at paragraph 2.

Ms.

s attempt to deceive the University appears to have quickly

unravelled.

The TCS Office contacted a Professor, Ana Perez-Leroux, who was the

[18]

undergraduate coordinator of the Depaitment of Spanish and Pmtugese in Toronto, and
who identified that the IFNU Cervantes Outline submitted by Ms.

was a

verbatim translation of the U ofT Cervantes Outline (with a few grammatical errors).

[19]

Following this, the University confirmed with the Vice-Rector of Academic

Affairs at IFNU that the purpmted IFNU documents were fraudulent.

Subsequent Events

[20]

When first confronted, in December 2007, Ms. K-expressed surprise and

asse1ted that she had taken the two courses in the Ukraine.

[21]

Ms. ~ met with Professor Dewees, the Dean's Designate for Academic

Integrity in the Faculty in February 2008. She admitted then that the IFNU transcript, the
IFNU Cervantes Outline and the IFNU Politics Outline were forged and falsified

-7documents. She explained in February that she had taken a couple of non-credit, general
interest courses in the Ukraine in the summer of 2007 and had asked the instructor to
provide her with academic documentation to support a request for PATC. The instructor
had initially refused to do so but she had offered a bribe if he would produce the
documents. The instructor had then agreed to assist her and had provided the forged and
falsified academic records.
[22]

That remained the state of matters until not long before this hearing, when the

University forwarded a draft Agreed Statement of Facts containing the admissions made
in February 2008. Ms. Kllllllthen stated that she had misled the Dean's Designate
during the February 2008 meeting, and in fact she was not in the Ukraine at all during the
summer of 2007, took no courses there and that her story about the instructor and the
bribe were untrue.
[23]

It appears instead, that she had asked a Ukrainian friend to help her by creating

the forged documents. She provided her friend with copies of the U of T Cervantes
Outline and the U of T Politics Outline and her friend then created the forgeries. No
money changed hands.
[24]

A copy of the forged and falsified transcript of the academic record (Tab 8 of the

Joint Book of Documents) with its false seal is attached to these Reasons at Appendix

"B".

-8-

[25]

When she enrolled at the University of Toronto in 2001 she had obtained transfer

credits for her work at the University of Saskatchewan and at IFNU in the Ukraine. She
had been enrolled here since 2001 mostly as a part-time student, working to support
herself and enable her attendance at University.
[26]

Ms. K

described, supp01ted by the letters from the health practitioners,

Exhibits 3 and 4, severe symptoms of depression, and anxiety leading to panic attacks
over the period of her University attendances. She described these as triggered by the
requirements for class paiticipation, a basic requirement in language classes, and
manifested by sho1tness of breath and, indeed, her having to remove herself from class
from time to time. As she approached her tenth year at university, her purpose became to
obtain a degree and then return to the Ukraine where, she advised the Panel, a degree was
a necessity to obtain any sort of meaningful employment.
[27]

In evidence upon which the Tribunal ultimately put great reliance, Ms.

K-

candidly admitted that the course requirements in the Cervantes course were too heavy
for her, that she could not meet the demands of the course and for this reason she had
attended only one class, and had obtained the syllabus. She did not see how she could
pass that course.
[28]

She admitted in her evidence she had no excuse for what she has done and feels

ashamed and angry at herself. She also clearly admitted that she set about a course of
fraudulent conduct over a period of months starting in July 2007, involving her friend in

-9creating the false documents (on the basis that she thought he would do a better job than
she in creating the forged materials).
(29)

Ms. ~ was also f011hright in cross-examination. She agreed she had

enrolled in "Cervantes" at U of T twice and confirmed that she dropped the course in
February 07 because she couldn't handle the material and couldn't keep up. She enrolled
again September 2007, that is just at the time she had completed her PATC applications
for credit for the fictional Cervantes and Poli Sci courses. She did not follow through on

K-

this occasion either. She was hedging her bets.
[30]

Ms.

as detailed above, had given much evidence in her direct

examination about her health issues, including depression, anxiety and panic attacks, and
the letters submitted from her naturopath and family physician recorded these conditions,
as well as some apparent physical allergies that she suffered from seasonally.
[3L]

What emerged from these letters and Ms. ~ s evidence however was that

at the material time, July through September 2007, when the false documents were
created with the assistance of her friend and submitted to the TCS office for PATC, Ms.

K

was well, physically and mentally. Speaking to that period the naturopath, Dr.

Hnatov said "as of n o w ~ is in good physical and emotional state".
[32]

When questioned about this, Ms. ~ acknowledged that she was not

affected by any physical or mental disorder or her range of symptoms when call'ying out
her fraudulent plan but rather her motivation was the recognition that because of anxiety,
depression and panic attacks that she experienced while attending class and pa11icularly
approaching a rigorous course such as Cervantes, she had concluded that she would not

be able to complete her course. This was the reason she entered into the fraudulent and
deceptive scheme we have described.
[33]

Ms. K - a l s o confirmed that, while it had been recommended to her that

she seek psychiatric or psychological assistance, as a matter of choice she preferred
homeopathic and herbal remedies and had never sought such assistance. Nor had she
approached the University in an attempt, on account of her disability, to ameliorate the
course requirements including class participation requirements.
Submissions

[34]

Mr. Centa, for the University, reiterated the University's position that the facts

and circumstances in this matter warranted Ms. K

's expulsion from the

University and a permanent notation on her record.

He reviewed the applicable

sentencing principles and sought to draw parallels to this case from the facts and
language contained in earlier Tribunal Decisions. Falsification of an academic record has
always been considered to be the most serious conduct and Tribunals consistently, but not
in every case, have decided that expulsion is the appropriate penalty in such cases.
[35]

He argued that both the need to protect the integdty of the University setting,

where trust must be the hallmark of shared values, and the need for deterrence, mandate
the most severe penalty. Mr. Centa reviewed the facts, and the deliberate and intentional
scheme conceived by Ms. K - and carried out with the assistance of a third party
over an extended period.

This was not a case of a spontaneous act home out of

desperation or some act of recklessness which could be, if not justified, at least explained
in a more general context.

- 11 -

[36]

In an effective submission, Mr. Muscovitch challenged the University's approach

to this case, emphasizing that the Code provides a range of penalties for every offence
and that the Panel should avoid imposing an automatic penalty for fabricating transcripts
in this case. Ms. Kalandruk had obtained 19 credits over a ten year period, mostly as a
pai1-time student while working, striving to get her degree, the best evidence of her good
character.
(37]

While candidly admitting that her health was not the cause of her actions Mr.

Muscovitch submitted that nonetheless she had displayed a period of weakness, an
exception to her otherwise good behaviour over a long period, and this should justify a
severe but not the ultimate penalty.
[38]

Ms. K - h a d admitted the offence, pleaded guilty, made no eff011 to justify

her conduct at this hearing and she should be given the opportunity to complete what she
had almost completed. She had expressed remorse, and these factors should justify a
lesser sentence.
[39]

Mr. Muscovitch also sought to draw a distinction with reference to some of the

previous cases, between the fabrication of an entire degree or a full academic record, on
the one hand, and the less serious offence, in his submission, of fabricating records with
respect to one or two courses.
Decision

[40]

After careful consideration, the Tribunal is unable to give effect to Mr.

Muscovitch's submissions. In our view, the planned and deliberate nature of this offence,

- 12 -

with its complexities, can-ied out over a period of months in circumstances where Ms.

K

could have withdrawn from her plan at any time, involving a third party with a

view to maximizing the scheme's chances of success and her continued deceptions when
first confronted and again in fabricating her wholly fictitious explanation including the
insistence that she had in fact taken the two courses in the Ukraine leave us in the
position that expulsion is the only justified response by this Tribunal.
[41]

Moreover, there is more to the deliberate nature of this conduct than just the time

it took to obtain the materials and put together the fraudulent documents, engage with the
TCS office and ultimately submit a false application for a PATC. In this case, we find
that Ms. K - had reached her own conclusion that she could not successfully
complete the requirements of course SPA 454 HIS - Cervantes, at this institution. She
thus conceived this plan and carried it out in an effort to obtain the two half credits that
she needed and, without the fraudulent PATC, she would never attain.
[42]

Thus, in our view, while the falsified transcript was in respect of two courses only

and not an entire academic record or multiple falsifications of a transcript, nonetheless
the effect of Ms. K

's actions in this case is the same - this fabrication was in the

nature of a fabricated degree or University transcript in that it was designed to
accomplish the same purpose, namely, obtaining a degree that otherwise would not be
obtained.
[43]

For these reasons and particularly to protect the integrity of the University

community, the compelling need to signal and to underscore the deterrent effect and
reiterate that such conduct will and must meet with the most severe reaction when

- 13 uncovered, the Tribunal will recommend to the President that Ms. K - b e expelled
from the institution, and a permanent notation to that effect be made on her academic
record.

[44]

A word about character. Much was made in argument about this criterion, one of

the sentencing principles the Tribunal routinely addresses, arising from Chelin. We are
sympathetic to Ms.

in this sense. As with many students, she was able to

muster only modest evidence to put before the Tribunal, in the form of a letter from her
building superintendent. She has no access, as Mr. Muscovitch put it, to the titans of
corporate Canada or the leaders of the law or other places. She came to the Tribunal and,
as we observed her demeanor, honestly admitted her failings and took no efforts to
excuse or otherwise justify her conduct. While the medical evidence before us led us to
the conclusion that any mental or physical disabilities she suffers were not causative of
her conduct but rather a reason for it, nonetheless this Panel believes something must
have been going on or is going on with Ms. ~because she appeared to us to
show some insight into her actions and a genuine remorse for her conduct.

[45]

We do hope Ms . . _ , who came here to deal with what she had done in a

fotihright manner, can go on to a productive life. She has displayed a side of character
that should permit this. Nonetheless, on the facts of this matter, we were unable to reach
a conclusion other than the one we have expressed in these Reasons.

- 14 Conclusion

[46]

We therefore recommend to the President that Ms. ~ be expelled from

the University and that a permanent notation of this expulsion be recorded on her
academic record.

[4 7]

Date:

The Panel thanks counsel for their assistance with this difficult matter.

Ronald G. Slagli,Q.c.'
Chair
/

Ck.<;.~Y<=q12 a& IJJ)\
Faculty Panel Men

Melany Bleue
Student Panel Member

APPENDIX "A"
UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
~ K-(991820302)
CHARGES

Note:

Wherever in the Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters, 1995 ("Code") an

offence is described as depending on "knowing", the offence shall likewise be deemed
to have been committed if the person ought reasonably to have known.

1.

In August or September 2007, you knowingly forged or in any other way altered

or falsified a document or evidence required by the University of Toronto, or uttered,
circulated or made use of any such forged, altered or falsified document, namely, a
document that purported to be a transcript of academic record from Ivan Franko
National University of L'viv ("IFNU"), contrary to Section B.1.1 (a) of the Code.
2.

In the alternative, In August or September 2007, you knowingly forged or in any

other way altered or falsified an academic record, or uttered, circulated or made use of
any such forged, altered or falsified record, namely, a document that purported to be a
transcript of academic record from IFNU, contrary to Section B.l.3(a) of the Code.
3.

In the further alternative, In August or September 2007, you knowingly

engaged in a form of cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or
misrepresentation not otherwise described in order to obtain academic credit or other
academic advantage of any kind by submitting to the University of Toronto a document
that purported to be a transcript of academic record from IFNU contrary to Section
8.l.3(b) of the Code.
4.

In August or September 2007, you knowingly forged or in any other way altered

or falsified a document or evidence required by the University of Toronto, or uttered,
circulated or made use of any such forged, altered or falsified document, namely, a

68454 7 I

document that purported to be a "Program of educational course "Cervantes", from
IFNU contrary to Section B.1.1 (a) of the Code.
5.

In the alternative, in August or September 2007, you knowingly engaged in a

form of cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or misrepresentation not
otherwise described in order to obtain academic credit or other academic advantage of
any kind by submitting to the University of Toronto a document that purported to be a
"Program of educational course "Cervantes", from IFNU contrary to Section B.l.3(b) of
the Code.
6.

In August or September 2007, you knowingly forged or in any other way altered

or falsified a document or evidence required by the University of Toronto, or uttered,
circulated or made use of any such forged, altered or falsified document, namely, a
document that purported to be a syllabus for "Politics and Society in Latin America",
from IFNU contrary to Section B.1.1 (a) of the Code.
7.

In the alternative, in August or September 2007, you knowingly engaged in a

form of cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or misrepresentation not
otherwise described in order to obtain academic credit or other academic advantage of
any kind by submitting to the University of Toronto a document that purported to be a
syllabus for "Politics and Society in Latin America", from IFNU contrary to Section
B.l.3(b) of the Code.

Particulars
8.

Since 2001 you have been enrolled at the University of Toronto.

9.

In August 2007 you applied for post-admission transfer credits. You submitted

at least three documents in support of your application for post-admission transfer
credit:

684547 I

a. a document that purported to be a transcript of academic record from
IFNU
b. a document that purported to be a program of educational course
"Cervantes" from IFNU; and
c. a document that purported to be a syllabus for "Politics and Society in
Latin America" from IFNU.
10.

Each of the documents you submitted to the Faculty of Arts and Science was

not an official document from IFNU. You either forged, falsified or altered these three
documents or had them forged, falsified or altered at your request.
11.

You submitted these forged, falsified or altered documents in support of your

request for post-admission transfer credit. You submitted these documents knowing
them to be forged, altered or falsified.

684547 I

I;

11

APPENDIX

;

B 11

UKRAINE MINISTRY OF EDUCATION

l:

lr#;tJ ~{IIJJ#lJ!:/4,t~til!tJi ½(tJtv,~l$i(Y- oiL 'viv

f

/I Transcript of the academic record

If>

TransorlptNo.000345

--

IssuedtoM-

From May 22, 2007 through July 10, 2007

This document states that from May 22 to July 2007 M - ~ h a s been
a part-time student of the Foreign Languages Department at Lviv State University.
During this academic period the above mentioned student has taken the following

lessons and lectures as well as written the final examinations for the. following courses:

Subject

Roura

Midterms

Final

1. Cervantes

26

Pass

4

2. Politics of Latin America

27

Pass

4

Date of issue

July 10, 2007
Languages Department, Mrs. Doha L.M.
17p-....-<.~~&>''-'.

\\ 1

Signature
Seal

i;,. • )'
f:·~
. :·~.l
(-

~

flbBIBCbKMM HAUIOHAJlbHIIIM YHIBEPCMTET
IMEHI IBAHA Cl>PAHKA
syn. YHiBepCLIITeTCbKa 1 J1bBiB 79000 YKpaiHa
IVAN FRANKO NATIONAL UNIVERSITY OF LVIV
1 Universytetska str. Lviv 79000 Ukraine

