Report 367

DATE:

   October 7, 2013

PARTIES:

   Mr. A.K.D. (the Student) v. the Faculty of Applied Science and
   Engineering

Hearing Date(s):

   September 11, 2013

Committee Members:

   Professor Hamish Stewart, Chair
   Professor Elizabeth Cowper
   Mr. Andrew Girgis

Secretary:

   Ms. Natalie Ramtahal, Coordinator, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty
   Grievances

Appearances:

For the Student Appellant:

   Mr. A.K.D., the Appellant (‚the Student‚)

For the Faculty of Applied Science and Engineering:

   Professor Thomas Coyle, Chair of the Committee on Examinations
   Mr. Khuong Doan, Associate Registrar, Student Services

   Appeal from an academic status of ‚Refused Further Registration.‚
   Student performed so poorly in his program that he had been refused
   registration for the following term. Student petitioned the Faculty for
   special consideration on the ground that he might have been suffering
   from ADHD. Student sought reinstatement into the program or, in the
   alternative, a waiver of the rule that had resulted in his being
   refused further registration. This petition was dismissed for want of
   adequate documentation. The Student then submitted a revised petition
   with additional documentation concerning his ADHD diagnosis and the
   course of treatment he was pursuing. The Faculty allowed the petition
   in part, effectively granting the Student his alternative remedy. The
   Faculty changed the Student‚s academic status from ‚Refused Further
   Registration‚ to ‚Academic Repeat Probation ‚ Withdraw for eight
   months,‚ which would allow the Student to re-enroll two semesters later
   than he requested. The Faculty did not give any reasons for refusing to
   reinstate the Student, or for granting the alternative remedy. The
   Student then submitted another petition to the Faculty, with supporting
   documentation indicating that he had been attending classes throughout
   the semester in the hope of being reinstated.

   Student then appealed from the Faculty‚s decision to the Academic
   Appeals Board, claiming that his condition had stabilized and drawing
   the AAB‚s attention to his immigration and financial difficulties as
   well as alleged procedural irregularities in the Faculty‚s process.
   Student sought credit for two of the courses he had been attending, and
   an opportunity to obtain credit for the remaining three courses through
   deferred examinations. The AAB obtained term work reports from the
   instructors in the courses that the Student had attended, which mostly
   indicated poor performance. The AAB concluded that the Faculty‚s
   decision was fair and reasonable; reinstatement in the requested term
   was not appropriate given the timeline of the evidence submitted.

   Student then appealed to the Committee. The Committee concluded that
   the Faculty erred in failing to provide written reasons for its
   decision, but stated that this error did not affect the outcome of the
   appeal as the AAB provided reasons, which were the basis of the appeal
   to the Committee. The Committee also noted that it is the Student‚s
   responsibility to make his or her case for a remedy in the appeal
   process; the Faculty cannot direct students as to what information to
   provide given the confidential nature of such information. The
   Committee agreed with the AAB that the Student‚s situation fell well
   outside the circumstances in which a deferred examination, aegrotat
   standing, or assessment of grades would be given. To grant one of these
   remedies in this situation would have been highly unusual given that
   the Student was not enrolled in the courses and the basis for assessing
   his performance was very thin. The Committee also noted that the
   medical evidence did not strongly support the Student‚s assertion that
   his treatment had been successful. The Committee concluded that the
   AAB‚s decision was reasonable. Appeal dismissed.

   The Committee also denied the Faculty‚s request to redact the names of
   all of the Faculty‚s faculty and staff who were involved in the
   student‚s case, noting that the fact that an individual was acting in
   an official or institutional capacity is not by itself a reason for
   redacting that person‚s name. The Committee noted that it might look
   more favourably on such a motion where there was some allegation
   concerning personal misconduct by a member of the faculty or staff,
   particularly if the Committee found that allegation to be unfounded.
   [1]View Report

References

   1. file:///media/12605
