Case No.: 848

THE UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
OF THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO (APPEAL DIVISION)
IN THE MATTER OF charges of academic dishonesty made on January 18, 2016
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic
Matters, 1995 (the "Code")
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University a/Toronto Act, 1971, S.O. 1971, c. 56 as amended
S.O. 1978, C. 88
BETWEEN:

Appellant
- and-

THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
Respondent

REASONS FOR DECISION
Appeal hearing date: August 4, 2017
Members of the Discipline Appeal Board:
Ms. Patricia D.S. Jackson, Chair
Mr. Sean McGowan, Student Panel Member
Professor Elizabeth Peter, Faculty Panel Member
Ms. Alena Zelinka, Student Panel Member

Appearances:

HIIIIIIII

Mr. Glenroy K. Bastien, Counsel for the Appellant-(~)
Ms. Tina Lie, Counsel for the Respondent, the University of Toronto
Parties in attendance:
Mr. 1.

(~)
Mr.

HIii

HIIIIIIII (the "Student") was charged and pleaded guilty to the following academic

offences:

-2-

2.

1.

On or about June 2 and 3, 2015, having an intent to commit an offence
under the University Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters, 1995 (the
“Code”), you did or omitted to do something for the purpose of carrying
out your intention to forge or in any other way alter or falsify an academic
record, or utter, circulate or make use of such forged, altered or falsified
record, contrary to sections B.II.2 and B.I.3(a) of the Code.

2.

On or about June 2, 2015, you knowingly forged or in any other way
altered or falsified an academic record, or uttered, circulated or made use
of such forged, altered or falsified record in an email to Woodsworth
College, contrary to section B.I.3(a) of the Code.

At a hearing on March 16, 2016, a panel of the Trial Division of the University Tribunal
accepted the plea of guilty and, on consent, adjourned the penalty phase of the hearing.
The Tribunal further issued an order requiring a notation on the Student’s academic
record and transcript to reflect that he had been found guilty of academic misconduct on
March 16, 2016, pending the outcome of the hearing on sanction.

3.

On August 9, 2016 the Tribunal conducted a hearing and on November 2, 2016 issued a
decision making the following directions on sanctions:
(a) that the Tribunal recommends to the President that he recommend to Governing
Council that it expel the Student from the University;
(b) that the order of the Tribunal dated March 16, 2016 continue until the final
disposition of the order made in paragraph (a); and
(c) that this case be reported to the Provost for publication of a notice of the decision
of the Tribunal and the sanction or sanctions imposed with the name of the
Student withheld.

4.

The Student appeals from the sanctions thereby imposed.

5.

The Student submits that the Tribunal gave vague and inadequate reasons which gave no
indication of how, if at all, the Tribunal considered the Student’s history of anxiety and
depression and the extent to which that affected his actions, and that this inadequacy
prevents an effective appellate review. Particularly given the catastrophic consequences
of an expulsion and the impact of Student’s mental state on his behaviour at the time of

-3the offence, he says that the recommendation for expulsion was wrong and should be
over-ruled.

Background to the Offence
6.

The offence at issue was the Student's third offence.

7.

The First Offence The first offence concerned the Student's alteration of an Economics
term test which had been marked and returned to him. He corrected certain answers and
then submitted the altered test for re-marking. Before the re-marked test papers were
returned to the students, the instructor in the course advised that because of past abuses
he sometimes photocopied tests before returning them in order to detect alterations.

8.

The next day, the Student met with the instructor and admitted to altering some of the
answers on the test that he had submitted for re-marking.

9.

Thereafter he met with the Dean's Designate and at that meeting admitted that he had
altered his test paper before submitting it for re-marking and that he knew it was wrong to
do so. He apologized for his conduct which he described as shameful. He said that he
had learned his lesson about the importance of ethics and integrity.

10.

The Dean's Designate advised the Student that the typical penalty for such an offence
was a zero in the course and a suspension, but that given his honesty in coming forward
to the instructor she was imposing a sanction of zero on the test, a further grade reduction
equivalent to the value of the test, and a notation on the Student's transcript for two years,
from March 1, 2012 to February 28, 2014.

11.

In a letter advising the Student of the sanction she concluded with a warning that if there
were a further instance of academic misconduct the consequences would be "much more
severe".

12.

Although advised that the sanction was lenient in the circumstances, the Student wrote to
the Vice-Provost requesting a reconsideration of the sanction imposed by the Dean. He
explained that he had suffered a "psychological breakdown" when the test was returned
to him and committed a "subconscious mistake", that he regained his senses "the very

-4-

next day" and that a failure in the course would have a serious impact on him. He further
wrote: "This is a life lesson that I will cherish for the rest of my life. Again, I truly
understand that this is not something I will ever do again."
13.

On receipt of this, the Dean's Designate wrote to point out that the Student's statement
that he had confessed to the instructor "the very next day" was inaccurate, as he had
waiting until the instructor announced that he had detected problematic resubmissions
before coming forward. She also noted that the Student did not fail the course as a result
of the sanction imposed, and that the sanction was indeed more lenient than that imposed
on another student who had committed the same offence but did not voluntarily come
forward.

14.

The Vice Provost denied the Student's request for reconsideration.

15.

The Second Offence In September 2013, the Student submitted an application for a

Student internship program with the Canadian Automobile Association ("CAA"). He
included a copy of what purported to be his transcript, but which did not include his
academic record for the Fall 2011 and Winter 2012 terms (which reflected the reduced
grade in Economics and the transcript notation relating to his prior offence).
16.

This omission came to the attention of the University, and in consequence the Student
met with the Dean's Designate. During the first hour of the meeting, he insisted that he
was "really rushed" when preparing the application package for the CAA and that the
omission of part of his academic record was accidental.

17.

However, after an hour of discussion, which included two breaks to allow the Student to
think about his situation, the Student eventually admitted to the Dean's Designate that he
deliberately omitted the portions of his academic record in order to conceal the reduced
grade in Economics and the transcript notation. He also told the Dean's Designate that
when the issue was brought to his attention he wrote a letter of apology to the CAA and
that the CAA responded by expressing appreciation for the fact that he had been
forthcoming. However both these statements, which were repeated in subsequent emails
to the University, were false.

-5-

18.

The Student was charged with forgery or falsification of an academic record under
section B.I.3(a) of the Code. A University Tribunal convened to hear the charges, the
Student pleaded guilty and the case proceeded by way of an agreed statement of facts.
The Student admitted that he had deliberately omitted his academic record from his CAA
application in order to conceal his reduced grade in Economics and the transcript notation
relating to his prior offence.

19.

The Tribunal accepted the Student's guilty plea and convicted him of the charge.

20.

The sanction was contested, the Provost requesting a three-year suspension and a fouryear transcript notation, and the Student submitting that a two-year suspension retroactive
to September 2014 and a transcript notation of two to three years were appropriate.

21.

At the hearing, the Student testified about his personal circumstances including a difficult
childhood in Korea and an abusive relationship with another student, which led to an
altercation and the arrest of his girlfriend shortly after he had submitted the falsified
transcript. He explained his misleading communications with the University concerning
his apology to the CAA as being caused by his "stress and his inability to deal with all the
things going on" at the time.

22.

The Student also presented medical evidence indicating that he had sought medical
assistance and had been diagnosed with major depression and anxiety disorder. The
Tribunal summarized the Student's statements and his assurances that he would not reoffend in the following terms:
The student asserted that he is now dealing with his stress. With the
help of his psychiatrist and doctors, he is learning techniques to calm
himself and to cope. He is taking his medication and dealing with the
program at CAMH He said that he has learned from his mistakes and
not will not repeat his misconduct. Conceding that he had previously
said that with respect to the first academic misconduct, he said the
second incident is now different because it has been raised to a much
more serious level involving these proceedings at the Tribunal
compelling him to hire a lawyer and now he was getting the help of a
psychiatrist. He asserted that these types of incidents would never
occur again. (Emphasis added.)

-6-

23.

The Tribunal reserved its decision on sanction.

24.

Before the hearing the University had taken steps to ensure that the Student would have
appropriate supports in place when the Tribunal decision on sanction was communicated
to him. This included requesting that the Student's counsel be given advance notice of
the decision in order to enable him to make any necessary arrangements with the
University's Counseling and Psychological Services and/or student crisis response
programs.

25.

Accordingly, when the Tribunal released its decision, which accepted the Provost's
requested sanction and imposed a three-year suspension and a four-year notation from the
date of the decision, the decision was provided to the Student's counsel, but not to the
Student directly.

26.

Moreover, out of concern for the Student's mental health and wellbeing, the University
decided not to implement the sanctions imposed by the Tribunal immediately but to wait
until it had received confirmation that the Tribunal's decision had been communicated to
the Student with appropriate supports in place.

27.

On June 1, 2015 at 3:00 p.m. the Tribunal's decision was communicated to the Student at
the University's counseling and psychological services facility. As of that afternoon, the
Student knew that the Tribunal had ordered a three-year suspension and a four-year
transcript notation commencing May 19, 2015.

28.

The fact that the Student had received the Tribunal's decision was communicated on June
2, 2015, but the sanction was not reflected through a record on ROSI until June 3, 2015.

29.

The Current Offence During the two days between the communication of the
Tribunal's decision to the Student and its implementation on ROSI, the Student made a
number ofrequests for copies of his academic record:
(a) the Student requested a total of 10 transcripts and paid the corresponding fee
using Student Web services
(b) on June 2, 2015 the Student spoke to the Registral Clerk of Woodsworth College
requesting letters regarding his academic status at the University. He followed

-7-

that up with an email the following day in which he asked for four letters to
Immigration Canada, four letters "to whom it may concern", and two letters to
"CPA Ontario", each advising that "rllll is a full-time student in good standing
at the University" and is "expected to graduate in June 2017".
30.

Although the Student initially appealed the Tribunal's decision ordering the three-year
suspension and four-year transcript notation, he later withdrew his appeal.

The Charges in this Case
31.

The Misconduct Phase of the Tribunal Hearing The Student met with the Dean's
Designate concerning his request for transcripts and letters that did not reflect his
academic status. He denied that he had committed an academic offence.

32.

He was accordingly charged on January 18, 2016.

33.

On March 16, 2016, the Tribunal convened to hear the charges The hearing proceeded
by way of an agreed statement of facts and a guilty plea in which Student admitted that:
(a) he knew at the time of the first day of the Tribunal hearing that he would likely
be suspended by the Tribunal;
(b) he knew as of the afternoon of June 1, 2015, that the Tribunal had suspended him
for three years commencing on May 19, 2015;
(c) he knew that the University had delayed implementing the sanction until it
received confirmation from his counsel that the sanction had been communicated
to him, out of concern for his mental health and well-being; and
(d) when he requested the 10 transcripts on the Student Web Services on June 2 and
3, 2015, he knew that the transcripts did not accurately reflect his academic
record and standing with the University and in particular that the sanction had
not yet been entered into ROSI or on his transcript. By requesting the transcripts
he intended to obtain a record that did not reflect his academic record and
standing with the intention of uttering, circulating or making use of them
contrary to the Code; and
(e) when he requested letters from Woodsworth College by phone and email he
knew that he was not "in good standing with the University" and was not
expected to graduate from the University in June of 2017 and that his email to
the Registral Clerk altered or falsified his academic record contrary to the Code.

-834.

The Tribunal accepted the guilty pleas and convicted the Student of the two charges. The
sanction phase of the hearing was adjourned at the Student’s request to enable him to
assemble additional evidence. In the interim, at the direction of the Tribunal a notation
was placed on the Student’s academic record, pending the outcome of the sanction
hearing.

35.

Sanction hearing The Tribunal’s hearing on sanction was originally to occur on June 7,
2016 but at the Student’s request was adjourned again to August 9, 2016.

36.

The Provost requested a recommendation for expulsion. The Student requested a fiveyear suspension to run consecutively with the current suspension, effectively extending
that suspension by five years.

37.

At the hearing the Student tendered a letter from Dr. Juan Kim. The University objected
to the admission of the letter on the basis that it had only been received the previous day
(in contravention of the established timetable) and the University had not had an
opportunity either to respond to the evidence or to cross-examine on it. However, the
Tribunal admitted the letter into evidence.

38.

Dr. Kim is a family physician in Port Moody, British Columbia. In his letter he indicated
he had treated the Student from time to time, and had recently spoken to him by
telephone, but also said that in terms of his ongoing treatment and medication he
concluded that the Student should be followed by a medical professional in Toronto
(where he was living at the time of the hearing). He described the Student as suffering
from depression and stress and expressed the view that he would be unable to address or
deal with anything because of his poor mental state of mind. He knew of the Student’s
expressions of remorse and concluded with the hope that the Tribunal would be able to be
lenient with him.

39.

The Student was the only witness to testify at the hearing. He described his personal
background, including a difficult childhood in Korea living with an alcoholic father who
was physically abusive to his wife and children. Following his parents’ divorce, he
moved with his mother and sister to a small apartment in British Columbia. Although he

-9-

did not speak English when he arrived, he was able to learn English, become Student
President in his school and graduate with the second highest average in his grade 12
class.
40.

He then enrolled in the commerce program at the University of Toronto in hopes of one
day becoming a chartered accountant. However, he has had difficulty with his student
life at the University. He dated a fellow student who became increasingly controlling and
physically abusive. The relationship ended with his girlfriend's arrest for assaulting him
in the lobby of his residence.

41.

He has continued to suffer from anxiety and depression and has sought and received
counselling. Although at the original hearing he told the Tribunal that he had been taking
his medication and receiving medical treatment, during his cross-examination the Student
testified that he had only taken a sample of the medication and not filled any of his
prescriptions. He also stopped seeing his psychiatrist at the University and did not seek
out any other psychiatrists.

42.

As to why he had requested the ten transcripts and ten letters, the Student said that his
mother had requested (as she had in the past) a letter confirming his enrollment in the
University for purposes of his parents' divorce proceedings and in order to obtain funds
from his father.

43.

However this explanation was contradicted by letters previously obtained from the
University for that purpose, which merely confirmed the Student's enrollment (with no
indication of an expected graduation date) and included the amounts paid for his tuition.

44.

In contrast, the ten letters requested by the Student on this occasion, including letters
addressed to Immigration Canada and CPA Ontario indicated that he was a student "in
good standing" and expected to graduate in June 2017 (neither of which was true) and did
not include any tuition information. The Student also ordered ten transcripts which he
acknowledged were not needed for the court case in Korea.

45.

He also admitted in cross-examination that he requested the transcripts in order to have
the option of transferring to a different school and that he requested the letters and

- 10 transcripts because he knew they did not represent his academic standing at the
University.
46.

At the conclusion of the hearing, the Tribunal reserved its decision.

4 7.

Tribunal Decision The Tribunal concluded that a recommendation for expulsion was
the appropriate sanction. In addition, it ordered that the transcript notation imposed at the
hearing on March 16, 2016 be continued until the final disposition of the
recommendation for expulsion.

48.

In reaching its decision, the Tribunal concluded that it did not accept the Student's
explanation that he acted spontaneously in requesting the 10 transcripts and 10 letters. It
held:
31. The Student explained that when the result was delivered to him on June 1, 2015, he
left the room at the University where the doctor was present. He explained that his
mother called and asked him for documents to be used for a court proceeding in Korea to
verify that the Student was still registered so that the mother could receive payment for
these expenses. He testified that the reason he sought the various transcripts and letters in
question was to fulfill his mother's request.
32. On further review of the evidence, the Student's request for documentation from the
University went beyond seeking formal documentation to assist his mother in the court
case. It included a request for a letter addressed to the Chartered Professional
Accountants Association and to Immigration Canada.
33. He requested that the letter state that he was a "full-time student in good standing at
the University and expected to graduate in June 2017". He knew that this was untrue.
He admitted in the Agreed Statement of Facts that "he intended to obtain transcripts that
did not accurately reflect his academic record and standing with the intention of uttering,
circulating or making use of those records".
34. The Student suggested that he was acting spontaneously while under stress.
However, the conduct occurred over a 3 day period. It is quite clear that the Student was
not acting spontaneously, but rather quite intentionally in order to take advantage of the
University's delay in posting the suspension.
35. In his evidence he said that after speaking to his mother, he went on the computer
and noted that ROSI had not picked up the sanction imposed by the Tribunal. He said he
"needed the money" and rushed to get the transcripts and the letters. Obviously, the
Student was hoping to get the transcripts and letters before the suspension was recorded
so that he could use them knowing they were false. Clearly, his actions involved
deliberate steps rather than spontaneous actions.

- 11 -

36. What is particularly troubling is that the Student received some sympathetic
treatment from the Tribunal and the University because of his fragile mental state, yet
upon receiving the result, he immediately took steps to obtain copies of his academic
record which he knew were false. This demonstrates a lack of real remorse and a
complete lack of respect for the basic principles of integrity embodied in the Code.
49.

The Tribunal considered a number of mitigating circumstances, including that the Student
admitted guilt on this and the prior occasions at a very early stage. He cooperated in the
proceeding by agreeing to the Agreed Statement of Facts in the first instance and on
penalty. He attended the hearing. The Tribunal further noted that the medical evidence
submitted indicated that the Student was suffering from significant mental distress at the
time of the offence, and that the offence in question occurred at the lowest point in the
Student's academic career, after he had just been told that he was to be suspended for 3
years.

50.

However, in addition to concluding that the Student had not acted spontaneously in the
various steps he took to obtain a falsified academic record, the Tribunal noted that it was
obvious that the Student had not learned his lesson from the first or second offence and
that it was not possible to conclude he would never do it again. The Tribunal concluded
that it was clear that the Student had little or no understanding of the significance of the
University's fundamental values of integrity embodied in the policies and procedures
under the Code. Moreover, it noted that this third offence, forgery, was at the high end of
the scale of wrong-doing, and occurred immediately after the Student being notified of
the penalty for his second offence.

51.

On this basis, the Tribunal concluded that a recommendation for expulsion was
appropriate.

Issues on Appeal

52.

Standard of Review Under section E7(c) of the Code, the Discipline Appeals Board

has the power "to affirm, reverse, quash, vary or modify the verdict, penalty or sanction
appealed from and substitute any verdict, penalty or sanction that could have been given
or imposed at trial".

- 12 53.

A number of decisions over the years have recognized the broad powers thus granted to
the Appeals Board and that it is not obliged to show deference to the Tribunal below.
Similarly, decisions have recognized that it is appropriate for an Appeals Board Panel to
vary a sanction which it believes to be wrong whether because of an error of law,
significant errors of fact, or a material inconsistency with the weight of other Tribunal
and appeal decisions. 1

54.

At the same time, and notwithstanding its broad jurisdiction, it is appropriate for the
Appeals Board to give deference to a Tribunal panel who has heard the case, particularly
on credibility issues where the panel has had the opportunity to observe witnesses giving
evidence and draw conclusions from this based on their first-hand exposure to the
demeanour and quality of evidence of a witness or witnesses. 2

55.

Whether the Tribunal Committed a Reversible Error The Student asserts that the
Tribunal either overlooked the medical evidence he submitted, or failed to provide
reasons which indicated what weight, if any, was attached to that evidence. He says,
based in part on that evidence, and also on his own testimony that the ordering of ten
transcripts and ten letters was a "spontaneous" transaction triggered by his mother's
contact, without regard to whether it was right or wrong.

56.

He further submits that in failing to describe what weight if any was attached to the
medical evidence, and to advert to the other factors, (frequently described as the Chelin
factors, based on the name of the case in which they were first enunciated) the Tribunal
has failed to provide sufficient reasons for effective appellate review.

57.

Finally, the Student says that the Tribunal arbitrarily attempted to fit this case into the
penalties imposed in previous cases, without regard to the facts and circumstances,
particularly his fragile mental condition, of this particular Student. He says that this is
particularly significant because of the devastating impact of the penalty imposed.

1 e.g.~ [Case No.

1976/77-3, November 5, 1976], ~ [Case No. 451, August 24, 2007}, [ a l . &

4 [Case No. 596, 597, 598, November 23, 2011]
2 ~ [Case No. 606, October 10, 2012]

- 13 -

58.

We have considered each of these grounds carefully. We have concluded that we reject
them and uphold the Tribunal's decision on sanction.

59.

Not only did the Tribunal admit the medical evidence from Dr. Kim (notwithstanding its
late delivery, the absence of any cross-examinations or testing and over the objection of
the University) it specifically referred to the Student's "fragile mental state", and noted as
a mitigating factor that the offence occurred when he was suffering from significant
mental distress and at the lowest point of his academic career. However, the Tribunal
specifically rejected the Student's argument made before them and repeated on appeal
that as a result he should be seen to have been acting spontaneously in his actions
ordering 10 transcripts and 10 letters over the three day period in which the offence was
committed. Moreover, the Tribunal came to the conclusion having heard and observed
the Student's evidence specifically on this point. We see no basis to disturb that
conclusion.

60.

Moreover, while the Tribunal did not specifically refer to the ~ factors as such, it
specifically referred to the Student's character, the seriousness of the offence, the
likelihood of repetition of the offence and mitigating circumstances in reaching its
decision.

61.

Nor do we consider that in imposing as a sanction ofrecommendation for expulsion that
the Tribunal was artificially trying to fit this case within the confines of previous cases
and without regard to the facts and circumstances of the Student, including his depressed
and stressed status, and his expressions of remorse. Unfortunately, on previous occasions
the Student had also expressed remorse, also pledged not to re-offend, and had also relied
on his medical condition (for which he has said he was being treated), as circumstances
which should, and which have, meant that his previous offences of academic dishonesty
have not been subjected to the serious penalties (including a recommendation for
expulsion) to which they might otherwise be.

62.

Unfortunately, on each occasion on which the Student committed an offence of academic
dishonesty and promised to never do so again, he quickly engaged in a further offence of
academic dishonesty, each more serious than the one before.

- 14 -

63.

In the vast majority of cases where a student has, as here, engaged in forgery or
falsification of an academic record, the Tribunal has recommended expulsion (or where
the student has completed a degree, the revocation of that degree). 3 This level of sanction
recognizes both the seriousness of the harm inflicted on the institution by this kind of
academic dishonesty, and the fact that it is often difficult to determine that it has
occurred. As was said in the George case:
... We note that the integrity of the University as an educational institution and as
a degree granting body is fundamental to the academic relationship. Many
important third parties, including potential employers, members of the public and
other institutions of higher education rely on records of transcripts and of degrees
as correctly representing the academic achievements of those to whom they are
awarded. Falsification of records of transcripts and of degrees strikes at the heart
of the honesty and integrity which is at the core of the academic experience and
evaluation. It undermines not only the credibility of the University but also the
credibility of other students who have legitimately achieved the marks and
degrees recorded in such records. It is important that when confronted by such
falsification, the University treat, and be seen to treat, such conduct very
seriously. 4

64.

In the rare cases where expulsion has not been recommended, it is generally on the basis
that the student had no prior offences and also, usually, because the case proceeded by
way of a joint submission on penalty.

65.

In other words, a recommendation for expulsion would have been the penalty typically
applied in respect of the Student's conviction on the second charge described above.
However, on that occasion, as in the case of the first offence, the Student was shown
leniency, as we read it, largely because of the mental stress that was operating on his
mind at the time of the offences, his apparently sincere expressions of remorse, his
commitment to treatment of the mental condition under which he was operating, and
promise that he would not repeat the offence.

3 For example, R. .l {Case No.833, April 27, 2016}, ~ ' i::ali[Case No. 450, September 3, 2010}, ~
{CaseNo.726, April 8, 2014}, ~ [CaseNo.762, November 18, 2014},A,_, [Case No. 540, May 4,
2009}, ~ k {Case No. 491, November 5, 2008}, L■[Case No. 822, March 22, 2016}, ~[Case No.613,
April 5, 201 l}, ~ {Case No. 510, March 28, 2007}, ~ C a s e No. 441, 2006} [
4 GIIIII [Case No. 508, October 14, 2008]

- 15 66.

Unfortunately, these assurances have turned out to be meaningless, and there appears to
be no basis upon which to conclude those given now would be otherwise. Rather, the
(now) three offences are indications of a continuing dishonest motive and a continuing
failure to recognize the importance of or adhere to core University values.

67.

In those circumstances it is not surprising, and in our view not an error, that the Tribunal
concluded: that the Student had not learned his lesson from the first or second offence;
that it was not possible to conclude he would never do it again; and that he demonstrated
a lack of real remorse and little or no understanding of the significance of the
University's fundamental values of integrity.

68.

The Tribunal concluded in the face of all of that and given that the third offence, forgery,
was at the high end of the scale of wrongdoing and occurred immediately after the
Student was notified of the penalty for his second offence, that a recommendation of
expulsion was appropriate.

69.

The Tribunal's decision was neither in error nor unreasonable, and we decline to disturb
it.

70.

The University requested that if we decided to dismiss the appeal, as we have done, that
we extend the period of the Student's suspension, currently scheduled to end on May 19,
2018 (as a result of the sanction imposed in the Second Offence), to the earlier of the date
of which the Governing Council makes its decision on expulsion, or November 2, 2021.
This request arose as a result of the delay associated with the hearing of this appeal
because of timing requests made by the Student.

71.

While we consider it unlikely that the Governing Council's consideration of the
recommendation for expulsion will not be finalized before May 19, 2018, we do agree it
would be appropriate to provide for that possibility.

72.

We accordingly continue the existing suspension, and further provide that it should
expire on the later of May 19, 2018 or the date on which the Governing Council makes its
decision on the recommendation for expulsion.

- 16 October 13, 2017

