Case 815

DATE:

   January 19, 2016

PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v W.L.J.

Hearing Date(s):

   December 3, 2015

Panel Members:

   Bernard Fishbein, Chair
   Ann Tourangeau, Faculty Member
   Raylesha Parker, Student Member

Appearances:

   Robert A. Centa, Assistant Discipline Counsel
   Lauren Pearce, Articling Student, Paliare Roland
   Tyler Evans-Tokaryk, Associate Professor, Teaching Stream, University
   of Toronto Mississauga
   Brian Price, Instructor of the Course

In Attendance:

   Christopher Lang, Director, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances
   Lucy Gaspini, Manager, Academic Affairs, University of Toronto
   Mississauga

   Student charged under s. B.i.1(d) and s. B.i.1(b) and, in the
   alternative, s. B.i.3(b) of the Code . The charges related to
   allegations that the Student knowingly represented as his own an idea
   of another in an Essay, and that the Student knowingly obtained
   unauthorized assistance in connection with the Essay. The Student was
   not present at the hearing. The Panel noted that the Student had not
   participated in any stage of the disciplinary process. The Panel
   concluded that the efforts made to contact the Student by email and
   phone were reasonable as per the Statutory Powers Procedure Act and the
   Code . The Panel ordered that the hearing proceed in the Studentâs
   absence.

   Student was found guilty with respect to the plagiarism charge. The
   plagiarism in this case was unusual in the sense that there is usually
   an original text to compare with the submitted work, but that is not
   necessary to convict a student of plagiarism; what is necessary is that
   someone represent someone elseâs work as their own. The Student had
   admitted to a prior academic offence of plagiarism and unauthorized
   aid. The Panel took into account evidence that the quality of the
   writing and analysis in the Essay submitted improved dramatically from
   the Studentâs first essay in the Course. The Panel also took into
   account expert evidence that the difference in the two essays was too
   stark to possibly be the work of the same student, and that the level
   of writing was inconsistent with the Studentâs level of spoken English
   as observed by the Course Instructor. The University withdrew the
   charge of unauthorized aid and the alternative charge of academic
   dishonesty not otherwise described. The Panel accepted the Universityâs
   submissions for sanction and imposed a grade assignment of zero in the
   Course; a 3-year suspension; a 4-year notation on the Studentâs
   academic record and transcript; and that the case be reported to the
   Provost for publication.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12890
