THE UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
THE UNIVERSITY
TORONTO
IN THE MATTER OF charges of academic dishonesty filed on October 7, 2015,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters, 1995,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Act, 1971, S.O. 1971, c. 56 as amended S.O. 1978,
C. 88

BETWEEN:
UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO

- and -

V\11111 ..
REASONS FOR DECISION

Hearing Date: Thursday, December 3, 2015

Members of the Panel:
Mr. Bernard Fishbein, Chair
Professor Ann Tourangeau, Faculty Panel Member
Ms. Raylesha Parker, Student Panel Member

Appearances:
Mr. Robert A. Genta, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland, Barristers
Ms. Lauren Pearce, Articling Student, Paliare Roland, Barristers
Tyler Evans-Tokaryk, Associate Professor, Teaching Stream, University of Toronto
Mississauga
Professor Brian Price, Instructor of the Course, University of Toronto, Mississauga

In Attendance:
Mr. Christopher Lang, Director, Appeals Discipline and Faculty Grievances
Ms. Lucy Gaspini, Manager, Academic Affairs, University of Toronto, Mississauga
Not in Attendance:
Mr.

V\11111-11, Student

2

[1]

Mr. \J\.1111

I •

("the Student") was charged with violations of the University of

Toronto ("the University") Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters, 1995 (the "Code") as
follows:
1.

On or about December 1, 2014, you knowingly represented as your own

an idea or expression of an idea, and/or the work of another in an essay titled
"The ensnarement of the female protagonist in Alfred Hitchcock's 'Rebecca"'
("Essay") that you submitted for academic credit in CIN2O3H5F (the "Course"),
contrary to section B.1.1 (d) of the Code.
2.

On or about December 1, 2014, you knowingly obtained unauthorized

assistance in connection with the Essay that you submitted for academic credit in
the Course, contrary to section 8.1.1 (b) of the Code.
3.

In the alternative, on or about December 1, 2014, you knowingly engaged

in a form

of cheating,

academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud

or

misrepresentation not otherwise described in the Code in order to obtain
academic credit or other academic advantage of any kind in connection with the
Essay that you submitted for academic credit in the Course, contrary to section
B.l.3(b) of the Code.
The particulars related to charges are as follows:
(a)

At all material times, you were a registered student at the
University of Toronto Mississauga. In term 2014(9), you enrolled
in the Course, which was taught by Professor Brian Price.

(b)

Students in the Course were required to submit an essay in partial
completion of the Course requirements. On or about December 1,
2014, you submitted the Essay to complete this requirement.

(c)

You_ did . not write the Essay or you

knowingly obtained

inappropriately extensive assistance from someone else.
(d)

You knowingly represented the work of that other person as your
own. You knowingly included in the Essay ideas and expressions

3

that were not your own, but were the ideas and expressions of the
other person, which you did not acknowledge in the Essay.
(e)

You knowingly received unauthorized assistance in completing the
Essay from some other person.

(f)

For the purposes of obtaining academic credit and/or other
academic advantage, you knowingly committed plagiarism in the
Essay.

[2]

A Revised Notice of Hearing was sent by e-mail to the Student advising of a hearing

date of Thursday, December 3, 2015 at 1:45 p.m. in the Boardroom (Room 209) at Simcoe
Hall at the University. The panel of the Tribunal waited until 2:00 p.m. but the Student failed
to attend.

In fact, the Student did not attend throughout the course of the hearing and

apparently never really responded or participated at all in the procedures of the University
since the incident that led to these charges.

I.

Whether the Hearing Could Proceed in the Absence of the Student

[3]

Counsel for the University requested that the Panel proceed in the absence of the

Student. An Affidavit of Service was provided indicating that both the Revised Notice of
Hearing and the Charges were served by e-mail to the Student at the e-mail address which
the Student provided to the University's student information system ("ROSI").
[4]

Both the Code and the Statutory Powers Procedure Act which govern the

proceedings of the Tribunal require reasonable notice to be given to the Student.
[5]

The relevant provisions of the Tribunal's Ru/es of Practice and Procedure

(the "Ru/es") are:
9.

Charges, notices of hearing, disclosure, material for use on motions,

orders, and reasons for decision may be served on a student or sent to a
student:

4

(c)

by e-mailing a copy of the document to the student's e-mail
address contained in ROSI, ... and service shall be
effective on the day the document is sent by e-mail; or

13.

The Secretary shall provide the parties with reasonable notice of a

hearing and shall send to all parties a notice of the hearing on the merits of the
proceeding.
14.

A notice of an oral hearing shall include
(a)

the date, time, place and purpose of the hearing;

(b)

a reference to the statutory authority under which the hearing will
be held; and

(c)

a statement that if a person notified does not attend at the
hearing, the panel may proceed in the person's absence and the
person will not be entitled to any further notice in the proceeding.

17.

Where notice of an oral hearing, electronic hearing, or written hearing has

been given to a person in accordance with this rule, and the person does not
attend at or does not participate in the hearing, the panel may proceed in the
absence of the person or without the person's participation and the person is not
entitled to any further notice in the proceeding.

[6]

_,_Jn the University's submission, the notice (which was filed as an Exhibit) complied

with the form and substantive content of the Rules, had been served on the Student in
accordance with the Rules, and the Tribunal should proceed in his absence.
[7]

We were further advised that the Student had in fact not attended any meeting with

the Dean's Designate and voice mails earlier in the process in April 2015 and June 2015

5

had been left at the Student's phone number (indicated in ROSI) inviting him to participate
in the process. He did not do so.
[8]

As well, on April 9, 2015, an e-mail had been sent to the Student to which he failed

to respond, seeking to confirm his attendance at a meeting on April 2015. The Student did
telephone in response to that e-mail and indicated that he would attend the meeting and
would check his e-mails and reply to them. The Student did neither.
[9]

In any event, none of the e-mails sent to the Student at his ROSI e-mail address

ever "bounced back" or indicated in any manner that the connection was not in service or
the e-mails had not been received.
[1 O]

In the circumstances, the Tribunal unanimously ruled that the Student had been

given reasonable notice of the charges and of the hearing and the University was entitled to
proceed in his absence.
II.

The Charges Against the Student

[11]

The charges related to the Student having submitted an essay on December 1st, in

CIN203, a course with respect to the films of Alfred Hitchcock. The course required two
essays - the first to be submitted on October 29 and the second on December 1, 2014. In
the first essay, the Student received a failing grade of 40 out of 100. When the second
essay was submitted, the improvement from the first was so dramatic that the teaching
assistant brought it to the attention of the instructor and that led to the commencement of
the University investigation. A report was prepared by Professor Tyler Evans-Tokaryk, a
scholar of student writing and the teaching of student writing, who concluded that it was
highly unlikely that the Student had authored the second essay.
[12]

The Panel heard from Professor Evans-Tokaryk, who gave his testimony under oath.

Professor Evans-Tokaryk is an Associate Professor, Teaching Stream and Acting Director
of the Robert Gillespie Academic Skills Centre, the organization for teaching and developing
academic skills including writing for undergraduate students (primarily) and teaching
assistants at the University of Toronto, Mississauga (UTM).
reviewed his curriculum vitae.

Professor Evans-Tokaryk

He has extensive experience in teaching and developing

courses to teach and assess academic skills including writing. Presently the Acting Director

6

of the Robert Gillespie Academic Skills Centre, he has been working there since 2007.
During that time, he has also been Adjunct Faculty & Visiting Scholar at the University of
Johannesburg. Prior to that, he was an English Instructor at UTM, and prior to his arrival at
UTM, had been an Instructor, Research Assistant and Teaching Assistant since 1994. He
was a Member of many professional organizations and had authored many refereed
publications, non-refereed publications and presented papers at many conferences and
symposia. He dealt with at least 300 students per year on a one-on-one consultation basis,
and thousands in lectures or groups.

Seventy percent of his time was teaching and

assessing written work and the balance of the time was teaching and dealing with ideas
about how to teach writing. Accordingly, the Panel accepted Professor Evans-Tokaryk as
an expert witness.
[13]

Professor Evans-Tokaryk contrasted the two essays submitted by the Student in

CIN203 and explained that the first essay was largely descriptive and not particularly
analytical. He contrasted the essays based on various criteria used in his report:
(a)

paragraphing (the first essay paragraphs were overly long, contained
multiple arguments and frequently had sentences that did not support the
topic sentence or arguments made);

(b)

topic sentences;

(c)

sentence structure (simple sentence structure that did not deviate in the ·
first essay, as opposed to sentences that varied both in length and
complexity in the second essay);

(d)

grammar (the first essay contained many article errors (e.g. "the" vs. "an"
vs. "a") typical of English-language learners, errors that a spell-check
would not catch, difficulty with pluralization and subject-verb agreement,
which were not apparent at all in the second essay); and

(e)

word choice and vocabulary (the first essay used simple conversational
non-academic language).

[14]

The level of analysis in the first essay was weak and superficial whereas in the

second essay, the analysis was creative, sophisticated and erudite, which would not be

7

expected of a student below a third or fourth-year level course - the extreme opposite of the
first essay.
[15]

Therefore, in his opinion, it was very unlikely that the Student who wrote the first

paper could have improved so dramatically, in the course of 30 days, and written the
second.
[16]

The Panel also heard from Professor Brian Price who also gave his testimony under

oath. Professor Price is an Associate Professor of Cinema Studies in the Department of
Visual Studies at UTM. He was the instructor for CIN203 and identified the syllabus and the
course contents. He identified the first essay which had received a grade of 40 out of 100
from the teaching assistant who graded it. He also identified the second essay which was
marked by the same teaching assistant.

She did not assign a grade because, when

compared to the first essay, she became immediately suspicious of plagiarism, and brought
it to Professor Price's attention.
[17]

Professor Price also testified to the stark contrast between the two papers. The

second paper had a high degree of sophistication rarely seen at this level as contrasted to
the first paper which was obviously of an English-language learner. Equally, the second
paper had a level of analysis that was innovative and very substantial as contrasted to the
first paper which had very little analysis, if any, and only described some examples.
[18]

Professor Price also explained that he had met the Student.

The Student had

approached him at least twice after class to ask questions. The Student spoke English very
poorly, to such an extent, that Professor Price was struck by it. His questions were not so
much about the content of the course but the logistics of it.

In Professor Price's view,

neither paper was consistent with the level of the Student's oral skills that he had observed,
which only made the dramatic improvement in the second one even more striking and
improbable.

Ill.

The Submissions of the University

[19]

The University acknowledged that the burden was on it to establish the charges

were made out and it had to do so on a balance of probabilities that the Student committed
the offences and it had to do so on clear and convincing evidence.

8

[20]

There were two charges: that the Student had committed plagiarism contrary to

section B.1.1 (d) of the Code; and that the Student had availed himself of unauthorized
assistance contrary to section B.l.i(b). The University indicated that if the Tribunal made a
finding of plagiarism, which it felt was the more appropriate charge, it would withdraw the
charge of unauthorized assistance.
[21]

Here, the plagiarism was unusual only in the sense that there was usually an original

text to compare with the submitted work, but that was not necessary or required - what was
necessary was that someone represent someone else's work as their own to constitute
plagiarism.
[22]

In the University submissions, the two essays demonstrated an impossible

achievement and improvement within one month - from an inferior failing product to a
superior product to be expected of a student of a much higher level. Both essays, arguably
(and the second, most assuredly), were inconsistent with the spoken English ability of the
Student. On all of the different criteria that Professor Evans-Tokaryk had compared the
essays (and explained in his testimony), the difference in the two essays was too stark to
possibly be the work of the same student.

Alternatively, for such a startling dramatic

improvement, the Student must have made inappropriate use of assistance in the second
essay.
[23]

After considering the submissions of the University, the Panel unanimously found

that the University had established a charge of plagiarism and that section B.1.1.(d) of the
Code had been contravened.

In the circumstances, the University withdrew the other

charge against the Student.

IV.

Sanction

[24]

The University introduced a prior letter dated October 23, 2014 from the University to

the Student confirming that previously, on October 14, 2014, he had admitted guilt to
academic misconduct. In particular, he admitted to plagiarizing and obtaining unauthorized
assistance for an assignment which he submitted for credit in the course CIN202,
coincidentally also taught by Professor Price. This took place only a week before the first
paper was due in CIN203 and five weeks before the second.

9

[25]

In the circumstances, the University sought a sanction of a grade of O in the course,

a suspension for three years, and the offence to be noted on the Student's transcript for four
years publication of the decision with the name of the Student withheld .
[26]

Counsel for the University reviewed a number of previous Tribunal decisions with the

Panel -

fll ~ (January 17, 2014), sa ~ (November 14, 2007), ~

~ , . . . (January 12, 2009) and

£:tlllll C1IIIII ~ (October 7, 2009), which the

University submitted established the proposition that plagiarism offences warranted a 2-year
suspension for a first offence and a 3-year suspension for a second offence.

In these

circumstances, the University was seeking a 3-year suspension.
[27]

As well, the University noted that there were no mitigating circumstances that could

be said to apply to the Student - the Student had failed to attend and offer any such
mitigating circumstances.
[28]

The Panel unanimously accepted the University's submissions for sanction and

imposed a O grade in the course, a 3-year suspension, and the offence to be noted on the
Student's academic transcript for 4 years and published with the name of the student
withheld.

Dated at Toronto, this

f 'ffl-, day of January, 2016

Bernard Fishbein, Chair

