Case 817

DATE:

   April 19, 2016

PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v H.F.L.

Hearing Date(s):

   March 3, 2016

Panel Members:

   Rodica David, Chair
   Joel Kirsh, Faculty Member
   Sean McGowan, Student Member

Appearances:

   Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel
   Lucy Gaspini, Manager, Academic Integrity & Affairs, Office of the
   Dean, University of Toronto Mississauga
   Sherna Tamboly, Counsel for the Student, Downtown Legal Services

In Attendance:

   Mr. H.F.L., the Student
   Krista Osbourne, Administrative Assistant, Appeals, Discipline and
   Faculty Grievances
   Student charged under s. B.i.1(b) of the Code . The charges related to
   allegations that the Student knowingly obtained unauthorized assistance
   in a Course Assignment. After the Course Instructor discovered that the
   computer systems showed no record of the Student accessing the system
   to complete the assignment, the Student admitted that he had obtained
   unauthorized assistance to complete it from a friend who had previously
   completed the Course.
   Based on the Agreed Statement of Facts, the Panel found the Student
   guilty of the unauthorized aid charge. The Panel noted that the Student
   had two prior offences, emphasizing that the sanction needed to be
   significant to reflect the seriousness of not only the offence itself,
   but also the fact that it was a third offence. The Panel did not accept
   Counselâs submission that there was no likelihood of repetition because
   the Student was in a position to graduate after the offence was dealt
   with, noting that if the Student wished to go onto post graduate work,
   repetition of the offence could occur. Â The Panel accepted the Joint
   Submission on Penalty, but it noted that if the requirements for not
   accepting a Joint Submission on Penalty were not as stringent as they
   were, it might have considered backdating the suspension farther back
   than agreed to by the parties in order to avoid penalizing the Student
   for the delay in the Tribunal. The Panel imposed a grade assignment of
   zero in the Course; a 3-year suspension; the earlier of either a 4-year
   notation on the Studentâs academic record and transcript, or a notation
   until his graduation from the University; and that the case be reported
   to the Provost for publication.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12901
