Case 996

DATE:

   May 7, 2019

PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v. N.H.

Hearing Date:

   April 18, 2019

Panel Members:

   Ms. Roslyn M. Tsao, Chair
   Prof. Kimberly Widger, Faculty Panel Member
   Ms. Julie Farmer, Student Panel Member

Appearances:

   Ms. Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland,
   Rosenberg Rothstein LLP
   Mr. Chew Chang, Paralegal, for the Student

In Attendance:

   Ms. Jennifer Dent, Associate Director, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty
   Grievances

   The Student was charged with two counts of academic misconduct under
   the Code of Behaviour on Academic Matter s, 1995 (the â Code â) on the
   basis that he purchased an essay online and submitted it as his own
   work for course credit.Â  Specifically, the Student was charged with
   plagiarism under s. B.i.1(b) of the Code , as well academic dishonesty
   under s. Bi.3(b) of the Code .

   The Student attended the hearing with an agent.Â  The parties submitted
   an Agreed Statement of Facts (ASF) wherein the Student admitted to
   knowingly committing the offence of plagiarism by submitting an essay
   as if it was his own work, knowing that he had purchased it from a
   third party.Â  The Student had previously admitted to this plagiarism
   during a meeting with his Deanâs Designate, where he also expressed a
   desire to apologize to the professor. Based on the ASF and a review of
   the relevant documents, the Panel found the Student guilty of
   plagiarism under s. B.i.1(d) of the Code .Â  The University withdrew
   the remaining charge.

   The Parties submitted a Joint Submission on Penalty (JSP) in support of
   a five-year suspension from the University commencing on a date one
   year prior to the hearing.Â  The Panel accepted the JSP and, in
   particular, the partiesâ recommendation that the suspension be
   back-dated by one year.Â  The Panelâs decision to back-date the
   suspension was based on the following undisputed facts: (1) the Student
   had not taken any further courses at the University pending resolution
   of the charges, and (2) the Student had not contributed to the delay in
   resolving the charges, but apparently sought to have the charges
   resolved as early as possible.

   In evaluating the JSP, the Panel considered the need for general
   deterrence, noting that the nature of the offence and detriment to the
   University were significant because this type of plagiarism is
   sometimes difficult to identify.Â  The Panel further stated that when a
   student is caught, the sanction should be on the serious end of the
   spectrum to deter others. The Panel also considered the need for
   specific deterrence, but found that this was of lower concern because
   the Student had no prior history of academic misconduct at the
   University and because he admitted guilt early in the process,
   explaining that he had a heavier course load pressure at the time.Â
   Finally, the Panel stated that the requested penalty was in the
   appropriate range of sanctions in these circumstances and noted that
   there was a very high threshold for departing from a JSP requiring the
   Panel to find that the acceptance of the JSP would be contrary to the
   public interest and bring the administration of justice into disrepute.

   The Panel imposed the following sanctions: a final grade assignment of
   zero in the course; a five-year suspension from the University
   commencing approximately one year prior to the date of the hearing; and
   a corresponding notation on the Studentâs academic record and
   transcript for a five-year period or until his graduation from the
   University, whichever occurs first.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/28410
