Case 1047 - Finding

   [1]Case 1047 - Sanction

DATE:

   November 18,Â 2019

PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v. M.S.D.

HEARING DATE:

   October 21, 2019

Panel Members:

   Ms. Cynthia B. Kuehl, Chair
   Professor Richard B. Day, Faculty Panel Member
   Ms. Alice Zhu, Student Panel Member

Appearances:

   Mr. Robert Centa, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland
   Rosenberg Rothstein LLP
   The Student, Self Represented

In Attendance:

   Mr. Christopher Lang, Director, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty
   Grievances

   The Student was chargedÂ underÂ s.Â B.i.lÂ (b) of theÂ CodeÂ of
   Behaviour on Academic Matters, 1995Â (âCodeâ)Â forÂ knowinglyÂ using or
   possessing an unauthorized aid or obtaining unauthorized assistance in
   connection with a final examination.

   TheÂ StudentâsÂ professor set a closed book examination for the final
   examination but allowed students to bringÂ in a one double-sided aid
   sheet. To avoid micro-copying, the professor insisted that theÂ aid
   sheet be prepared by the student individually. TheÂ parameters of what
   constitutedÂ a permissible aid sheet were communicated to the students,
   including the Student.Â To accommodate his medical
   issues,Â theÂ StudentÂ was allowed additional time toÂ write the
   examinationÂ and wrote it in a semi-private carrel.Â HeÂ was initially
   screened by an invigilatorÂ andÂ confirmedÂ in writing that he was not
   in possession of any other aids.Â At the end of the examination,
   theÂ invigilatorÂ foundÂ on the Studentâs carrelÂ a folded piece of
   paper, containingÂ photocopies of previous problems and their solutions
   from theÂ StudentâsÂ course.Â This was anÂ inappropriateÂ aid
   sheetÂ that would not have been allowed inÂ the examination.

   The Student was self-represented at this phase of theÂ Â hearing.Â The
   invigilator and the Student gave diverging evidence regarding
   theÂ aidÂ sheet, which raised issues of credibility.Â In assessing
   their evidence, theÂ PanelÂ considered several factors.Â ItÂ found that
   the invigilator was experiencedÂ andÂ whoÂ gave clear, convincing and
   logical evidence.Â It alsoÂ noted that his evidence was supported by
   his contemporaneous notes.Â ItÂ furtherÂ held that his actions were
   consistent with the process and procedures expected of an invigilator
   for an examination.Â InÂ consideringÂ the Studentâs evidence,
   theÂ PanelÂ noted the Studentâs own admission regarding his past
   mistakesÂ and stated that it seemed highly unlikely that another
   student could have placed the unauthorized aid sheet in the carrel
   during the examination without detection. Ultimately,
   theÂ PanelÂ preferred theÂ invigilatorâsÂ evidence.

   TheÂ PanelÂ recognized thatÂ the StudentÂ does not haveÂ to prove that
   the unauthorized aid sheet was not his becauseÂ theÂ onus always
   remains on the University to establish its case on a balance of
   probabilities.Â While the Student denied that the unauthorized aid
   sheet was his,Â theÂ Panel rejectedÂ the Studentâs version of events,
   including hisÂ allegationÂ that the invigilatorÂ was dishonest in his
   evidence by saying he foundÂ theÂ unauthorized aid sheetÂ on his
   desk.Â The Panel found thatÂ theÂ StudentÂ ought to have known that he
   possessed the unauthorized aid sheet.

   TheÂ PanelÂ foundÂ that the University had established the charge on a
   balance of probabilities,Â with clear and convincing
   evidence.Â TheÂ PanelÂ made no findingÂ as toÂ whether the
   StudentÂ attempted to orÂ used the unauthorized aid sheetÂ during the
   examination.
   [2]View Case

References

   1. https://governingcouncil.utoronto.ca/sites/default/files/university-tribunal-decisions/Case%201047_Redacted.pdf
   2. file:///media/28784
