Case 1376

FILE:

   Case # 1376 (2022-2023)

DATE:

   May 15, 2023, via Zoom

PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v. J.X. (âthe Studentâ)

HEARING DATE(S):

   February 28, 2023, via Zoom

PANEL MEMBERS:

   Douglas F. Harrison, Chair

   Dr. Pascal von Lieshout, Faculty Panel Member

   Harvi Karatha, Student Panel Member

APPEARANCES:

   Tina Lie, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg
   Rothstein LLP

   Joseph Berger, Co-Counsel, Paliare Rolan Rosenberg Rothstein LLP

HEARING SECRETARY:

   Nusaiba Khan, Quasi-Judicial Administrative Assistant, Office of
   Appeals, Discipline and Faculty of Grievances

   The Student was charged under s. B.i.1(d) of the Code for knowingly
   representing as their own an idea or work of another on a course test
   (Test 2). In the alternative, the Student was charged under s. B.i.1(b)
   for knowingly obtaining unauthorized aid in relation to Test 2. The
   Student was also alternatively charged under s. B.i.3(b) for knowingly
   engaging in a form of cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct,
   fraud or misrepresentation not otherwise described in the Code to
   obtain academic advantage in connection with Test 2.

   The Student was enrolled in the course in Fall 2020 and Winter 2021.
   Test 2 was administered online. Students were allowed to use course
   materials but not permitted to communicate with peers or use external
   help, including online platforms. After the completion of the test,
   course instructors found test questions and answers posted on
   Chegg.com. One of the course instructors found that the Studentâs
   answers to a test question were very similar to answers posted on
   Chegg.com, with aspects that were virtually identical. The instructor
   determined that the similarities were extensive and unlikely to have
   been coincidental.

   The Student acknowledged receipt of an email from the chair of the
   courseâs department and denied cheating but did not respond to any
   other follow-ups. The Student did not attend the hearing and was not
   represented by counsel. The Panel heard evidence that the University
   had made serious efforts to serve the Student with notice, through
   email and telephone, and through courier delivery. The Panel found that
   reasonable notice of the hearing was provided.

   After considering the instructorâs evidence concerning similarities
   between the Studentâs answers and those on Chegg.com, the Panel found
   the Student guilty of knowingly representing as her own, an idea or
   expression of an idea or work of another on Test 2, contrary to s.
   B.i.1(d). The University withdrew the alternative charges.

   In determining the appropriate sanction, the Panel considered similar
   previous cases and the Provostâs Guidance on Sanctions, available in
   Appendix C of the Code. The Panel considered the Student'sÂ character
   and extenuating circumstances, finding that there was no evidence to
   the Student's character nor extenuating circumstances due to the
   Studentâs absence in the proceedings. The Panel also found that though
   the Student had no prior offences, there was no evidence of remorse. In
   considering the nature of the offence, the detriment to the University,
   and the need for deterrence, the Panel found that copying answers from
   another, improper source onto an exam is an extremely serious offence
   that can be perceived as an attempt to fraud the University. The Panel
   noted that the shift to online assessments during the pandemic has
   resulted in the increase of students using resources like Chegg.com.
   The Panel observed that online assessments, and the temptation among
   students to use sources like Chegg.com, will remain part of curricula
   beyond the pandemic. The Panel therefore found that it was necessary
   for the associated penalty to function as a general deterrent against
   such behaviour.

   Counsel for the University directed the Panel to similar prior
   decisions and sanctions where students had submitted evaluation answers
   similar to answers found on Chegg.com, including a case where the
   student did not participate in the proceedings.

   The Panel imposed the following sanctions: a grade assignment of zero
   for the course; a two-year suspension; a three-year notation on the
   Studentâs transcript; and a report to Provost for publication with the
   Studentâs name withheld.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/31158
