Case No. 1376
THE UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
IN THE MATTER OF charges of academic dishonesty made on May 12, 2022,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters,
2019,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Act, 1971, S.O. 1971, c. 56 as amended
S.O. 1978, c. 88
B E T W E E N:
UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
- and J

X

REASONS FOR DECISION
Hearing Date: February 28, 2023, via Zoom
Members of the Panel:
Douglas F. Harrison, Chair
Dr. Pascal van Lieshout, Faculty Panel Member
Harvi Karatha, Student Panel Member
Appearances:
Tina Lie, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg Rothstein LLP
Joseph Berger, Co-Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg Rothstein LLP
Hearing Secretary:
Nusaiba Khan, Quasi-Judicial Administrative Assistant, Office of Appeals, Discipline and
Faculty Grievances
Not in Attendance:
J

X

-2Charges and Hearing
1.

The Trial Division of the University Tribunal held a hearing by videoconference on

February 28, 2023, to address the following charges brought by the University of Toronto (the
“University”) against J

X (the “Student”) under the Code of Behaviour on Academic

Matters, 2019 (the “Code”), which were set out in a letter to the Student dated May 12, 2022:

a. On or about November 18, 2020, you knowingly represented as your own an idea or
expression of an idea or work of another in Test 2 in MAT133Y1 (the “Course”),
contrary to section B.I.1(d) of the Code.
b. In the alternative, on or about November 18, 2020, you knowingly obtained
unauthorized assistance in connection with Test 2 in the Course, contrary to section
B.I.1(b) of the Code.
c. In the further alternative, on or about November 18, 2020, you knowingly engaged in

a form of cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or misrepresentation not
otherwise described in the Code in order to obtain academic credit or other academic
advantage of any kind in connection with Test 2 in the Course, contrary to section
B.I.3(b) of the Code.
Particulars of the offences charged are as follows:
1.

At all material times you were a student enrolled at the University of Toronto
Faculty of Arts & Science.

2.

In Fall 2020 and Winter 2021, you enrolled in MAT133Y1 (Calculus and Linear
Algebra for Commerce).

3.

Students in the Course were evaluated on the basis of, among other things, 6 tests
worth a combined 35% (with the lowest score dropped).

4.

Test 2 was administered online during a 24-hour period on November 17-18, 2020.
The second part of the test consisted of a series of written response questions.
Students were permitted to consult the course materials but were not permitted to

-3communicate with one another or to get outside help, including through the use of
websites or online forums.
5.

On or about November 18, 2020, you submitted Test 2 in the Course.

6.

You submitted Test 2:
(a)

to obtain academic credit;

(b)

knowing that it contained ideas, expressions of ideas or work which were
not your own, but were the ideas, expressions of ideas or work of others,
including the author of an answer that was posted on Chegg.com, which is
a website that allows subscribers to post questions on the site and to view
questions and answers posted on the site (the “Chegg Source”); and

(c)

knowing that you did not properly reference the ideas, expressions of ideas
or work that you drew from the Chegg Source or from others.

7.

You knew that the Chegg Source was not an authorized source to which you were
allowed to refer in completing Test 2.

8.

You knowingly obtained unauthorized assistance in Test 2 from the Chegg Source
or from others.

9.

You knowingly submitted Test 2 with the intention that the University of Toronto
rely on it as containing your own ideas or work in considering the appropriate
academic credit to be assigned to your work.

Service
2.

The Student did not attend the hearing. In order to proceed with the hearing in the Student’s

absence, the Tribunal therefore had to determine if reasonable notice was given to the Student, as
required by s. 6 of the Statutory Powers Procedure Act, R.S.O. 1990, c. S.22 (“SPPA”) and by
rule 17 of the University Tribunal’s Rules of Practice and Procedure (“Rules”).

-43.

On the issue of service, counsel for the University presented affidavit evidence from

Kimberly Blake and Andrew Wagg. This evidence, as outlined below, demonstrated that all
relevant materials in this matter were delivered to the Student via email to the Student’s contact
email address as recorded in the University’s Repository of Student Information (“ROSI”).
4.

Delivery by email to a student’s email address as recorded in ROSI is permitted and is

considered valid service for a hearing before this Tribunal by virtue of rule 13(c) of the Rules. It
is not necessary to physically deliver materials to effect valid service. Pursuant to the University’s
Policy on Official Correspondence with Students (“Policy”), the University and its divisions may
use email for delivering official correspondence to students. This Policy also directs that students
are responsible for maintaining and advising the University of their current email address through
ROSI. There is a link to the Policy on the webpage that provides a link to the login for student
email accounts.
5.

In the present case, an email was sent to the Student’s email address (as recorded in ROSI)

on December 17, 2020, by Ava Danialy, the Mathematics Department Chair’s representative for
academic misconduct in MAT133. In this email, Ms. Danialy said it had come to her attention
that the Student had allegedly committed an academic offence during MAT133 Test 2, which had
been administered online on November 17-18, 2020. In particular, Ms. Danialy said that the
Student’s MAT133 Test 2 submission contained work that bore a significant resemblance to
solutions found in a second source, either another student’s exam or on Chegg.com. She said two
instructors agreed that this resemblance was significant enough to constitute “strong evidence” of
the Student either having committed an act of plagiarism or having obtained unauthorized aid
during the test, both of which are academic offences.
6.

Ms. Danialy further advised the Student in her December 17, 2020 email that it was not

possible to withdraw from the Course and the Student would be reinstated in the Course if they
did so. Ms. Danialy said that before any sanction could be imposed, the Student was entitled to an
opportunity to discuss the allegations with a member of the Course staff. The Student also had the
option of admitting to the offence and foregoing a meeting. In the event the Student chose the
latter option, the email contained a statement that the Student could cut and paste into a responding
email, admitting the offence and declaring that the Student was prepared to accept the sanction of

-5a mark of zero for the test. Ms. Danialy asked the Student to respond by December 23, 2020, failing
which the matter would be forwarded to the Associate Chair of the Department of Mathematics or
the Office of Student Academic Integrity.
7.

The following day, December 18, 2020, Ms. Danialy sent a follow-up email to the Student,

correcting a typo in the admission statement, to clarify the reference to the specific test.
8.

On January 20, 2021, the Student replied by email to Ms. Danialy, from the Student’s email

address as recorded in ROSI.

The Student acknowledged receipt of Ms. Danialy’s email,

apologizing for not having checked their emails over the holiday period. The Student denied
cheating and said, “At the beginning of this semester, I found it more and more difficult to learn
math, so I gave up this course last week.” In addition, the Student asked, “What can I do for this
situation”, given they had already dropped the course.
9.

On January 27, 2021, the MAT 133 Administrative Team emailed the Student, “strongly”

suggesting that the Student book an appointment with the registrar to discuss the situation of
having dropped the Course while proceeding with a case in academic integrity. The emailed was
signed off with, “If you wish to book a meeting to discuss your case, kindly let us know.”
10.

From September 16, 2021, to March 28, 2022, the Student Academic Integrity Office of

the University’s Faculty of Arts and Science (“SAI”) sent four emails to the Student’s ROSI email
account, attempting to schedule a meeting between the Student and the Dean’s Designate for
Academic Integrity, to discuss the allegation of academic misconduct at issue. SAI did not receive
a response from the Student. On April 11, 2022, SAI sent the Student a letter by email, informing
them that their file was being sent to the Vice-Provost for resolution, with the recommendation
that charges be laid and the Student’s case be heard by the University’s Tribunal.
11.

On May 12, 2022, the Office of the Vice-Provost, Faculty and Academic Life sent an email

to the Student’s ROSI email address, serving the Student with a copy of a letter from Professor
Heather Boon, who was then the University’s Vice-Provost, Faculty & Academic Life, attaching
the charges. On the same day, the Office of Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances (“ADFG”)
sent an email to the Student’s ROSI email account, serving the Student with a letter regarding the

-6charges filed, together with copies of the charges, the Code, the Rules, and a pamphlet for
Downtown Legal Services.
12.

Emails were sent to the Student, to their ROSI email account, by Tina Lie, a partner with

Paliare Roland Rosenberg Rothstein LLP (“Paliare Roland”), who acts as Assistant Discipline
Counsel to the University, as follows:
a. May 17, 2022, introducing Ms. Lie to the Student and advising that important
documents and correspondence would be sent in future to the Student’s contact email
address;
b. June 19, 2022, attaching a disclosure letter and a link to a PDF of the University’s
Disclosure Brief;
c. September 21, 2022, proposing dates for the hearing of this matter, asking the Student
to respond by September 28, 2022, regarding their availability, advising that the hearing
would proceed electronically via videoconference unless the Student requested
otherwise, and inviting the Student to contact Ms. Lie to discuss the case; and
d. December 19, 2022, noting that Ms. Lie had not heard from the Student, and advising

that the hearing for this matter would be scheduled for Tuesday, February 28, 2023 at
9:45 am.

13.

On December 19, 2022, the ADFG Office served the Student, via the Student’s email

address in ROSI, with the Notice of Electronic Hearing for a hearing on February 28, 2023, at 9:45
a.m. (the “Notice”), together with copies of the ADFG Office’s May 12, 2022, letter regarding the
charges and enclosures. The email from the ADFG Office also included the coordinates to access
the Zoom videoconferencing platform for the hearing.
14.

On February 17, 2023, Joseph Berger, a lawyer at Paliare Roland working with Ms. Lie,

emailed the Student, providing the Student with the affidavit evidence of the Provost’s witnesses,
and asking if the Student intended to conduct cross-examinations.

-715.

Neither Ms. Lie nor Mr. Berger received any correspondence from the Student. In addition,

neither of them received a bounce back message indicating that their email messages to the Student
could not be delivered.
16.

At the request of Ms. Lie, on February 17, 2023, Andrew Wagg, Manager, Incident

Response, Information Security, at the University’s Information Technology Services, checked the
last time someone had accessed the Student’s university email account (the contact email in ROSI).
Mr. Wagg determined that the last time was August 29, 2021, at 11:42 p.m. (Toronto time).
17.

In addition to their email address, students are required to provide a current telephone

number and mailing address in ROSI. On November 22 and 28, 2022, and on January 9, 2023,
Kimberly Blake, a legal assistant at Paliare Roland who works with Ms. Lie, attempted to call the
Student at the phone number the Student provided in ROSI. On all three occasions, the calls went
to a recording that indicated the number was “not equipped for incoming service” and to “check
the number and try again”.
18.

On February 1, 2023, Paliare Roland arranged for a courier to deliver a package to the

Student at the Student’s mailing address in ROSI, on Carlton Street in Toronto. The package
contained a letter from Ms. Lie, a copy of the charges and the Notice of Electronic Hearing
(together with the Zoom coordinates). The courier company returned the package to Paliare
Roland the same day along with a notification that the person at the address did not know the
addressee and the package should be returned to the sender.
19.

As of February 22, 2023, no communication had been received by Paliare Roland from the

Student.
20.

The Tribunal convened on the morning of February 28, 2023, in accordance with the

Notice. Initially, those who attempted to use the Zoom coordinates provided by ADFG Office
were unable to access the virtual hearing room. At 9:36 a.m., revised Zoom coordinates were sent
by email to those involved, including the Student at their contact email address in ROSI. Receipt
of this email was confirmed by Diane Pacheco, Academic Integrity & Petitions Specialist, Student
Academic Integrity Office of the Faculty of Arts and Science, who was copied on that email. The

-8Tribunal then waited 15 minutes to allow the Student or a representative of the Student to sign in
to the hearing. After that time, neither the Student nor a representative appeared.
21.

Following submissions from the University’s counsel, the Tribunal concluded that even

with the late change of Zoom coordinates, it was reasonable to proceed in the Student’s absence.
Had the Student been motivated to attend, which was not actually apparent from the Student’s
behaviour, since early 2021, of ignoring all emails from the University and Paliare Roland, the
Student would have reasonably contacted the ADFG Office upon determining that they were
having difficulty logging in to the videoconference. Or, the Student would have checked their
email account, and thereby seen the email that was sent at 9:36 a.m. Any student who was
motivated to appear at the hearing would also have been motivated to figure out how to connect
into it after not being able to do so initially. The Tribunal therefore concluded that the Student had
received reasonable notice of the hearing and of the charges, and ordered that the hearing proceed
in their absence, as permitted by s. 7(3) of the SPPA and rule 21 of the Rules.
Facts
22.

In support of the charges, counsel for the University tendered an affidavit from Cindy

Blois, an Assistant Professor, Teaching Stream, in the Department of Mathematics, the contents
of which are described below. As noted above, a copy of this affidavit was emailed to the Student
by Mr. Berger on February 17, 2023. Ms. Blois was in attendance during the hearing and addressed
questions from the University’s counsel.
23.

In the fall of 2020, the Student was a student in MAT133Y: Calculus and Linear Algebra

for Commerce (as defined above, the “Course”). The Course ran through the Fall 2020 and Winter
2021 terms. Ms. Blois was one of five instructors and was the course coordinator for the Course.
The Course was designed for students with an interest in business and economics, in order to
provide the mathematical foundation needed for their studies and to work towards a business
career. The Course focussed on topics in linear algebra, differential calculus and integral calculus
in one and two variables, and their applications in business and economics.

-924.

Students’ final grades in the Course were evaluated based on the results of homework,

lecture preparation, projects, meeting and presentations, tests, and a final assessment. Throughout
the Course there were a total of six tests. Results from a student’s five best test scores (worth 7%
each) were counted towards their final grade.
25.

The outline for the Course indicated, under the heading “Academic Integrity” on page 16,

that students were expected to read and abide by the Code. The outline provided specific examples
of academic offences under the Code, including looking at another student’s work during a test,
communicating with another student in the Course during a test, communicating with anyone about
test content during a test, using unauthorized materials or online resources such as Chegg.com
during a test, and copying solutions from another source and submitting them as your own.
26.

On November 17-18, 2020, students in the Course wrote Test 2, which was administered

online. It was available beginning at 8 pm on November 17, 2020, and was required to be
submitted by 8 pm on November 18, 2020. The test had two sections: 10 multiple choice questions
and five written response questions. The test information and study guide advised students that
they were prohibited from communicating with other students in the Course, getting outside help
from anyone, accessing or posting on so-called “tutoring websites” like Chegg.com, or using
solution templates, tutoring services, online forums or a search engine.
27.

On or about November 18, 2020, the Student submitted her answers to the test. The Student

signed the academic integrity statement at the end of the written responses part of the test,
affirming that the Student knew the Code and did not cheat.
28.

After the test had been distributed to the students in the Course, the instructors and teaching

assistants found questions and answers from the test posted on Chegg.com. This is a subscriptionbased website that allows students to post problems and obtain answers from so-called experts.
Subscribers can access questions posted by others to the site, and the answers given.
29.

In reviewing the Student’s answer to Question 3(b) in the written response portion of the

test, Ms. Blois stated that it was determined that the Student’s answer was very similar to the

- 10 answer to that question that was posted on Chegg.com. In particular, Ms. Blois found the
similarities suspicious because:
a. The Student’s answer was virtually identical to the Chegg.com answer;
b. Both the Student’s answer and the Chegg.com answer made almost all the same choices
for the symbol they used to represent multiplication on each line – a dot on one line, an
“x” on another and no symbol at all on a third (i.e., just a number adjacent to
parentheses);
c. Both the Student’s answer and the Chegg.com answer rounded 10/3 to 3.33, and also
rounded the final answer to the same single decimal point;
d. The concept of elasticity was not taught in the Course, yet both the Student’s answer
and the Chegg.com answer used it to solve this question; and
e. Both the Student’s answer and the Chegg.com answer used a lowercase “e” to represent

elasticity, which was an unconventional choice, given the use of lowercase “e” for
Euler’s number and its use in business and economics to represent compound interest.
30.

With respect to item 4 in the above paragraph, Ms. Blois noted that of over 1,000 students

in the Course who wrote this test, only 36 used the concept of elasticity to solve Question 3(b),
and of those 36, 29 were suspected of having copied from a Chegg.com solution, due to the extent
of the similarities of their answers with the Chegg.com answer (the remaining 7 were not similar
enough to conclude that they had been copied). In Ms. Blois’ view, the similarities between the
Student’s answer and the Chegg.com answer were unlikely to have been coincidental.
31.

During examination by Mr. Berger, Ms. Blois explained that the Department of

Mathematics has a Chegg.com subscription for the purpose of checking whether test questions and
answers are posted there. For this test, the Course’s administrative staff pulled screen shots of all
of the test questions from Chegg.com during the test period or shortly after the test ended.
32.

The Student received a grade of 0.5 out of 3 on Question 3(b), a mark of 21.5 out of 30 on

the written responses part of the test, and a total mark of 35.5 out of 50 on the entire test.

- 11 33.

Ms. Blois also noted that, to her knowledge, despite the offer by the Mathematics

Department in its January 27, 2021 email, referenced in paragraph 9, above, to meet with the
Student, no instructor’s meeting was held for the Student. During the hearing, Ms. Pacheco
confirmed that the Student was still a student in good standing at the University.
Finding on Charges
34.

The Student was charged under s. B.I.1(d) of the Code, by which it is an offence to

knowingly represent as one’s own, any idea or expression of an idea or work of another in any
academic examination or term test or in connection with any other form of academic work, i.e., to
commit plagiarism.
35.

In addition, the Student was charged, in the alternative, under s. B.I.1(b) of the Code, by

which it is an offence to use or possess an unauthorized aid or aids or obtain unauthorized
assistance in any academic examination or term test or in connection with any other form of
academic work.
36.

The Student was also charged, in the further alternative, under section B.I.3(b) of the Code,

by which it is an offence to engage in any form of cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct,
fraud or misrepresentation not otherwise described in the Code, in order to obtain academic credit
or other academic advantage of any kind.
37.

The Student knew that they were not permitted to collaborate with other students during

the test and that they were not permitted to consult Chegg.com for assistance with answers.
38.

Having considered the evidence of Ms. Blois, and in particular the unusual and

idiosyncratic similarities between the Student’s answer to Question 3(b) of Test 2 and the
Chegg.com answer, having regard in particular to the symbols used and the reference to elasticity,
which was not taught in the Course, the Tribunal finds that on a balance of probabilities, the
Student violated the Code by copying the answer to Question 3(b) from Chegg.com (or from
another student who had copied from that website) and presenting it as her own work by submitting
it as part of her test answers.

- 12 39.

Accordingly, the Tribunal finds that the Student did commit the offence of knowingly

representing as one’s own, an idea or expression of an idea or work or another in Test 2 of the
Course, contrary to s. B.I.1(d) of the Code.
40.

Upon these findings, Counsel for the University advised that the University was

withdrawing the two alternative charges, as set out in paragraphs 2 and 3 of the charges (see
paragraphs 1, 35 and 36, above).
Sanction
41.

Section C.II.(B) of the Code sets out that the Tribunal may impose a range of sanctions on

a student who has been convicted under the Code, ranging from an oral reprimand to a five-year
suspension or, more severely, a recommendation to the President of expulsion or to Governing
Council of cancellation of a degree. The Tribunal may also order that any sanction it imposes be
recorded on the student’s academic record and transcript for a period of time and may also report
any case to the Provost, who may publish a notice of the decision and sanction in the University
newspapers, with the name of the student withheld.
42.

The Code also contains, in Appendix “C”, the Provost’s Guidance on Sanctions, section

B.8(b) of which provides, “absent exceptional circumstances, the Provost will request that the
Tribunal: … suspend a student for two years for any offence involving academic dishonesty, where
a student has not committed any prior offences”.
43.

In this instance, the University sought an Order that the Student receive a final grade of

zero in the Course and a two-year suspension, along with a notation on the Student’s record and
transcript for three years and a report to the Provost for publication with the Student’s name
withheld.
44.

This request was in part based on sanctions handed down by the Tribunal in previous cases,

the Provost’s Guidance on Sanctions (but which are not binding on this Tribunal), and on the
factors laid down by this Tribunal in University of Toronto and Mr. C (Case No. 1976/77-3,
November 5, 1976) (“Mr. C”).

- 13 45.

The reasons for decision in Mr. C. set out factors that a tribunal should consider when

imposing a sanction:

46.

a.

The character of the person charged;

b.

The likelihood of a repetition of the offence;

c.

The nature of the offence committed;

d.

Any extenuating circumstances surrounding the commission of the offence;

e.

The detriment to the University occasioned by the offence; and

f.

The need to deter others from committing a similar offence.

With respect to factors (a) and (d), character and extenuating circumstances, respectively,

there was no evidence one way or the other before the Tribunal. The Student did not participate
in the process beyond their initial responding email in January 2021, in which the Student denied
cheating but gave no explanation for the similarities to the Chegg.com answer, as detailed above.
There is no evidence of remorse or insight, no evidence of a willingness to take responsibility for
their actions and no evidence of a willingness to learn from their mistakes. The onus was on the
Student to put forward mitigating evidence and none was presented.
47.

With respect to factor (b), likelihood of repetition, the Student was in the Fall term of first

year at the time of the test. The Student did not enroll in the Winter term and has not enrolled at
the University since. There is no evidence of a pattern of misconduct but also nothing to show
that the Student has learned from their mistake or that they appreciate its gravity. Again, there is
no evidence of remorse or insight on the Student’s part.
48.

With respect to factors (c), (e) and (f), the nature of the offence, the detriment to the

University and the need for deterrence, respectively, copying answers from another, improper
source onto an exam, as the Student has committed, is an extremely serious offence that harms the
institution and the academic process. It is a serious breach of academic integrity and can be seen
as an attempt to defraud the University. Regrettably, the move to online assessments during the

- 14 pandemic led to an increase in instances of students making use of resources like Chegg.com and
attempting to pass off as their own work, material they had taken from such websites. Even as we
move away from the protocols imposed during the pandemic, online assessment will continue to
be part of the curricula and the temptation among students to use Chegg.com and its ilk will remain.
Therefore, the associated penalty must act as general deterrent against this behaviour.
49.

As was noted by this Tribunal in University of Toronto v. T.J. (Case No. 1102, November

5, 2021), at para. 11(e), with respect to the need to deter others from committing similar offences
(factor (f) in Mr. C.):
[C]heating on exams must always be denounced and deterred in order to protect
the academic integrity of the University. In today’s online world, it is all too easy
for students to find new outlets for unauthorized assistance. Students must
understand that this kind of misconduct will have serious repercussions, so that
they will be dissuaded from the temptation to cheat when under pressure.
50.

It is accepted that there is no benchmark or starting point that a Tribunal is meant to apply

in sanctioning a student who has been found to have violated the Code. The sanction in a particular
case is to be determined based on the circumstances of that case. However, previous decisions of
the Discipline Appeals Board and the Trial Division of this Tribunal have found that students must
be treated fairly and equitably when being sanctioned, and that there must be a general consistency
in the approach of the Tribunal (see University of Toronto v. B.S. (Case No. 697, January 17, 2014
(Sanction), at paragraphs 8-11).
51.

Counsel for the University directed the Panel to a number of previous decisions of the

University Tribunal on the issue of sanctions in cases of plagiarism and use of unauthorized aids.
52.

In University of Toronto v. K.Z. (Case No. 1126, September 13, 2021), the student was

found to have submitted, in both an online test and an online final exam administered in March
2020, and April 2020, respectively, in a first-year Calculus course, five answers that had been
taken from Chegg.com. The Tribunal noted it was not known if the student was a Chegg.com
subscriber and also made note of the upheaval associated with the province-wide lockdown during
the initial weeks of the pandemic, which may have had a negative impact on the student. The

- 15 Tribunal imposed a sanction of a mark of zero in the course, a two-year suspension, and a threeyear notation.
53.

In University of Toronto v. Y.L. (Case No. 1133, November 29, 2021), the student was

found to have submitted, in an online final exam administered in April 2020, in a first-year
Calculus course, a number of answers that had been taken from Chegg.com. There was no
evidence the student was a Chegg.com subscriber. The student did not participate in the
proceeding. The Tribunal noted that the events in question, including the hearing, had occurred
six months into the global pandemic. The Tribunal concluded that it was appropriate to impose a
sanction of a mark of zero in the course, a two-year suspension, and a three-year notation.
54.

Finally, in University of Toronto v. S.L. (Case No. 1151, November 30, 2021), the student

was found to have submitted, in an online final exam administered in April 2020, in a first-year
Calculus course, an answer that had been taken from Chegg.com. It was unknown whether the
student was a Chegg.com subscriber or had been provided the answer by another student. The
Tribunal imposed a sanction of a mark of zero in the course, a two-year suspension, and a threeyear notation.
55.

In the present case, the Student has no prior record of academic misconduct. However,

they have been found to have engaged in a serious breach of academic integrity. The upheaval of
the initial weeks of the pandemic were long over by the time the test in question took place, in
November 2020. While the fact that they chose not to participate in this process will not be
considered an aggravating circumstance, they passed up the opportunity to present evidence of
mitigation or extenuating circumstances. The Tribunal accepts that there was no evidence the
Student paid for the answers that were submitted on the test. Accordingly, in light of the foregoing,
the Tribunal concludes that the sanction requested by the Provost is reasonable and appropriate in
the circumstances of this case, and, importantly, is generally consistent with prior decisions of this
Tribunal.
56.

The Tribunal therefore orders that the following sanctions be imposed on the Student:
a) a final grade of zero in the course MAT133Y1 in Fall 2020 and Winter 2021;

- 16 b) a suspension from the University for a period of two years from February 28, 2023; and
c) a notation of this sanction on the Student’s academic record and transcript for a period of
three years from February 28, 2023; and
57.

In addition, the Tribunal orders that this case be reported to the Provost for publication of

a notice of the decision of the Tribunal and the sanctions imposed, with the name of the Student
withheld.
Dated at Toronto, this 15th day of May, 2023.
Original signed by:
_________________________________
Douglas F. Harrison, Chair
On behalf of the Panel

