Case #642

   DATE: June 10, 2011
   PARTIES: University of Toronto v. P.P.
   Hearing Date(s): April 5, 2011
   Panel Members:
   Ms. Ira Parghi, Chair
   Prof. Graeme Hirst, Faculty Member
   Mr. Albert So, Student Member
   Appearances:
   Mr. Robert Centa, Assistant Discipline Counsel for the University
   In Attendance:
   Christopher Lang, Director, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances

   Trial Division â s. B.i.1(a) of Code â forged documents â submitted
   falsified petitions to defer exams in four courses over the span of two
   years â hearing not attended â request to proceed in the absence â
   Agreed Statement of Facts â guilty plea â finding of guilt â Joint
   Submission on Penalty â administration of justice would not be brought
   into disrepute by accepting the Joint Submission â grade assignment of
   zero for courses; five-year suspension; five-year notation on
   transcript; report to Provost

   Student charged under s. B.i.1(a) of the Code . The charges related to
   allegations that the Student submitted falsified petitions and letters
   claiming deaths of family members to defer her exams. The Student did
   not attend the hearing but requested that the hearing proceed in her
   absence. The parties submitted an Agreed Statement of Facts. The
   Student pleaded guilty to the charges, and the Panel found the Student
   guilty under s. B.i.1(a) . The parties also submitted a Joint
   Submission on Penalty. The Panel recognized that to reject a joint
   submission, it must meet a high threshold which requires that accepting
   the joint submission would bring the administration of justice into
   disrepute. The Panel concluded that this threshold could not be met in
   this case as (1) the Student had admitted to committing the offences;
   (2) providing falsified information and documents even once was a
   serious offence; (3) the penalty called by the joint submission was
   reasonable in consideration of precedents; and (4) procedurally, the
   Student had had the opportunity to obtain legal advice, had appropriate
   notice of hearing, requested that the hearing proceed in her absence,
   and voluntarily signed the Agreed Statement of Facts and the Joint
   Submission on Penalty. The Panel accepted the Joint Submission and
   imposed a grade assignment of zero in the four courses; a five-year
   suspension; a five-year notation on the Studentâs transcript; and a
   report be issued to the Provost.

   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12777
