Case #711

   DATE: May 11, 2015
   PARTIES: University of Toronto v S.G.
   Hearing Date(s): November 28, 2014
   Panel Members:
   Sana Halwani, Chair
   Ato Quayson, Faculty Member
   Adam Wheeler, Student Member
   Appearances:
   Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel for the University
   Leslie Salituro, Student Services Assistant, School of Graduate Studies
   Alan Saks, Professor, Department of Management, UTS
   Erin McMahon, Governance and Policy Officer, School of Graduate Studies
   Luc de Nil, Deanâs Designate, School of Graduate Studies
   In Attendance:
   Sinead Cutt, Administrative Assistant, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty
   Grievances
   Not In Attendance:
   The Student
   Trial Division â s. B.i.1(a) , s. B.i.1(d) , s. B.i.3(b) of the Code â
   falsified documents â plagiarism - document purporting to be official
   University letter â Â document sent to employer falsifying possession
   of degree â Â plagiarized dissertation âStudent did not attend hearing
   â Student given reasonable notice of Hearing â finding of guilt â
   âshockingâ offence â five-year suspension; recommendation that the
   Student be expelled; report to Provost for publication
   The Student was charged with two offences under s. B.i.1(a) , one
   offence under s. B.i.1(d) , Â and in the alternative, two offences
   under s. B.i.3(b) of the Code . The charges related to allegations that
   the student had forged and falsified a letter purportedly from the
   University of Toronto School of Graduate Studies and also a
   dissertation. The Student did not attend the hearing but the Panel was
   satisfied that the Student had reasonable notice of the hearing as he
   had been in contact with the University before his responses ceased.
   The Panel proceeded in accordance with the University Tribunal Rules of
   Practice and Procedure.
   The Student joined an American University (Ferris State) as an
   associate professor on the condition that he complete his doctoral
   degree at the University of Toronto. The Student provided a letter to
   Ferris State, purportedly from the University which stated that the
   Student had completed his degree, save for some minor changes to his
   thesis.
   Despite deadline extensions on the dissertation and assurances from the
   Student that he would meet those deadlines, the Student never submitted
   a final draft of his thesis. The Studentâs failure to complete his
   degree in one year violated a condition in his reinstatement to the
   University and made him ineligible to complete his degree. The
   supervisor was made aware of the letter sent to Ferris State and
   advised Ferris State that the University had not written the letter.
   Â The Student resigned from Ferris State.
   The supervisor also provided the Panel with evidence of plagiarism in
   the Studentâs dissertation. Approximately 75% of the material was taken
   verbatim or almost verbatim from uncited sources.
   The Panel found the Student guilty of one count under s. B.i.1(a) , one
   count under s. B.i.1(d) , and one count under s. B.i.3(b) of the Code .
   The University sought an immediate five-year suspension and a
   recommendation of expulsion due to the shocking nature of the offence.
   The University focused on the Studentâs lack of participation in the
   process, ineligibility to complete his degree, deliberate deception and
   irreparable harm to the relationship with the University.
   The Panel accepted the submission and imposed a penalty of a suspension
   of up to five years from the date of the order or until expulsion,
   whichever is earlier, recommended that the Student be expelled, and
   ordered that the case be reported to the Provost for publication.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12874
