THE UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
TRIAL DIVISION

IN THE MATTER OF charges of academic dishonesty filed on March 19, 2013 and July 10,
2014
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters,
1995,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Act, 1971, S.O. 1971 , c.56 as amended
8.0. 1978, C. 88

BETWEEN:

THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
-AND-

Hearing Date: November 28, 2014
Members of the Panel:
Ms. Sana Halwani, Lawyer, Chair
Prof. Ato Quayson, Centre for Diaspora and Transnational Studies, Faculty Panel Member
Mr. Adam Wheeler, Student Panel Member
Appearances:
Mr. Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Barristers
Ms. Leslie Salituro, Student Services Assistant, School of Graduate Studies
Prof. Alan Saks, Professor of Organizational Behaviour and HR Management, Department of
Management, University of Toronto Scarborough
Ms. Erin McMahon, Governance and Policy Officer, School of Graduate Studies
Prof. Luc de Nil, Dean's Designate, Vice Dean of Students, School of Graduate Studies
In Attendance:
Ms. Sinead Cutt, Administrative Assistant, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances
Not in Attendance:
Mr. ~ ~ . the Student

I.
1.

Charges
The Trial Division of the Tribunal held a hearing on November 28, 2014 to address the
following cha rges brought by the University of Toronto (the "University") against ~
~ (the "Student") under the Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters (the "Code"):

Ma rch 2014 Cha rges:
a. In or about September 2012 , you knowingly forged or in any
other way altered or falsified a document or evidence required
by the University, or knowingly uttered, circulated or made use
of any such forged, altered or falsified document, namely, a
letter dated September 28 , 20 12 on University of Toronto
School of Graduate Studies letterhead to you from Mrs. Leslie
Salituro (the "Letter"), contrary to section B.1.1 (a) of the Code.
b. In or about September 2012, you knowingly forged or in any
other way altered or falsified a document or evidence required
by the University, or knowingly uttered, circulated or made use
of any such forged, altered or falsified document, namely, a
dissertation entitled "Examining the Role of Error Training and
Metacognition in Computer Based Learning Environments",
contrary to section B.1.1 (a) of the Code.
c. In the alternative, in or about September, 2012, you knowingly
engaged in a form of cheating , academic dishonesty or
misconduct, fraud or misrepresentation in order to obtain
academic credit or other academic advantage of any kind,
contrary to section B. l.3(b) of the Code by:
i. forging or falsifying the Letter;
ii. forging or falsifying a dissertation entitled "Examining
the

Role of Error Training and

Metacognition in

Computer Based Learning Environments".

1

July 2014 Charges:
a. In or about February 28, 2012, you knowingly represented as
your own an idea or expression of an idea of work of another in
connection with a draft of a dissertation entitled "Examining the
Role of Error training and Metacognition in Computer Based
Learning Environments" ("Dissertation"), contrary to section
B.1.1 (d) of the Code.
b. In the alternative, in or about February 28, 2012, you knowingly
engaged in a form of cheating, academic dishonesty or
misconduct, fraud or misrepresentation in connection with the
Dissertation in order to obtain academic credit or other
academic advantage of any kind, contrary to section B.l.3(b) of
the Code

II.
2.

Notice to the Student of the Hearing

The Hearing was called for 9:45am and the Student did not appear at that time.

The

Tribunal therefore recessed for approximately 15 minutes to allow for a late arrival by the
Student.
3.

The Panel was satisfied that the Student had been properly served, had received notice of
the hearing, and that it had the jurisdiction to proceed without the Student in attendance
for the following reasons:
a. the University has a clear policy on official correspondence that
places the onus on students to maintain and advise the
University on the University information system (ROSI) of a
current and valid postal address, as well as email address;
b.

the charges and notices of hearing were emailed to the
Student at his ROSI email address and his Gmail address;

c. the Notice of Hearing is clear that if the Student does not
attend, the hearing my take place without him and he will not be
entitled to further notice in the proceeding;
2

d. the Student has been using his Gmail address to communicate
with Discipline Counsel and Tribunal Staff as recently as March
6, 2014. The Student had been clearly previously responsive to
emails sent to this email address; and
e. at a previous Proceeding Management Conference (on March
10, 2014 ), the Student - who attended by telephone - was
ordered to provide Discipline Counsel and Tribunal Staff with a
letter from his surgeon by March 20, 2014. He did not comply.
He was also ordered to serve the University with copies of
documents to be used at the hearing no later than 7 days prior
to this hearing. No documents were so served.

Ill.

4.

Summary of Facts

The Panel was advised that the March 2013 charges related to the Letter the Student had
allegedly forged, and the July 2014 charges related to the Dissertation.
Background to the Charges

5.

The background to these charges is set out in the affidavit of David Steenstra, the
Management Department Head in the College of Business at Ferris State University in
Michigan ("Ferris State"). The Student joined Ferris State as an associate professor in
2009.

At that time he had not yet completed his PhD at the University of Toronto. A

condition of the Student's employment with Ferris State was that he would finish his
doctoral degree with the University within one year of being hired. This condition was
subsequently extended through 2012.
6.

In the fall of 2012, the Student was asked to provide evidence of progress on completion
of his doctoral degree. In response, the Student submitted his transcript, the Letter and
the Dissertation.

7.

The Letter was on University of Toronto School of Graduate Studies letterhead and
appeared to be signed by Ms. Leslie Salituro.

The letter stated, inter alia: "You have

completed all academic requirements towards degree completion. Your thesis committee
and external examiner have suggested minor changes and modifications in your

3

dissertation.

You are required to make such changes and submit four copies of the

completed dissertation to the School of Graduate studies by December '10, 2012."
8.

The Panel heard from the following witnesses:
a. Prof. Alan Saks, Professor of Organizational Behaviour and HR
Management, Department of Management, UTS;
b. Ms. Leslie Salituro, Student Services Assistant, U of T School
of Graduate Studies;
c.

Ms. Erin McMahon, Governance and Policy Officer, U of T
School of Graduate Studies; and

d. Prof. Luc de Nil, Vice Dean of Students, U of T School of
Graduate Studies.
The Student's Inability to Complete his PhD
9.

Prof. Saks testified that he has been the Student's supervisor for four years total, until the
end of 2012, when he was removed from the program, for not completing his dissertation.
In his capacity as supervisor, Prof. Saks assisted the Student in laying out a clear
timetable to complete his PhD by December 2012, as he was obliged to do.

In that

timetable, the Student was to have completed his dissertation by early September to
provide time for review and his defence.
10.

On February 28, 2012, the Student provided Prof. Saks with a draft of his dissertation (by
email) to "reassure" him that he had been working on his thesis, but stated that the version
he was attaching was "not ready for [his] review". He also stated that he would clean the
draft up and provide a revised draft by "the end of next week".

11.

As such, Prof. Saks did not review the draft in detail but simply took a look at it to ensure
that there had been some progress made. Despite assurances that a revised copy would
be forthcoming, Prof. Saks never received another draft.

12.

In July 2012, Prof. Saks contacted the Student to follow up on the dissertation and
advised the Student that "Ideally, the committee members should have your complete
dissertation as soon as possible, preferably sometime in August, so that there is time to
provide you with feedback. Please let me know how you are progressing and if you will be
4

able to provide us with the complete dissertation sometime in August." In response, the
Student said that he would have a complete draft ready before August 15.
13.

However, no drafts were received before this date and on August 21, 2012, the Student
wrote saying that he would be sending the thesis within the week and was hoping to visit
Toronto in the next few weeks to get effective feedback. Despite these assurances, Prof.
Saks never received any other drafts and the Student never visited.

14.

On November 6, 2012, Prof. Saks received an email from Prof. Steenstra at Ferris State
inquiring about the Student's anticipated completion date. Following this email, the two
professors had a telephone conversation in which Prof. Saks stated that the Student
should have submitted his dissertation in August and that it was no longer possible for him
to defend in time.

15.

Prof. de Nil - the Dean's Designate - provided testimony regarding the Student's
registration status. He testified that the Student's registration with the University had
lapsed in 2010 and he had been reinstated in 2012. The condition of his reinstatement
was that he was to complete his degree in one year, and failure to do so meant he could
no longer complete his degree absent exceptional circumstances. As such, by the end of
2012, he was no longer eligible to complete his degree.
The Letter

16.

Following the conversation in November between Prof. Steenstra and Prof. Saks in
November 2012, Prof. Steenstra emailed Prof. Saks again to ask about the Letter and
attached a copy of the Letter. In particular, given that the Student's dissertation had not
been submitted to his committee, he asked "why would this letter indicate that only minor
modifications of the dissertation are required by his committee?" This was the first time
that Prof. Saks had seen this letter or been made aware of it.

17.

Prof. Saks forwarded the Letter to the assistant administrator and was advised that the
School of Graduate Studies had not written the letter. He advised Prof. Steenstra of this
fact on November 12, 2012.

18.

On November 21, 2012, Prof. Steenstra advised Prof. Saks that the Student had resigned
from his position at Ferris State.

5

The Dissertation
19.

During this period, it came to Prof. Saks' attention that Prof. Steenstra had been provided
with the Dissertation, that he had reviewed it, and that he had found sections of it to be
plagiarized.

Prof. Saks provided the Panel with evidence of the plagiarism in the

Dissertation. In sum, the Dissertation appears to be a patchwork of paragraphs taken
verbatim from other papers.
20.

Counsel helpfully provided the Panel with a colour coded copy of the Dissertation and the
relevant other papers, identifying the origin of paragraphs in the Dissertation that had
been taken from these papers. It appears that 75% or more of the Dissertation has been
taken from these sources.

The text taken from these sources was verbatim or near

verbatim but was not marked by quotation marks.
21.

Ms. Salituro provided testimony about the allegedly forged Letter. She testified that the
Letter, which was purportedly written by her to the Student, was not written by her at all.
More specifically, Ms. Salituro noted that the formatting of the address was "wrong"; that
she would not be aware of any of the information contained in the letter; that it was indeed
her signature but she did not sign this letter; and that she had never written anything like
this for any student.

22.

Ms. McMahon 1 testified that she wrote the Student an email on December 11, 2014,
inviting the Student to attend a meeting on December 13, 2012 with Vice Dean De Nil to
discuss the allegation that he had forged the Letter. This meeting was rescheduled for
December 18, and following the meeting Ms. McMahon was asked to contact Prof.
Steenstra of Ferris State to obtain additional information regarding the Letter. In January
2013, the Student was advised that his case would be forwarded to the Dean's Designate.

IV.
23.

Finding on Charges
Following deliberation and based on the testimony of Ms. Salituro, Prof. Saks, Ms.
McMahon and Prof. de Nil, and on the evidence in the affidavit of David Steenstra, the
Panel concluded that the following charges had been proven:

1 Ms. McMahon was the Governance and Policy Officer handling cases of academic integrity for the School of

Graduate Studies from April 2012 to August 2014. She was therefore responsible for handling the Student's case.
6

i. one count of knowingly forging or in any other way
altering or falsifying a document or evidence required by
the University of Toronto, or uttering, circulating or
making

use

of

such

forged,

altered

or falsified

document, contrary to section B.l.1(a) of the Code;
ii. one count of knowingly representing as his own the idea
or expression of an idea or work of another, contrary to
section B.1.1(d) of the Code; and
iii. one count of engaging in a form of cheating, academic
dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or misrepresentation
not otherwise described in the Code, in order to obtain
academic credit or other academic advantage of any
kind, contrary to section B.1.3.(b) of the Code.

V.
24.

Penalty
Counsel for the University submitted that given the "shocking" combination of forgery and
plagiarism, the appropriate penalty was the most serious the Panel could impose, namely
an immediate five-year suspension and a recommendation that the Student be expelled.

25.

Counsel focussed on the following characteristics of the Student's actions as relevant to
penalty:
a. The Student chose not to appear and was entirely nonresponsive to the process after March 2014.
b. Because he could no longer be reinstated, the Student was no
longer eligible to complete his degree.
c. The Student took steps to deliberately mislead faculty and staff
at another university with the forged letter, and the scope and
extent of the plagiarism in the Dissertation could have called
into question the reputation of the University.
d. The Student's behavior had fundamentally and irretrievably
broken his relationship with the University.
7

26.

Counsel for the University also made submissions that the plagiarism in the Dissertation
by itself would warrant a recommendation of expulsion. When combined with the forgery,
the actions of the Student rise to the level of "shocking".

27.

Counsel further provided submissions that expulsion of the Student would send a clear
message of both specific and general deterrence. The expulsion would be recorded on
the Student's permanent record and would be published in a notice of decision.

28.

The Panel accepted the submissions of Counsel as to the appropriate penalty, and saw fit
to impose a suspension of five years and to recommend expulsion, as sought by the
University. This severe sanction is necessary in particular because the Student submitted
both the forged Letter and plagiarised Dissertation to another academic organisation,
which could have been misled into believing that the University is lax in its standards.

VI.

29.

Decision of the Panel

At the conclusion of the hearing, the Panel conferred and made the following order:
a. the hearing may proceed in the absence of the Student;
b. the Student is found guilty of:
i.

one count of knowingly forging or in any other way altering or falsifying a
document or evidence required by the University of Toronto, or uttering,
circulating or making use of such forged, altered or falsified document,
contrary to section B.1.1 (a) of the Code;

ii. one count of knowingly representing as his own the idea or expression of
an idea or work of another, contrary to section B.1.1 (d) of the Code; and
iii. one count of engaging in a form of cheating, academic dishonesty or
misconduct, fraud or misrepresentation not otherwise described in the
Code, in order to obtain academic credit or other academic advantage of
any kind, contrary to section B.1.3.(b) of the Code;
c. the following sanctions shall be imposed on the Student:

8

-

--------------~---------------------------~---

i. the Student shall be immediately suspended from the University of
Toronto for a period of up to 5 years from the date of this order or until
Governing Council makes its decision on expulsion, wh ichever comes
first, and that a corresponding notation be placed on his academ ic record
and transcript;
ii. the Tribunal recommends to the President of the University that he
recommend to the Governing Council that the Student be expelled from
the University; and
ii i.

this case shall be reported to the Provost for publication of a notice of the

decision of the Tribunal and the sanctions imposed, with the name of the
student withheld.
DATED at Toronto, May .!l_, 2015

~ --

Sana Halwani, Co-Chair

9

