Case 1077

DATE:

   November 2, 2020

PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v. J.H. (âthe Studentâ)

HEARING DATES:

   August 6, 2020, via Zoom

Panel Members:

   Mr. Dean Embry, Chair
   Professor Kimberley Widger, Faculty Panel Member
   Ms. Emily Hawes, Student Panel Member

Appearances:

   Ms. Tina Lie, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg
   Rothstein LLP

Not in Attendance:

   The Student

In Attendance:

   Ms. Krista Kennedy, Administrative Clerk &Â HearingÂ Secretary, Office
   of the Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances, University of
   Toronto

   TheÂ StudentÂ was charged underÂ s. B.i.1(d) of theâ¯Code of Behaviour
   on Academic Matters, 1995â¯(the âCodeâ) on the basis that heÂ knowingly
   represented an idea or expression of an idea or work of another as his
   own in an assignmentÂ to obtain an academic credit. In the alternative,
   theÂ StudentÂ was charged under ss. B.i.1(b) and B.i.3(b) of
   theÂ CodeÂ on the basis that theÂ StudentÂ knowingly obtained
   unauthorized assistance in connection with an assignmentÂ and knowingly
   engaged in a form of cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud
   or misrepresentationÂ in order toÂ obtain academic credit or other
   academic advantage.

   Neither the Student nor a legal representative of the Student appeared
   at the hearing.â¯The University provided evidence that the Student had
   been served at his ROSI-listed email address with theâ¯chargesâ¯and
   notice of hearing. The Student was subsequentlyÂ providedÂ withÂ an
   opportunity to provide submissionsÂ in relation to the request of
   Assistant Discipline Counsel for thisÂ matter to proceed electronically
   due to the COVID-19 pandemic. The Student did not respondÂ to this
   request and the hearing was ordered to proceed electronically.Â The
   charges,Â notice,Â andÂ otherÂ email correspondence to the
   StudentÂ went unanswered.Â The PanelÂ found thatÂ Â that the Student
   had beenÂ provided withÂ Â reasonableâ¯noticeâ¯and proper service in
   accordance with Rule 14 and 9 of theÂ TribunalâsÂ Rules of Practice and
   ProcedureÂ andâ¯therefore determined it would proceed to hear the case
   on its merits in theÂ StudentâsÂ absence.

   The assignment in questionÂ required theÂ StudentÂ to write an
   interactive tree-map visualization tool in which theÂ StudentÂ was
   provided withÂ aÂ âstarterÂ codeâ which he wasÂ requiredÂ to
   buildÂ upon to create the envisioned tool. TheÂ course in question was
   taught at both the St. George and University of Toronto
   MississaugaÂ (âUTMâ)Â campusesÂ at the same time in which the âstarter
   codeâ was the same. However, there were two non-operative changes made
   to the code to differentiate between the two
   campuses.Â TheÂ StudentâsÂ assignment contained theÂ UTM started code
   insteadÂ of the one provided to theÂ St. George campus students.

   Regarding the charges laid under s. B.i.1(d) of theÂ Code, the
   PanelÂ considered the possibility that theÂ StudentÂ generated his own
   original work and it was somehow shared or accessedÂ by other students
   without his knowledge, however, the Panel foundÂ that the identical
   orÂ substantially similar contents of theÂ StudentâsÂ assignment
   compared toÂ the assignments of the other studentsÂ andÂ the use
   ofÂ the UTMÂ âstarter codeâÂ makes thatÂ possibility unlikely.
   TheÂ Panel found that it was more likelyÂ thanÂ not that
   theÂ StudentÂ was guilty of one count of knowingly representing an idea
   or expression of an idea or work of another as his own, contrary to
   section B.i.1(d) of theÂ Code.Â Given the Panelâs finding, the
   University withdrew the charges underâ¯ss. B.i.1(b) and B.i.3(b).

   In determining sanction,â¯theÂ PanelÂ declined to treatÂ the Studentâs
   lack ofÂ participation in the process as an aggravating factor asÂ it
   is the Panelâs finding that the Studentâs lack of participation is not
   evidenceÂ that the Student has no insight or is not remorsefulÂ and it
   would be improper to infer anything from the lack of participation or
   attendance as there is noÂ evidence before the Panel as to why the
   Student did not participate in the process.Â Without the Studentâs
   participation,Â the PanelÂ found no evidence of mitigating
   circumstances or factorsÂ and accepted the Universityâs submission on
   penalty. Given the seriousness of the offence the PanelÂ imposedÂ the
   following sanctions:Â a final grade of zero in the
   course;Â aÂ two-yearÂ suspensionÂ from the
   University;Â aÂ three-yearÂ notation of the sanction on
   theÂ StudentâsÂ transcript; andÂ aÂ publication by theÂ ProvostÂ of a
   notice of the decision and sanctionsâ¯imposedâ¯with
   theÂ StudentâsÂ name withheld.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/29497
