Case 696

DATE:

   September 12, 2013

PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v. S.A.

Hearing Date(s):

   August 19, 2013

Panel Members:

   Dena Varah, Chair
   Joel Kirsh, Faculty Member
   Saneea Tanvir, Student Member

Appearances:

   Robert Centa, Assistant Discipline Counsel for the University
   Amber Neumann, Student Representative, DLS

In Attendance:

   The Student
   Lucy Gaspini, Manager, Office of Academic Integrity
   Natalie Ramtahal, Coordinator, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty
   Grievances

   Student charged with three offences under s. B.i.1(a) and, in the
   alternative, one offence under s. B.i.3(b) of the Code. The charges
   related to an allegation that the Student had knowingly forged or
   falsified three Student Medical Certificates in support of three
   different petitions for academic accommodation. The Student pleaded
   guilty and the matter proceeded by way of an Agreed Statement of Facts.
   The Panel accepted the Studentâs guilty plea and the University
   withdrew the alternative charge. The parties presented a Joint
   Submission on Penalty. The offences were very serious an involved
   repeated acts of dishonesty. The Student was cooperative throughout the
   process. There was evidence that the Student had a significant learning
   disability. The Student did not rely on her learning disability to
   avoid responsibility and the Panel accepted it as a mitigating factor.
   The suspension proposed in the joint submission was slightly less than
   the five year-suspension imposed in similar cases. The shorter
   suspension was recommended because the Student had met all requirements
   for graduation and would be eligible to graduate immediately following
   suspension. If the suspension were for a full five years, it would
   delay graduation and the practical effect of the penalty would be a
   suspension lasting more than five years. The Panel accepted the joint
   submission and imposed a final grade of zero in three courses, a
   suspension just under five-years, a five-year notation on the Studentâs
   transcript, and ordered that the case be reported to the Provost for
   publication.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12810
