THE UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO

IN THE MATTER OF charges of academic dishonesty made on
December 5, 2012,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on
Academic Matters, 1995,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Act, 1971, S.O.
1971 , c. 56 am.
BETWEEN:

THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
-and-

REASONS FOR DECISION
Hearing Date: Monday, August 19, 2013
Panel Members:
Ms. Dena Varah , Barrister and Solicitor, Chair
Dr. Joel Kirsh, Department of Medicine, Faculty Member
Ms. Saneea Tanvir, Student Member
Appearances:
Ms. Amber Neumann, Lega l Case Worker, Downtown Legal Services
Mr. Robert A. Centa, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Barristers
In Attendance:
Ms. ~ ~ . the Student
Ms. Lucy Gaspini, Manager, Academic Integrity and Affairs , University of Toronto
Mississauga
'
Ms. Natalie Ramtahal , Coordinator, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances,
Office of the Governing Counsel

REASONS FOR DECISION

1.

The Trial Division of the University of Toronto Tribunal was convened on

August 19, 2013 to consider charges advanced by the University of Toronto (the
"University") against ~ ~ (the "Student") under the Code of
Behaviour on Academic Matters (the "Code").
The Charges

2.

The Student is charged with four offences under the Code:
(1)

In November 2011, you knowingly forged or in any other way

altered or falsified a document or evidence required by the University of
Toronto, or uttered, circulated or made use of any such forged, altered or
falsified document, namely, a University of Toronto Student Medical
Certificate, dated November 18, 2011 , which you submitted in support of
your request for academic accommodations or relief in PSY280, contrary
to Section B.1.1 (a) of the Code.
(2)

In February 2012, you knowingly forged or in any other way altered

or falsified a document or evidence required by the University of Toronto,
or uttered, circulated or made use of any such forged, altered or falsified
document, namely, a University of Toronto Student Medical Certificate,
dated February 3, 2012, which you submitted in support of your request
for academic accommodations in PSY252, contrary to Section B.1.1 (a) of
the Code.
(3) In June 2012, you knowingly forged or in any other way altered or
falsified a document or evidence required by the University of Toronto, or
uttered, circulated or made use of any such forged , altered or falsified
document, namely, a University of Toronto Student Medical Certificate,
dated June 20, 2012, which you submitted in support in support of your
2

request for academic accommodations in PSY321, contrary to Section
B.1.1 (a) of the Code.
(4) In the alternative to each of the charges above, you knowingly
engaged in a form of cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud
or misrepresentation not otherwise described in order to obtain academic
credit or other academic advantage of any kind by submitting fal'sified or
forged documents to the University of Toronto in support of various forms
of academic accommodation or relief, contrary to Section B.l.3(b) of the
Code.
Agreed Statement of Facts and Plea

2.

At the outset of the hearing, Discipline Counsel advised that the University

and the Student had entered into an Agreed Statement of Facts. The Agreed
Statement of Facts is attached hereto as Appendix "A".
3.

Pursuant to the Agreed Statement of Facts, the Student pied guilty to

charges (1)-(3) listed above. Discipline Counsel advised that if the Tribunal
accepted the plea on the first three charges then the University withdrew charge
(4).
4.

The Student was in attendance and confirmed that she pied guilty to the

charges as provided for in the Agreed Statement of Facts.
5.

The details of the charges are set out in the Agreed Statement of Facts

and are supported by the documents contained in the Joint Book of Documents.
The charges relate to three petitions filed by the student for academic

3

accommodation on the basis of medical illness. The essential elements of the
charges are set out below.
The First Petition

6.

The first charge relates to a petition filed by the Student in November 2011

in PSY 280. The Student petitioned the Department of Psychology for academic
accommodation for a test she missed on November 18, 2011. The test the
Student missed was worth 23% of the final grade in PSY 280.
7.

In support of this petition, the Student submitted a University of Toronto

Student Medical Certificate, which was purportedly signed by Dr. Nafissa Aptikar
on November 18, 2011 (the "November 18 Certificate").
8.

Without verifying its authenticity, the University accepted the November 18

Certificate and granted the Student's petition for academic accommodation.
9.

The Student admits that she knowingly forged and falsified the November

18 Certificate. The November 18 Certificate was not prepared or signed by Dr.
Nafissa Aptikar.
The Second Petition

10.

The second charge relates to a petition filed by the Student in February

2012 in PSY 252. The Student petitioned the Department of Psychology for
academic accommodation for a test that she missed on February 3, 2012. The
test the Student missed was worth 28% of the grade in PSY 252.

4

11.

In support of this petition, the Student submitted a University of Toronto

Student Medical Certificate, which was purportedly signed by Dr. Nafissa Aptikar
on February 3, 2012 ("February 3 Certificate").
12.

Without verifying its authenticity, the University accepted the February 3

Certificate and granted the Student's petition for academic accommodation.
13.

The Student admits that she knowingly forged and falsified the February 3

Certificate. The February 3 Certificate was not prepared or signed by Dr. Nafissa
Aptikar.
The Third Petition

14.

The third charge relates to a petition filed by the Student in June 2012 in

PSY 321. The Student petitioned the Department of Psychology for academic
accommodation for an assignment she had not handed in due on or about June
20, 2012. The assignment was worth 25% of the final grade in PSY 321.
15.

In support of her petition, the Student submitted a University of Toronto

Student Medical Certificate dated June 20, 2012, which was purportedly
prepared and signed by Dr. Joanne Dunstall ("June 20 Certificate").
16.

Without verifying its authenticity, the University accepted the June 20

Certificate and granted the Student's petition for academic accommodation.

5

17.

The Student admits that she knowingly forged and falsified the June 20

Certificate. The June 20 Certificate was not prepared or signed by Dr. Joanne
Dunstall.
Decision on Charges

18.

The Tribunal reviewed the Agreed Statement of Facts, the documents in

support thereof and considered the submissions of Discipline Counsel. After
deliberating, the Tribunal determined that the facts proved charges 1-3 and
accepted the guilty plea entered into by the Student.
19.

As a result, the University withdrew charge 4. The Tribunal makes no

findings or determinations with respect to this charge.
Penalty

20.

The University and the Student submitted a Joint Submission on Penalty.

The Joint Submission on Penalty is attached to these reasons as Appendix "B".
The Joint Submission on Penalty proposed the following:
(a)

Assign to the Student a final grade of zero for each of: PSY 280,
PSY 252 and PSY 321;

(b)

suspend the Student from the University from the date of the order
of the Tribunal until May 31, 2018; and

(c)

place a notation on the Student's academic record and transcript
for a period of five years from the date of the order.
6

21. In oral submissions, Discipline Counsel emphasized that the seriousness of
the offences as they reflect repeated acts of dishonesty by the Student to gain an
advantage over her peers. He noted that this penalty is consistent with prior
Tribunal decisions on similar offences.
22.

Discipline Counsel referred the Tribunal to the two cases in which

students were charged with and plead guilty to falsifying multiple petitions for
academic accommodation. In both cases, the students received final grades of
zero in the relevant courses, five-year suspensions and notations on their
academic record and transcript for a five-year period (The University of Toronto
v. ~ ~ [ C a s e 642; June 10, 2011]; The University of

via£Case 633; March 22, 2012] ).
23.

Discipline Counsel noted that the proposed suspension in this case is

slightly less than five years because the Student has met all requirements for
graduation and will be eligible to graduate immediately following the suspension,
being June 2018. If the suspension were a full five years it would delay the
Student's graduation and , hence the practical effect of the penalty, for more than
five years.
23.

On behalf of the Student, Ms. Neumann submitted that the Student's

cooperation throughout the process was a mitigating factor. Ms. Neumann also
submitted documentation of the Student's significant learning disability, wh ich
she submitted was another mitigating factor on penalty.

7

00000000000~00--~--------------------------

24.

The Tribunal is mindful that there is a high threshold for rejecting a Joint

Submission on Penalty. To reject a Joint Submission on Penalty, the Tribunal
would have to hold that accepting the Joint Submission on Penalty would bring
the administration of justice into disrepute. This is not such a case.
25.

The offences to which the Student has admitted are very serious.

Submitting even one false petition would be a significant act of dishonesty and a
serious breach of trust. The Student has admitted to submitting three false
petitions in three different courses. In doing so, the Student sought to obtain an
academic advantage on three separate occasions to the detriment of her fellow
students and of the University.
26. The Penalty is fully in line with the precedents for similar types of offenses,
which led to almost identical penalties. The fact that the penalty is slightly under
five years to permit the Student to graduate in June 2018 is warranted in the
circumstances. The Student will have a notation on her academic record and
transcript for a full five-year period.
27. Finally, the mitigating factors in this case further support the reasonableness
of the penalty. The Student cooperated throughout this process, from the very
first allegation to this Tribunal hearing. She has accepted responsibility for her
acts, and although her learning disability was raised as another mitigating factor
on penalty, it was not relied upon to excuse the underlying offences.
28. The Tribunal is therefore satisfied that the Joint Submission on Penalty is
reasonable in view of all of the circumstances of the case, and does not bring the
8

~-.-~~=---==~---------------administration of justice into disrepute. The Tribunal accepts the Joint
Submission on Penalty.

The Tribunal's order to this effect is attached as

Appendix "C".

..-rt...Dated at Toronto, this jl day of September, 2013,

Dena \/arah, Co-Chair

9

APPENDIX A

THE UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO

IN THE MATTER OF charges of academic dishonesty filed on December 5, 2012,

AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters, 1995,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Act, 1971 , S.O. 1971 , c. 56 as am. S.O. 1978, c. 88

BETWEEN:
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO

- and-

AGREED STATEMENT OF FACTS
1.

This hearing arises out of charges of academic misconduct filed by the Provost of the

University of Toronto (the "Provost") under the Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters
("Code"). For the purposes of this hearing, the Provost and ~ ~ ("Ms. ~

')

have prepared this Agreed Statement of Facts ("ASP') and a joint book of documents ("JBD").
The Provost and Ms. ~ agree that:
(a)

each document contained in the JBD may be admitted into evidence at

the Tribunal for all purposes, including to prove the truth of the document's
contents, without further need to prove the document; and
(b)

if a document indicates that it was sent or received by someone, that is

prima facie proof that the document was sent and received as indicated.

Doc 922044 v2

---------------

--

- - -- - - - - - - - - - -- - -- - -- -- - - -

A.

Notice of hearing

2.

Ms. M - admits that she received reasonable notice of the hearing. The notice of

hearing is included in the JBD at Tab 1.

B.

Charges and guilty plea

3.

Ms. ~ admits that she received a copy of the charges filed by the Provost on

December 5, 2012, which are found at JBD Tab 2. Ms. ~ waives the reading of the
charges filed against her, and pleads guilty to all four of the charges filed by the Provost.
4.

If the Tribunal convicts Ms. ~ on any one of charges #1 - #3, the Provost will

withdraw charge #4.
5.

A copy of Ms. ~ • s academic record, dated July 18, 2013, is found in the JBD at

Tab 3. At all material times, Ms. M - was a student member of the University of Toronto
Mississauga, within the meaning of the Code. Ms. M - acknowledges that the University
Tribunal has jurisdiction over her and that the Code.

C.

Petition filed in November 2011

6.

In September 2011, Mr. ~ enrolled in PSY 280. A copy of the syllabus for PSY

280 is included in the JBD at Tab 4.
7.

In November 2011, Ms. ~ petitioned the Department of Psychology for academic

accommodation for a test she missed on November 18, 2011. The test Ms. ~ missed
was worth 23% of the final grade in PSY 280.
8.

In support of this petition, Ms. ~ submitted a University of Toronto Student

Medical Certificate, which was purportedly signed by Dr. Nafissa Aptikar on November 18, 2011
("November 18 Certificate"). A copy of the November 18 Certificate is included in the JBD at
Tab 5.
Doc 922044 v2

9.

The University accepted the November 18 Certificate without confirming its authenticity,

and granted Ms. ~ s petition for academic accommodation.
10.

Ms. M - admits that she knowingly forged and falsified the November 18 Certificate,

and circulated it to support her request for academic accommodation. Ms. ~ admits that
Dr. Aptikar neither prepared nor signed the November 18 Certificate.

D.

Petition filed in February 2012

11.

In January 2012, Ms. ~ enrolled in PSY 252. A copy of the syllabus for PSY 252

is included in the JBD at Tab 6.
12.

In February 2012, Ms. ~ petitioned the Department of Psychology for academic

accommodation for a test that she missed on February 3, 2012. The test M s . ~ missed
was worth 28% of the grade in PSY 252.
13.

In support of this petition, Ms. M - submitted a University of Toronto Student

Medical Certificate, which was purportedly signed by Dr. Nafissa Aptikar on February 3, 2012
("February 3 Certificate"). A copy of the February 3 Certificate is included in the JBD at Tab 7.
14.

The University accepted the February 3, Certificate without confirming its authenticity

and granted Ms. ~ s petition for academic accommodation.
15.

Ms. ~ admits that she knowingly forged and falsified the February 3 Certificate,

and circulated it to obtain an academic advantage. She admits that Dr. Aptikar neither prepared
nor signed the February 3 Certificate.

E.

Petition filed in June 2012

16.

In May 2012, M s . ~ enrolled in PSY 321. A copy of the course syllabus for PSY

321 is included in the JBD at Tab 8.

Doc 922044 v2

17.

In June 2012, Ms. M - petitioned the Department of Psychology for academic

accommodation in PSY 321. Ms. M - had not handed in an assignment due on or about
June 20, 2012, and which was worth 25% of the final grade in PSY 321.
18.

In support of her petition, Ms. ~ submitted a University of Toronto Student

Medical Certificate dated June 20, 2012, which was purportedly prepared and signed by Dr.
Joanne Dunstall ("June 20 Certificate"). A copy of the June 20 Certificate is included in the JBD
at Tab 9.
19.

Ms. ~ admits that she knowingly forged and falsified the June 20 certificate and

circulated it to obtain an academic advantage. Ms. ~ admits that Dr. Dunstall did not
prepare or sign the certificate.
F.

General Admissions

20.

Ms. M - admits that she knowingly circulated all of the false information and the

forged or falsified documents to the University:
(a)

in order to obtain an academic advantage;

(b)

to mislead the University and its staff and faculty; and

(c)

expecting that the University and its staff and faculty would rely on this

information to their detriment and would provide her with an academic
advantage.
21.

On October 9, 2012, Ms. ~ met with Professor Scott Graham, Dean's Designate

for Academic Integrity, to discuss the allegations that she had violated the Code. During this
meeting, Ms. M - admitted that she had committed the academic offences described
above.

Doc 922044 v2

22.

M-

Ms. ~ acknowledges that she is signing this ASF freely and voluntarily, with the

benefit of legal counsel, and knowing the potential consequences she faces. Ms.

acknowledges that the Provost has provided her with no assurances regarding what sanction
the Provost may request the Tribunal to impose in this case.

Signed on August

, 2013.

Signed on August

llo, 2013.
Robert A. Genta
Assistant Discipline Counsel
University of Toronto

~

THE UNIVEiRSe'T'if T~~BBi\i~l
UNIVEPuSil V f~J~:-: TfN::\j~\JTQi

·the ..••......
U•\\lve:·t
s 1t--t!.J
,..~.. c..l ......
•• • 1. . . . . ... . ., • • oo••········
this

Iq day of R{Jlt U~1
Cl,~
• fl • •

Doc 922044 v2

p '~

....

, 20.8. ...

.7-/

't.tt.v.

i.. ••• •••• • •• • • • • •

APPENDIX B

THE UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO

IN THE MATTER OF charges of academic dishonesty filed on December 5, 2012,
AND IN .T HE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters, 1995,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Act, 1971, S .O. 1971, c. 56 as am. S.O. 1978, c. 88

BETWEEN:
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO

-and -

JOINT SUBMISSION ON PENALTY

1.

The Provost of the Unive rsity of Toronto ("Provost") and Ms. ~

submit that the appropriate penalty in all of the circumstances of this case is that
the Tribunal:
(a)

assign a final grade of zero for each of: PSY 280, PSY 252 and
PSY 321;

(b)

suspend Ms. ~ from the University from the date of the
order of the Tribunal until May 31, 2018; and

(c)

place a notation on her academic record and transcript for a period
of five years from the date of the order.

2.

The Provost and Ms. ~ submit that the Tribunal should report this

case to the Provost to publish a notice of Tribunal's decision and the sanctions
imposed with the student's name withheld.
3.

Ms. ~ acknowledges that the Provost has advised her to obtain

independent legal advice before signing this Joint Submission on Penalty and
that she has done so.
Signed in Toronto on August

, 2013.

Signed in Toronto on August

{b , 2013.

5 ~---

Robert A. Genta
Assistant Discipline Counsel
University of Toronto

Doc 935950 v1

B

THE UNtVEIRSiTV TRU3lJNAl
UNiVERsrrv OF TOt~ONTO
AN.D
This Exhibit is produced by
, J' / ,

vl~r

-<';) V"}"l'.'"\l

. ' I .tr ..,,:;:.
... .,..r. "............... ....... .
the . . ..•. ..I.P1 \."-1..

this

~

\Ci

day of fltlUH.Agi

, 20••~
-.; •• •

✓ ·· ,,l
............ ..............I,"...,u
. . . ... . . .., ..

X

APPENDIX C

THE UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO

IN THE MATTER OF charges of academic dishonesty made on December 5, 2012,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University ofToronto Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters, 1995,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Act, 1971, S.O. 1971, c. 56 am.

BETWEEN:
THE UNIVERSITY OF TO~ONTO

- and-

ORDER
On August 19, 2013, after reading the agreed statement of facts, the joint book of
documents, the agreed statement of facts on penalty, the joint submission on penalty,
and hearing any other evidence called, and hearing submissions by disci"pline counsel
and the representative of the student, the University Tribunal orders:

1.

THAT Ms. ~ is found guilty of three counts of the academic offence of

forging or falsifying a document required by the University of Toronto, or circulating such
a document, contrary to section 8.1.1 (a) of the Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters;
2.

THAT the following sanctions shall be imposed on Ms. ~
(a)

:

she shall receive a final grade of zero in each of the courses PSY 280,
PSY 252 and PSY 321;

(b)

she shall be suspended from·the University from the date of this order until
May 31 , 2018; and

(c)

that a notation be placed on her academic record and transcript for a
period of five years from the date of this order;

3.

THAT this case shall be reported to the Provost for publication of a notice of the

decision of the Tribunal and the sanctions imposed, with the name of the student
withheld.

All of which is ordered on August 19, 2013,

Ms. Dena Varah, Chair

Dr. Joel Kirsh, Faculty Panel Member

Ms. Saneea Tanvir, Student Panel Member

Doc 941648 v1

