Case 571

DATE:

   February 3, 2010

PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v. S.H.

Hearing Date(s):

   November 18, 2010

Panel Members:

   Julie Hannaford, Chair
   Professor Graeme Hirst, Faculty Member
   Elena Kuzmin, Student Member

Appearances:

   Rob Centa, Assistant Discipline Counsel for the University
   Noah Craven, DLS for the Student
   Eleanor Irwin, Dean‚s Designate
   S.H., the Student

   Student charged under s. B.I.1(d) of the Code. The Student plead guilty
   to the charge that she knowingly represented an idea that was not her
   own in an essay. An Agreed Statement of Fact and Joint Submission of
   Penalty was submitted by the Student and the University agreeing to a
   final grade of zero in the course, a three-year suspension, a
   three-year notation on her transcript and a report to the Provost
   regarding this case. The Student had committed two previous academic
   offences. First, the Student had admitted to having brought
   unauthorized aids into an examination three years prior. The Student
   received a final grade of zero in the course for said offence. Second,
   the Student admitted to plagiarizing an essay two years prior for which
   she received a final grade of zero in the course and a four month
   suspension. As part of the Joint Submission, the Student agreed to
   complete a program through the University of Toronto Scarborough Center
   for Teaching and Learning to undertake five workshops including
   instruction on ‚Common Types of Academic Assignments‚ and the ‚Elements
   of Writing. The Panel was satisfied with the joint submission, noting
   the University and the Student had approached the undertaking in a
   conscientious way. The Panel held it was not appropriate to reject a
   joint submission that includes an undertaking because it is novel or
   because the rehabilitative end cannot be guaranteed. The Panel further
   held that the novel joint submission of the University and the Student
   was to be respected and accorded great deference and agreed with the
   terms of the penalty.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/13002
