Case 1313

FILE:

   Case # 1313 (2022-2023)

DATE:

   October 31, 2022

PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v. Y.P. (‚the Student‚)

HEARING DATE(S):

   August 12, 2022, via Zoom

PANEL MEMBERS:

   Michelle Henry, Chair

   Professor George Cree, Faculty Panel Member

   Karim Wanes, Student Panel Member

APPEARANCES:

   Tina Lie, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg
   Rothstein LLP

HEARING SECRETARY:

   Christopher Lang, Director, Office of Appeals, Discipline and Faculty
   Grievances

   The Student was charged with one count under section B.i.1(d) of the
   Code for knowingly representing as their own an idea or expression of
   an idea or work of another in an assignment. Alternatively, they were
   also charged with one count under section B.i.1(b) of the Code for
   knowingly obtaining unauthorized assistance in connection with an
   assignment. In the further alternative, they were charged for knowingly
   engaging in a form of cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct,
   fraud or misrepresentation not otherwise described in the Code to
   obtain academic credit or other academic advantage in connection with
   an assignment, contrary to section B.i.3(b) of the Code.

   The Student did not appear at the hearing. The Panel proceeded to hear
   the case on its merits in the Student‚s absence because it concluded
   that the Student was given reasonable notice of the hearing in
   accordance with the notice requirements set out in the Statutory Powers
   Procedure Act and the Tribunal‚s Rules of Practice and Procedure .
   Furthermore, under the University‚s Policy on Official Correspondence
   with Students , students are responsible for maintaining a current and
   valid postal address and a University-issued email account in the
   Repository of Student Information (‚ROSI‚). They are expected to
   monitor and retrieve their mail, including electronic messaging
   accounts issued to them by the University, frequently and consistently.
   Affidavits filed by the University revealed that the Student was served
   with various documents, including the notice of hearing.

   The Panel entered a finding of guilt with respect to the charge under
   section B.i.1(d) of the Code. The affidavit evidence from a professor
   revealed that the Student had submitted an assignment that was
   virtually identical to another student‚s assignment. The students were
   required to complete their assignments independently. In the
   professor‚s experience, the degree of similarity between the
   assignments submitted by both students was highly suspicious, as the
   chances of two students independently developing such similar solutions
   were virtually zero. Given the Panel‚s finding of guilt, the University
   withdrew the second and third charges .

   In determining sanction, the Panel noted that the student did not have
   a prior record of academic offences. It considered the serious and
   deliberate nature of the offence and the detriment to the University.
   It also highlighted that plagiarism and the use of third-party sources
   are considered serious offences that strike at the heart of academic
   integrity. Given the Student had not participated in the hearing, there
   was no evidence of mitigating or extenuating circumstances. The Panel
   commented that the University and the Tribunal must send a strong
   message to other students that such misconduct is considered a serious
   offence. The Panel imposed the following sanctions: a grade of zero in
   the course; a two-year suspension; a three-year notation on the
   Student's transcript, and a report to the Provost for publication.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/30746
