Case #710

   DATE: October 1, 2014
   PARTIES: University of Toronto v S.N.
   Hearing Date(s): September 17, 2014
   Panel Members:
   Roslyn Tsao, Chair
   Maria Rozakis-Adcock, Faculty Member
   Alice Zhu, Student Member
   Appearances:
   Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel
   Eleanor Irwin, Deanâs Designate, UTS
   Dan Riggs, Instructor
   In Attendance:
   The Student
   Christopher Lang, Director, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances
   Trial Division â s. B.i.1(a) of the Code â forged document required by
   the University â Scantron exam sheet â Student attended hearing â
   Â not-guilty plea â delayed medical evidence â inconsistent evidence â
   Â finding of guilt â five-year suspension; grade of zero in courses;
   two year suspension; notation on transcript for three years â report to
   Provost for publication
   The Student was charged with an offence under s. B.i.1(a) , in the
   alternative, an offence under s. B.i.3(a) , and, in the alternative, an
   offence under s. B.i.3(b) of the Code . The Student pleaded not guilty
   to each charge.
   The course instructor testified that, following an exam, the Student
   contacted him to discuss his grade. The Student claimed that he had not
   written the exam, as he had left after signing in on a form due to
   illness. Upon investigation the instructor found that the only exam
   answer sheet not matching the sign in form shared many similarities
   with the Studentâs name and handwriting. After unsuccessfully trying to
   set up a follow-up meeting with the Student, the instructor forwarded
   the matter to the Deanâs Designate. The Designate met with the Student
   who informed her that he had left the exam due to a serious illness
   which prevented him from returning to school. The Designate informed
   him she would be forwarding the matter to the Provost and requested
   medical evidence to attach to his file. Over the course of several
   months the Designate was in contact with the Student and his girlfriend
   and received differing information as to the type of illness the
   Student was suffering from. Approximately five months later the
   Designate received a signed medical note from a doctor stating the
   Student suffered from anxiety, not the same illness the Student or his
   girlfriend had initially described. Further, there were inconsistencies
   in the Studentâs deferral petitions.
   The Student testified and was cross-examined and further
   inconsistencies and questions were raised as to the type of illness he
   suffered from, details the day of the final exam, and details of an
   adjournment of an earlier hearing date.
   The Panel found the Studentâs testimony unconvincing on several issues
   including his misrepresentation of having âmissedâ the exam when his
   attendance was confirmed. The Panel found the Student guilty of Charge
   1 and the alternative charges were dropped.
   The University sought a penalty of a final grade of zero in the course,
   a suspension of two years, and a notation on the Studentâs transcript
   for two years. The Panel then considered penalty factors including that
   it was the Studentâs first offence and found the Universityâs suggested
   penalty to be fair and appropriate. The Panel imposed grade of zero in
   the course, a suspension of two years, a notation on the Studentâs
   transcript for two years, and that the case be reported to the Provost
   for publication.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12858
