UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
GOVERNING COUNCIL
Report # 407 of the Academic Appeals Committee
December 12, 2019
To the Academic Board
University of Toronto.
Your Committee reports that it held a hearing on Thursday, November 20, 2019, at which
the following members were present:
Professor Malcolm Thorburn (Chair)
Professor Douglas McDougall, Faculty Governor
Ms. Susan Froom, Student Governor
Hearing Secretary:
Ms. Krista Kennedy, Administrative Clerk and Hearing Secretary, Appeals,
Discipline and Faculty Grievances
Appearances:
For the Student Appellant:
Mr. N. B. (“the Student”)
For the University of Toronto Scarborough (“UTSC”):
Professor Mark Schmuckler, Vice-Dean Undergraduate
Dr. Curtis Cole, Registrar and Assistant Dean Enrollment Management

The Appeal
This is an appeal of a decision of the UTSC Subcommittee on Academic Appeals (“the
Subcommittee”) rendered on 24 July 2018 with reasons written by the Chair, Professor
Nick Cheng. In the Subcommittee’s decision, they denied the Student’s appeal to be
awarded a four-year honours bachelor of science (HBSc) degree in geography.
This appeal raises two distinct issues. The first is the procedural issue of timeliness. The
Student failed to appeal the Subcommittee’s decision within the prescribed time of 90 days
from the time of the decision. The deadline for filing an appeal would have been on 22
October 2018; the Student filed his appeal only on June 10, 2019 – roughly eight months
past the deadline for appeal.

1

The second issue concerns the merits of the appeal. It arises only should the Student
succeed on the issue of timeliness. He argues that the Subcommittee’s decision of July 24,
2018 denying his request to be awarded a four-year geography HBSc should be overturned.
This Committee agreed to hear submissions both on timeliness and on the merits of the
appeal.
Timeliness
On the issue of timeliness, the Student argued that he was delayed in submitting his appeal,
first, because he experienced printer problems and, second, because he became busy with
other matters. When pressed to say whether he had attempted to obtain the assistance of
Downtown Legal Services with his appeal, the Student said that he had called them, but
they had told him that there were no services for students. He was unable to remember the
name of the person who had told him this.
Professor Schmuckler for UTSC pointed out that all materials relevant to the appeal were
available online and fully readable. He insisted that the printer issues and the Student’s
busyness with other matters were not extenuating circumstances. These were precisely the
sorts of matters that the 90-day time for appealing were designed to consider.
We agree with UTSC on this matter. The Student’s appeal must be barred on grounds of
timeliness. His delay was egregious – almost eight months late – and without any
reasonable reason. To waive the issue of timeliness in this case would be tantamount to
overruling the deadlines themselves. We are not willing to do so.
In virtue of our finding on timeline, our reasons below on the merits of the appeal are moot.
Nevertheless, we feel it is important to address some of the concerns raised on the merits
of this appeal all the same, for two reasons. First, it is important to explain to the Student
precisely why his request is being denied. Although he filed his appeal much too late, the
original reasons for judgment from the Subcommittee were very brief and unilluminating.
Second, considering the merits of this appeal allows us to provide some guidance to the
Student toward another, different avenue that might be of assistance to him.
The Facts
Because of the thinness of the submissions of both parties, the statement of the facts set out
here are somewhat spotty. We believe that the facts presented here are nevertheless
sufficient to justify our reasons for decision.
The Student enrolled at the University of Toronto Scarborough (UTSC) in 1981 and he
continued to study there, on and off, until 1993. He was suspended from the program at
some point and was eventually permitted to re-enrol, which he did in the winter of 1987.
He was again suspended from the program in the winter of 1989. He eventually returned
to UTSC and continued to study there until 1993. In 2015, he was awarded a B.A. degree.
Over the course of his studies, the Student successfully completed 22 academic credits.
2

The parties agree that the 1981 UTSC academic calendar is the correct standard by which
to determine whether the Student met the requirements of a four-year HBSc. According to
that calendar, there are five specific requirements for the HBSc degree in geography:
(1) pass at least twenty courses;
(2) among these, pass at least thirteen B- or C-level courses;
(3) complete a specialist program; or two major programs; or a major and a college
program;
(4) earn a grade of “C-” of better in at least fourteen courses, including at least two Bof C-level courses;
(5) Earn a cumulative grade-point average of 1.5;
(6) For a bachelor of science degree, pass at least nine B-level and C-level courses in
science.
According to UTSC, the Student completed (1), (2), (4), and (5) from this list, but not (3)
and (6).
The Student does not have the credits for a specialist in geography, as required under (3).
As outlined in a document submitted to the Committee on November 20, 2019, there are
three requirements for this program (either in human settlements or in environmental
geography) that the Student has not completed.
The Student also does not have the B- or C-level credits required for an honours bachelor
of science degree as set out in item (6) from this list. He has completed 5.5 science credits
toward the nine required under item (6), but UTSC is willing to count a further course
(zoology 200Y) toward this total, bringing it up to 6.5 credits. Even with this concession,
however, the Student is not close to meeting requirement (6) of the HBSc degree.
In his oral submissions, the Student did not contest the description of the program
requirements or his progress toward meeting them as set out by UTSC. He simply insisted
that he was not far from the requirements. He mentioned that were he to be given credit for
some of the courses he failed, he might be somewhat closer to the degree requirements for
the HBSc in geography.
Decisions Below
The Subcommittee rejected the Student’s request to be awarded a four-year HBSc degree
with very few reasons provided. The Subcommittee simply stated that “[d]egrees are
granted to students when academic requirements are met, regardless of environmental
factors such as faculty/staff strikes, inefficient audio and visual technological systems, and
building maintenance disruptions. Furthermore, the Subcommittee firmly believes that
granting a degree that was not earned would devalue the credentials, which are granted to
students by the University judiciously.”

3

It is clear that, on the merits, this appeal would fail. The Student has not made the case that
he has met the requirements for the four-year HBSc degree that he is seeking. He has also
failed to provide any good reason for overturning this decision. In his notice of appeal, he
argues that “facts must be focused on (eg. science background of courses/programs, similar
content courses). Also, that some programs have a curricullum [sic] that incorporated a
similar body of courses.” He has not provided any reason why this Committee ought to
look beyond the categorisation of courses given to them in the academic calendar. Further,
the Committee was not given any reason why the Student’s own circumstances (“a lack of
suitable career employment” that motivate him “to confirm and rejuvenate the repertoire
of qualifications …”) should alter its understanding of his qualifications for the degree he
seeks.
Decision
The Committee dismisses this appeal on the issue of timeliness. The Student’s appeal is
well outside the prescribed time limit, without any suitable explanation. Further, however,
this Committee is of the view that were we to proceed to the merits, we would dismiss the
appeal on these grounds, as well. The Student is not close to meeting the requirements for
the degree he is seeking. Should he wish to earn the degree, the UTSC has made clear that
he is welcome to enrol and obtain the required courses.
Additional Remarks
UTSC, in its oral submissions, suggested that the Student has met the requirements of a
three-year BSc degree. They indicated that although they were not in a position to
guarantee that he could exchange his three-year BA for a three-year BSc, they indicated
that they saw no obstacle to his doing so. Since this would go some way toward meeting
the Student’s objective, and would do so consistently with the UTSC academic calendar’s
demands, we urge the Student to pursue this option.
This committee would like to add, as a final comment on this process, that it would have
been useful for the Subcommittee to have taken the time, as we have done, to make clear
precisely why the Student’s request was being denied and what other options were
available to him. Where this sort of guidance is available at first instance, it may satisfy the
parties and avoid further appeals to this Committee.

4

