Report 407

   DATE : December 12, 2019

   PARTIES : N.B. (the âStudentâ) v. UTSC

   HEARING DATE :Â N/AÂ (written submissions only)

   Chair:
   Professor Malcolm Thorburn

   Appearances:
   For the Student Appellant:
   Mr. N.B. (the âStudentâ)

   For UTSC:
   Professor Mark Schmuckler, Vice-Dean, Undergraduate

   Dr. Curtis Cole, Registrar and Assistant Dean Enrollment Management

   RequestÂ toÂ beÂ awardedÂ a four-yearÂ honoursÂ bachelor of
   scienceÂ (HBSc) degree in geography.Â This matterÂ concernsÂ the
   decision of theÂ SubcommitteeÂ on Academic AppealsÂ denying
   theÂ StudentâsÂ appeal to be awarded aÂ four-year honoursÂ bachelor of
   scienceÂ (HBSc).Â ItÂ raises a procedural issue, as well as a
   substantive one.

   TheÂ procedural issueÂ involves theÂ Studentâs delay in
   appealingÂ theÂ SubcommitteeâsÂ decision.Â Due to printerÂ problems and
   his busyness with other matters,Â theÂ StudentÂ appealedÂ the decision
   approximatelyÂ eight months after theÂ prescribedÂ 90-day deadline.Â In
   addressing theÂ timeliness issue, theÂ CommitteeÂ agreed with
   theÂ UniversityâsÂ followingÂ comments: (1)Â all materials relevant to
   the appeal were available online and fully readable; (2)Â the printer
   issues and the Studentâs busyness with other matters were not
   extenuating circumstances; and (3)Â these were precisely the sorts of
   matters that the 90-day time for appealing were designed to
   consider.Â TheÂ CommitteeÂ concluded thatÂ the Studentâs appeal must be
   barred on grounds of timelinessÂ and found that
   theÂ delayÂ isÂ egregious and without any reasonable reason. Further,
   theÂ CommitteeÂ commented that to waive the issue of timeliness in this
   case would be tantamount to overruling the deadlines themselves.

   Given itsÂ finding on timeliness,Â theÂ CommitteeÂ indicatedÂ that
   itsÂ reasonsÂ on the meritsÂ areÂ moot. ItÂ addressed theÂ meritsÂ of
   the appealÂ to explainÂ to the Student why his request is being
   deniedÂ andÂ to provide him withÂ some
   guidance.Â TheÂ CommitteeÂ ultimatelyÂ heldÂ that the StudentÂ is not
   close to meeting the requirements for the degree he is seeking.

   Finally, theÂ CommitteeÂ noted that theÂ original reasons for judgment
   from the Subcommittee were very brief and unilluminating
   andÂ commentedÂ that it would have been useful for the Subcommittee to
   have taken the timeÂ to make clear precisely why the Studentâs
   requestÂ had beenÂ denied and what other options were available to
   him.Â Appeal dismissed.
   [1]View Report

References

   1. file:///media/28845
