Case 01-02-01 - Appeal

DATE:

   November 19, 2001

PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v. Mr. P. (Applicant, Respondent by
   cross-application)

Hearing Date(s):

   October 4, 2001

Board Members:

   C. Anthony Keith, Q.C., Senior Chair

Appearances:

   Gary E. Shortliffe, for Applicant
   Lily I. Harmer, for Respondent

   Application by the Student for an extension of time to bring his appeal
   from a Tribunal decision. The University brought a cross-application,
   pursuant to section E. 10 of the Code, requesting that any extension of
   time not operate as a stay of the decision of the Tribunal below. The
   Student claimed that while no formal notice of appeal was delivered to
   the Secretary of the Tribunal within the time provided by E.5 of the
   Code, he understood from his conversations with the then-Secretary that
   he should proceed with his attempts to obtain legal representation and
   when he had secured that legal representation he should then file a
   formal notice. The issue before the Chair was whether or not the
   circumstances described by the Student would reasonably fall within the
   language of the Code and constitute âexceptional circumstancesâ so that
   the Chair could exercise his power under s. E.5 of the Code and enlarge
   the time for appeal upon application made either before or after the
   expiry of time provided. The Chair considered the Code of Student
   Conduct and previous Tribunal decisions found that the Code of Student
   Conduct did not contain the phrase âexceptional circumstancesâ or any
   provision for the extension of time and that there were no previous
   decisions of the Tribunal addressing the issue. The Chair considered
   the general jurisprudence on the issue of administrative tribunals and
   extensions of time and found that the use of imperative language found
   the in Code did not by itself render time limits mandatory. The Chair
   considered the chronology of events and the submissions of the Student,
   and affidavit evidence which indicated his understanding of what was
   expected of him as a result of a conversation with an employee
   representing the University, and the fact that the University had not
   decided to controvert by cross-examination or filing additional
   material, and found that on the circumstances of the case alone, there
   were exceptional circumstances upon which to exercise the power under
   the enactment to enlarge the time for appeal. The Universityâs did not
   oppose the Studentâs application provided that certain conditions were
   incorporated into the order granting an extension of time. The Chair
   considered the Studentâs acquiescence to the conditions and ordered
   that an extension for the time of appeal be granted, conditional upon:
   the appeal of the Tribunal decision would not operate as a stay of that
   decision, pursuant to s. E.10 of the Code; the granting of leave to
   appeal would not operate so as to prevent the University from raising
   as an issue on the appeal any practical difficulties which may arise in
   terms of presenting the necessary witnesses to deal with any new
   hearing the appellant tribunal might see fit to order; and the parties
   were to abide by a strict timetable. The Chair ordered that any
   submissions as to costs of the hearing would be reserved to the Chair
   of the Appeal Tribunal.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/30322
