FILE: 2001/02-01
Trial: 2000/01-07

Dated: October 4, 2001
Written Copy Released: November 19, 2001

UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
DISCIPLINE APPEALS BOARD
B E T W E E N:

Mr. P.

Gary E. Shortliffe
for the applicant

Applicant
(Respondent by cross-application)

- and -

THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO

Lily I. Harmer
For the Respondent

Respondent
(Applicant by cross-application)
HEARD: October 4, 2001

1
REASONS FOR DECISION 1

SENIOR CHAIR KEITH:

[1]

This is an application by Mr. P., a student at the University, for an extension

of time within which he may bring his appeal from a decision of the University
Tribunal that was announced orally at the conclusion of the hearing on October 10th,
2000. Formal written notice dated November 17th, 2000, was delivered to Mr. P. and
received by him on November 19th, 2000 and by counsel for the University on
November 21st, 2000.

[2]

Counsel for the University of Toronto has brought a cross-application

pursuant to section E. 10 of the Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters requesting
that any extension of time not operate as a stay of the decision of the tribunal below.

[3]

By the provisions of section E.5 of the Code of Behaviour on Academic

Matters, an appeal from a decision of the Tribunal shall be made by filing written
notice with the Secretary within 21 days after the giving of notice of the decision of
the Tribunal. The section goes on to indicate what the contents of the notice of
appeal should be. It is common ground that no formal notice of appeal was delivered
to the secretary within that time, although it is alleged by Mr. P. in his affidavit that
on a number of occasions (which unfortunately cannot be identified) he spoke with
the then-Secretary of the Tribunal at the University and that he understood from what
he was told in those conversations that he should proceed with his attempts to obtain

1

Note: Subsequent to the release of this ruling, Mr. Shortliffe withdrew the applicant’s appeal.

2
legal representation and when he had secured that legal representation he should then
file a formal notice.

[4]

The first formal indication of an intention to appeal, that is, an indication in

writing, was contained in a letter from Mr. P.’s present counsel dated April 6th, 2001.
When that communication was brought to my attention, I indicated to the Secretary
that in view of the requirements of section E.5 of the enactment, counsel should be
advised to make a formal application so that a hearing could be scheduled. Those
requirements are simply that in “exceptional circumstances” the Senior Chair shall
have the power to enlarge the time for appeal upon application made either before or
after the expiry of that time. There is no further indication in the enactment as to the
meaning of the phrase “exceptional circumstances”. I have noted that the companion
act, the Code of Student Conduct, does not contain that phrase nor, indeed, any
provision for the extension of time.

[5]

The issue before this hearing is therefore whether or not the circumstances

described would reasonably fall within the language of the enactment and constitute
exceptional circumstances. I have attempted to locate any previous decisions of the
Tribunal on this point without success. The general jurisprudence on the issue of
administrative tribunals and extensions of time, without going into detail, suggest that
the use of imperative language such as appears in this enactment, does not by itself
render time limits mandatory, rather that the provisions in question must be construed
to take into consideration a number of factors among which are, for example, the

3
policy basis of the enactment, the practical effect of non-compliance, whether the
requirement is intended to protect individual rights, and certainly to some extent the
degree to which either party to the procedure will be seriously inconvenienced if the
extension is granted.

[6]

In these circumstances having considered the relevant chronology of events

and the submissions of counsel for Mr. P., and in particular the affidavit evidence
which indicates his understanding of what was expected of him as a result of a
conversation with an employee representing the University, and the fact that counsel
for the University has not seen fit to controvert either by cross-examination or filing
additional material, I am prepared to find on the circumstances of this case alone that
there were exceptional circumstances upon which I can and have the power under the
enactment to enlarge the time for appeal. This is no way to be taken as a general
statement that in all similar circumstances such a decision would be reached as I am
satisfied that the intention of the enactment is to require those seeking to appeal
Tribunal decisions to do so promptly. Although there is no evidence of such before
me, I can think of several reasons why the University would wish to have such a
scheme in place. An appeal requires the preparation of transcripts. The time taken up
by hearing appeals may be extensive. Appeals operate as a stay of the order appealed
from unless otherwise ordered and this may have a serious effect upon the status of
the appellant party as a student of the University in terms of enrolling in further
courses or simply being a continuing part of the University community in the
situation such as we have here where the Tribunal of first instance has ordered a

4
lengthy suspension. It is therefore clear to me that there is a sensible and reasonable
basis for such a regulation within the context of the university community and the
practical effect of non-compliance with the requirements of the enactment may serve
to cause prejudice.

[7]

In the present circumstances, however, the University has clearly indicated

that it does not oppose the application provided that certain conditions can be
incorporated into the order granting an extension of time. Counsel for the appellant
has clearly indicated that he does not oppose the nature, or the imposition, of those
conditions.

[8]

There will therefore be an order granting an extension for the time to appeal,

conditional upon the following:

1.

Firstly, pursuant to section E.10 of the enactment, the appeal of the
decision of the Tribunal of October 10th, 2000 will not operate as a
stay of that decision.

2.

Secondly, the granting of leave to appeal will not operate so as to
prevent the University from raising as an issue on the appeal any
practical difficulties which may arise in terms of presenting the
necessary witnesses to deal with any new hearing the appellant
tribunal might see fit to order. In other words, the granting of this

5
order sought will not operate so as to prevent or prohibit the Provost of
the University from making that submission at the appeal hearing
should the appeal go forward.

3.

A further condition of the order granting an extension of time is that
the parties will abide by a strict timetable, which is imposed as part of
this order and which will commence to run from this date:

i.

Firstly, the appellant shall forthwith make an application to the
court reporting service which has in its custody the tapes or
other records of the hearings from the year 2000 for the
transcription of such portions of that hearing as are reasonably
required for the hearing of the appeal. Counsel may agree
between them as to what those portions may be and if there is
any difficulty you may speak to me for further assistance.
Counsel for the University, if she wishes, may insist upon
receiving a certificate or other written evidence that such order
has been placed, that the cost of the transcription has been
provided or paid, as the case may be, and that the work of
proceeding with the transcript is, in fact, proceeding. In the
event that the transcript has not been ordered and no
satisfactory arrangement concerning payment has been made

6
within two weeks, the leave to appeal granted by this order will
expire.

ii.

The next part of the schedule will deal with the timetable after
the transcript, as agreed, of the Tribunal hearing has been
received. Within seven days of its receipt by the appellant,
copies as necessary will be made available by the appellant to
counsel for the University and to the Tribunal. In accordance
with the terms of the enactment, providing the necessary
number of copies to the University and to the Tribunal and to
University counsel will be at the expense of the appellant.
With the agreement of counsel, within 30 days of the receipt by
the appellant of the transcripts from the court reporter, formal
notice of appeal, factum and book of authorities together with
any other supporting material as counsel for the appellant may
advise, shall be served upon counsel for the University and
filed with the Secretary. The University’s responding material
shall be served and filed within thirty days of receipt of the
appellant’s material. Upon receipt of the transcript counsel for
the University shall initiate the process of arranging for a date
of the hearing of the appeal which in any event shall not take
place before the time for the delivery of notice of appeal, the
appellant’s factum and the respondent’s material has expired.

7

[9]

It goes without saying that everybody will cooperate to find a date, that’s the

way this process works.

[10]

The only final comment I have is that any submissions as to the costs of this

hearing will be reserved to the Chair of the appeal tribunal who shall have the
authority to dispose of that issue.

DATED: October 4, 2001

WRITTEN COPY RELEASED:
“November 19, 2001”
Date

“C. Anthony Keith”
C. Anthony Keith, Q.C.
Senior Chair

