Case 1310

   DATE:

   April 18, 2022

   PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v. L.S. ("the Student")

   HEARING DATE:

   January 13, 2022, via Zoom

   PANEL MEMBERS:

   Ms. Karen Symes, Chair
   Professor Margaret MacNeill, Faculty Panel Member
   Mr. David Allens, Student Panel Member

   APPEARANCES:

   Mr. Robert Centa, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland
   Rosenberg Rothstein LLP
   Mr. William Webb, Co-Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg Rothstein LLP

   NOT IN ATTENDANCE:

   The Student

   HEARING SECRETARY:

   Mr. Christopher Lang, Director, Office of Appeals, Discipline and
   Faculty Grievances

   The‚ØStudent‚Øwas charged under s. B.i.1(d) of the‚ØCode of Behaviour
   on Academic Matters, 1995‚Ø(the ‚Code‚) on the basis that she knowingly
   represented as her own an idea or expression of an idea, and/or the
   work of another in an essay. In the alternative, the Student was
   charged under s. B.i.1(b) of the Code on the basis that she knowingly
   obtained unauthorized assistance in connection with an essay. In the
   alternative to the previous two charges, the Student was charged under
   s. B.i.3(b) of the Code on the basis that she knowingly engaged in a
   form of cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or
   misrepresentation in order to‚Øobtain academic credit or other academic
   advantage‚Øin connection with an essay.

   The hearing proceeded on the basis of an Agreed Statement of Fact
   (‚ASF‚) and a Joint Submission on Penalty (‚JSP‚). The Student signed
   and submitted a request that the Tribunal proceed in her absence and
   waived her right to any further notice of the proceedings. Furthermore,
   the Student agreed that she was aware that the Tribunal may find her
   guilty of academic misconduct and may impose a penalty greater than
   that set out in the JSP. The Panel noted that pursuant to ss. 6 and 7
   of the Statutory Powers Procedure Act (the ‚SPPA‚), and rule 17 of the
   University Tribunal Rules of Practice and Procedure, where reasonable
   notice of an oral hearing was given to a party in accordance with the
   SPPA and the party does not attend at the hearing, the Tribunal may
   proceed in the absence of the party, and the party is not entitled to
   any further notice of the proceeding. In light of the joint request of
   the University and the Student, the Panel exercised its discretion to
   proceed with the hearing in the absence of the Student.

   The ASF outlined that the Professor who taught the course for which the
   essay in question was submitted noted that the essay contained writing
   and ideas that were significantly stronger than those typically
   produced by a second-year undergraduate student. The Student met with
   the Dean‚s Designate and at the meeting she was unable to explain
   significant portions of her essay. The ASF further outlined that the
   Student advised the Dean‚s Designate that she used a paid essay writing
   service to rewrite her essay. The Panel noted that the Student admitted
   in the ASF that she paid an essay writing service to write her essay
   and that she did no meaningful academic work on the essay and by doing
   so, she knew or ought to have known she was committing plagiarism and
   engaging in a form of cheating and academic misconduct. Based on the
   admissions made by the Student, the ASF and the supporting materials,
   the Panel concluded that the first charge had been proven with clear
   and convincing evidence on a balance of probabilities and accepted the
   guilty plea of the Student. The University withdrew the second and
   third charges.

   In determining sanction, the Panel considered the JSP. The Panel noted
   that as set out by the Discipline Appeals Board in the University of
   Toronto and M.A. (Case No. 837, December 22, 2016) at para. 25, a JSP
   may be rejected by a panel only in circumstances where to give effect
   to it would be contrary to the public interest or would bring the
   administration of justice into disrepute. The Panel further noted that,
   as set out in the Discipline Appeals Board decision in the University
   of Toronto and S.C., N.R.H. and M.K.K. (Case Nos. 596, 597 and 598,
   November 23, 2011) at para. 136, ‚purchased essay offences are about as
   serious as can be committed in a University setting.‚ Furthermore, for
   this type of offence, the Tribunal should approach sentencing with the
   assumption that ‚expulsion is the sanction that is best commensurate
   with the gravity of the offence‚ (para. 136). However, the Panel noted
   that whether or not expulsion is appropriate will depend on a number of
   factors and the particular facts of this case. The Panel considered the
   factors on determining sanction outlined in the University of Toronto
   v. Mr. C. (Case No. 1976/77-3, November 5, 1976). The Panel noted that
   while this was a serious offence, there were also important mitigating
   factors, such as the Student‚s remorse, the admission of guilt,
   entering into the ASF and JSP, and that this was the Student‚s first
   offence.¬  In light of all the circumstances, the Panel found that the
   joint submission in this case was neither contrary to the public
   interest, nor would it bring the administration of justice into
   disrepute and therefore, accepted the JSP. The Panel imposed the
   following sanctions: a final grade of zero in the course, a five-year
   suspension; a six-year notation on the transcript, and a report to the
   Provost for publication.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/30476
