Case 805

DATE:

   August 10, 2015

PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v Y.C.

Hearing Date(s):

   June 22, 2015

Panel Members:

   Sarah Kraicer, Chair
   Bruno Magliocchetti, Faculty Member
   Alberta Tam, Student Member

Appearances:

   Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel
   Tegan O‚Brien, Counsel for the Student, DLS
   Nicole Wilkinson, Counsel for the Student, DLS
   John Carter, Dean‚s Designate, Faculty of Applied Science and
   Engineering
   Manfreddi Maggiore, Instructor of the Course
   Luca Scardovi, Instructor of the Course

In Attendance:

   Mr. Y.C., the Student
   Natalie Ramtahal, Coordinator, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty
   Grievances
   Johanna Braden, Observer
   Student charged under s. B.i.1(b) and, in the alternative, s. B.i.3(b)
   of the Code . The charges related to allegations that the Student
   possessed three unauthorized aids in the final exam of the Course;
   namely, lecture notes, the prior year‚s final exam, and solutions to a
   homework assignment. The Student signed an Acknowledgement of
   Possession of Unauthorized Exam Aid(s) form after the examination had
   concluded, but as it was plausible that the Student did not understand
   at the time of signing that he was admitting to having committed an
   academic offence, the Tribunal did not rely on this form as evidence of
   an admission of guilt by the Student. The Student pleaded not guilty at
   the hearing.
   Student was found guilty with respect to s. B.i.1(b) of the Code . To
   support the inference that he knowingly possessed the unauthorized
   aids, the Panel took into account that the Student acknowledged that he
   knew the applicable rules for permissible aids, that he admitted to
   bringing the documents into the examination, and that he could not have
   mistaken the unauthorized documents for a permissible study aid. The
   Student‚s explanation that illness and/or medication resulted in him
   not knowing that he possessed unauthorized aids on his desk was found
   to be implausible and not supported by any cogent evidence. An
   aggravating factor was the fact that this was the Student‚s second
   academic offence. The Panel noted that receiving a strong warning that
   future misconduct would be subject to severe penalties did not deter
   the Student from committing a second offence, and that therefore there
   was an increased likelihood of repetition. The Panel recognized that
   the sanctions typically imposed in cases of unauthorized aids would
   have a severe impact on the Student‚s ability to continue in his
   academic program, but it noted the seriousness of the offence and
   stated that reducing a penalty to cushion a student from a cumulative
   effect is not a principled reason for granting leniency. The Panel
   imposed a grade assignment of zero in the Course; a 2-year suspension;
   the earlier of either a 3-year notation on the Student‚s academic
   record and transcript or a notation until his graduation from the
   University; and that the case be reported to the Provost for
   publication.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12882
