THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
TRIAL DIVISION
IN THE MATTER OF charges of academic dishonesty filed on April 23, 2015,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic
Matters, 1995,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Act, 1971, S.O. 1971, c. 56 as
amended S.O. 1978, c. 88

B E T W E E N:
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
– AND –

Y (H

)C

■--

REASONS FOR DECISION
Hearing Date: Monday, June 22, 2015
Members of the Panel:
Ms. Sarah Kraicer, Barrister and Solicitor, Chair
Professor Bruno Magliocchetti, Faculty of Italian Studies, Faculty Panel Member
Ms. Alberta Tam, Student Panel Member
Appearances:
Ms. Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Barristers
Ms. Tegan O’Brian, Law Student, Downtown Legal Services
Ms. Nicole Wilkinson, Law Student, Downtown Legal Services
Professor John Carter, Deans’ Designate, Faculty of Applied Science and Engineering
Professor Manfreddi Maggiore, Instructor ECE311H1: Dynamic Systems and Control
Professor Luca Scardovi, Instructor ECE311H1: Dynamic Systems and Control
In Attendance:
Y (H
)C
, Student
Ms.
Ramtahal,
Coordinator, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances
I Natalie
Ms. Johanna Braden, Incoming Tribunal Co-Chair, Observer

2

REASONS FOR DECISION

1.

The Trial Division of the University Tribunal was convened on June 22, 2015 to

consider charges brought by the University of Toronto (the "University") against Mr.

(~) ca

'<I

(the "Student") under the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on

Academic Matters, 1995 (the "Code").

The Charges

2.

The Charges against the Student are as follows:
1. On or about December 10, 2014, you knowingly used or possessed an
unauthorized aid or aids or obtained unauthorized assistance in connection with the
final examination in ECE311 H1 - Dynamic Systems and Control, contrary to section
B.l.1(b) of the Code.
2. In the alternative, on or about December 10, 2014, you knowingly engaged in a
form of cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or misrepresentation
and otherwise described in the Code to obtain academic credit or other academic
advantage of any kind, contrary B.1.3(b) of the Code.
Particulars

The particulars of the offences charged are as follows:
(a)

At all material times you were a student registered at the University of
Toronto in the Faculty of Applied Science and Engineering.

(b)

In Fall 2014 you enrolled in ECE311 H1, which was taught by
Professor. Manfredi Maggiore and Professor Luca Scardovi.

3

(c)

You wrote the final examination in ECE311 H1 on December 10, 2014,
which was worth 50% of the course mark ("Exam").

No aids were

allowed in the Exam.
(d)

During the Exam you were found in possession of three unauthorized
aids in the final exam, being lecture notes, the prior year's final exam,
and solutions to a homework assignment.

(e)

At that time you signed an Acknowledgement of Possession of
Unauthorized Exam Aid(s) During a Faculty Examination form in which
you confirmed that you had been found in possession of the three
documents during the exam, and that in doing so you had committed
an academic offence under the Code.

Plea to the Charges

3.

The Student entered a plea of not guilty to the charges. He also stated that

particular (c) was factually incorrect, in that prescribed authorized aids were allowed in
the Exam. The University agreed with this correction.

The Evidence

4.

The Tribunal heard evidence from the two professors who invigilated the final

examination on December 10, 2014 in ECE 311, Professor Manfredi Maggiore and
Professor Luca Scardovi, from the Student, and from the Dean's Designate Professor
John Carter.

5.

Much of the evidence is not in dispute. The Student does not deny that he

brought a previous year's examination (questions only), a marked homework
.,

assignment, and lecture notes - all unauthorized aids - into the final examination and
had them on his desk when the examination commenced. He does not dispute that he
was aware of the rules of this examination, and knew that these documents were not

4

authorized aids. What is in dispute is whether effects of illness or medication prevented
the Student from knowing that the unauthorized aids were present on his desk.

6.

The Student was enrolled in the Fall 2014 section of ECE 311- Dynamic Systems

and Control, a course open to 3rd and 4th year students in the Faculty of Applied
Science and Engineering, taught by Professors Maggiore and Scardovi. The final
examination in ECE 311 H1 was worth 50% of the course grade.

7.

The rules for what was allowed to be brought into the examination were set out

on the first page of the examination booklet, and were also written by Professor
Maggiore on the blackboard of the examination room and announced again by him
verbally as the students entered the examination room. Students were permitted a nonprogrammable calculator, and a one-page handwritten aide sheet. The aide sheet is
one sheet of paper on which the student can handwrite his or her own notes of anything
the student thinks could be useful during the examination - e.g. formulae, drawings,
examples.

8.

The students wrote the examination in two adjacent rooms, each of which were

invigilated by a professor and by tutorial assistants. The Student was seated in the
room in which Professor Maggiore was invigilating.

9.

A few minutes after the examination commenced, a teaching assistant in the

room approached Professor Maggiore and advised that one of the students had an
unusually high pile of papers on his desk. Professor Maggiore went to the Student's
desk and observed that there was a neat pile of papers approximately .7 cm thick
stacked underneath the Student's examination booklet. Professor Maggiore lifted up
the examination booklet and saw 3 stapled documents underneath. He described these
documents as being "concealed" under the examination booklet.

10.

Professor Maggiore took away the three documents and permitted the Student to

continue to write the examination. The documents were 1) solutions to homework

5

assignment# 3 in the course 2) a final examination from 2013 with no solutions and 3) a
photocopy of Professor Maggiore's personal lecture notes for the course (approximately
100 pages). All of these documents were unauthorized aids in the examination.

11.

These lecture notes were not meant for distribution for students, and Professor

Maggiore could not say how they had ended up in the Student's hands. He found it "a
little upsetting" that his personal lecture notes were in the Student's possession. The
Student was not asked about this and provided no evidence about how he had obtained
these lecture notes.

12.

At the conclusion of the examination, the Student spoke to both Professor

Maggiore and Professor Scardovi. The Professors stated that the Student was very
apologetic, saying he was very sorry, that he realized he had made a mistake, and that
he "was not thinking straight". The Student did not mention being on any medication or
having an illness. The Student appeared shaken and asked that the Professors not
report the incident further. The Student's evidence was consistent with this, saying he
apologized for disrespecting the professors and for having "stuff on my desk that I was
not supposed to have".

13.

The Student testified that he had been ill with food poisoning on the previous

day, December 9, 2014. He saw a doctor, who recommended he take over-the- counter
medications lmodium and Gravol for his symptoms. The Student had an examination in
ECE 314 on December 9 and submitted a petition to the Registrar with a Doctor's note
in relation to that examination.

14.

On the morning of December 10, 2014, the Student was feeling tired and dizzy,

after studying late into the night, and took lmodium and Gravol. He stated that he put
"stuff'' relating to his course review into his backpack, thinking he might look at it before
the examination.

6

15.

The Student did not prepare a handwritten "aide sheet", although he knew that

he was permitted to bring such an aide sheet into the examination.

16.

Before the examination began, the Student emptied the contents of the backpack

onto his desk including the three unauthorized documents. When asked why he did
that, he said "I didn't think too much about it". When asked whether he knew the
documents were on his desk when the examination began, he stated "I'm not too sure"
and "not exactly, I wasn't focusing on it". He also stated at a different point in his
testimony that he only realized the documents were there when Professor Maggiore
came over and took them away.

17.

The Student acknowledged on cross-examination that he knew the rules about

what aids were permitted in this particular examination. He agreed that he knew he was
not permitted to bring into the examination any lecture notes, previous homework
assignment, or prior examination questions. He admitted that he should have known
that these documents were not allowed at the examination.

Evidence re Acknowledgement Form and Discussions with Dean's Designate

18.

Immediately after the examination was concluded, the Student spoke with

Professors Maggiore and Scardovi. Professor Maggiore advised the Student that he
was required to report the incident to the undergraduate office, and presented him with
a form entitled "Acknowledgement of Possession of Unauthorized Exam Aid(s) During a
Faculty Final Examination" , that the professor had partially filled out to describe the
three documents he had confiscated from the Student's desk.

19.

There is no dispute that the Professors advised the student to read the form

carefully, that the Student was clearly distressed and upset at the time, and that he
hesitated before signing it. The Professors testified that they told the Student that he
was not required to sign the form. They advised him that they were required to submit
the form to the undergraduate office, and that it was not them but that office that would

7

make a decision about the consequences. The Student testified that he didn't actually
read the form, although he was advised to do so and was given an opportunity to do so.
He testified that he was told by the professors "you don't have to sign it, but you
should".

20.

The Student signed the "Student Acknowledgement" on the form. His evidence

was that Professor Maggiore said sign it, "so I did". The form states "I agree that the
above statements are correct and true and that, by bringing an unauthorized aid into a
Faculty final examination, I have committed an academic offence under the University's
Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters. If this is my first offence, I understand that I
will receive a formal written reprimand for this offence for the Vice Dean of the Faculty.
I acknowledge that the unauthorized aid was returned to me at the end of the
examination".

21.

This was the first time that these Professors had had to report an unauthorized

examination aid, and both they and the Student were unfamiliar with the form and with
the precise procedure to be followed. While the Tribunal finds that the Professors did
not tell the student that he had to sign the form, given the Student's distress, and the
general lack of familiarity of the parties with the process and the form, it is plausible that
at the time he signed the Acknowledgment the Student did not understand he was
admitting having committed an offence under the Code of Behaviour. The Tribunal
therefore does not rely on this form as evidence of an admission by the Student that he
committed the offence.

22.

The Student subsequently met with Professor John Carter, Deans' Designate-

Academic Affairs in mid-December 2014 to discuss the incident. Professor Carter stated
that the Student advised him at that meeting that he was admitting to the academic
offence. The Student offered the explanation that he was ill with food poisoning, had
· been to see a Doctor the previous day, was taking over-the-counter medications which
affected his judgment about the aids he had brought into the area.

8

23.

Professor Carter then wrote to the Student to advise that he was imposing a

penalty of a mark of zero in the course. Because of his cumulative low academic
standing, this mark in this course meant that the Student's grades were too low to
permit him to continue his studies with the Department of Applied Science and
Engineering.

24.

The Student subsequently revoked the admission of guilt he made with the

Dean's Designate.

· 25.

The fact that the Student admitted and later revoked the admission of guilt made

at the meeting of the Dean's Designate was not relied on by the University in argument.
The Tribunal has not relied on the Student's interactions with the Dean's Designate in
making its decision regarding the Charges.

Decision of the Tribunal on the Charges
26.

The onus is on the University to establish on clear and convincing evidence on a

standard of probabilities that the academic offence charged has been committed.

27.

The Student is charged under Charge 1 with knowingly using or possessing an

unauthorized aid or aids in connection with the final examination in EGE 311. Under the
Code, the offence of "knowingly possessing" an unauthorized aid is deemed to have
been committed if the person knew or reasonably ought to have known that he or she
possessed the unauthorized aid.

28.

In the view of the Tribunal, the following undisputed facts around the

circumstances of the examination support the inference that the Student knowingly
possessed unauthorized aids during the examination. (There is no evidence and it is
not suggested by the University that the Student actually used those aids during the
examination):

9

29.

(a)

The Student acknowledged that he knew the applicable rules for
permissible aids in the final examination for ECE 311.

(b)

The Student admitted that he knew that he was not permitted to have the
professor's lecture notes, a previous homework assignment, or a prior
examination question paper on his desk.

(c)

He also admitted to bringing those documents into the examination and
placing those documents on his desk at the outset of the examination.

(d)

In addition, the Student must have handled the documents after he
removed them from his knapsack, as they were observed in a neat pile
under his examination paper.

(e)

Since the Student did not prepare a study aid, he could not have
mistaken the unauthorized documents on his desk for a permissible study
aid.

In addition, the Student gave vague and somewhat contradictory answers when

asked whether he knew the documents were on his desk at the outset of the
examination. He said he dumped the contents of his knapsack onto his desk. He said
he was "unsure" and "didn't focus" on whether the documents were there or not, but
also said that he only became aware of the documents when they were taken away by
Professor Maggiore.

30.

The explanation the Student gave for having the unauthorized aids on his desk

was that he was feeling ill since the previous day and had taken over-the-counter
lmodium and Gravol which impaired his judgment. It is difficult to understand how the
illness or medication he described would have affected his judgment to the extent that,
despite knowing the rules, he was unaware of the fact that he placed documents on his
desk under his examination booklet and that those documents were not permitted aids
in this examination.

31.

Further, there is minimal evidence to support this explanation. The Student did

not provide any further details of what he was thinking or how he was feeling when he

10

placed the documents on his desk. The Student led no evidence from any doctor or
health professional about his health on December 10 or about the possible effects of the
lmodium or Gravol on his mental state on that day. While he stated that he filed a
petition and doctor's note regarding an examination the previous day, no evidence
about that petition or that note was before the Tribunal. Moreover, in his discussions
with the Professors immediately after the examination on December 10, the Student did
not mention any illness or medication, just that he was "not thinking straight" at the time
and was sorry.

32.

In the view of the Tribunal, the Student's explanation that illness and/or

medication resulted in him not knowing that he possessed the unauthorized aids is not
plausible, and is not supported by any cogent evidence. To the contrary, there is clear
and convincing evidence from the University witnesses and from the Student himself
that he knew the rules for this examination, knew that he was not permitted to have
lecture notes, a homework assignment or the previous year's examination paper with
him at the examination, and that he nevertheless brought those documents into the
examination and placed them on his desk under his examination paper.

33.

The Tribunal finds that the Student knowingly possessed unauthorized aids at

the examination.

34.

The Tribunal finds that the Student is guilty of Charge 1.

35.

Charge 2 was withdrawn by the University.

Decision of the Tribunal on Sanction
36.

The University sought the following sanctions:
(a)

a final grade of zero in the course ECE 311;

11

37.

(b)

a suspension from the University of Toronto from the date of this order for
a period of two years;

(c)

a notation of the sanction on his academic record and transcript from the
date of this order for a period of three years, and,

(d)

that this case be reported to the Provost for publication of a notice of the
decision of the Tribunal and the sanction imposed, with the Student's
name withheld.

The Student sought the following sanctions:
(a) A grade reduction in the course ECE 311 to 50%. This grade
would allow him to continue in the Applied Science and Engineering
program;
(b) A suspension from the University of Toronto from the date of this
order for a period of two years;

38.

The University led additional evidence at the sanction stage that in January

2011, the Student admitted to committing the academic offence of plagiarism with
respect to a lab in a first year course in APS 105H 1F, worth 3% of the final mark in that
course. The Student received a penalty of a mark of zero for the lab, and was advised
that in the event of a 2nd offence, the penalties would be much more severe.

39.

The Tribunal has considered the principles and factors relevant to sanction set

out in University of Toronto and Mr. C (Case No. 1976/77-3; November 5, 1976). These
factors include the character of the person charged, the likelihood of repetition of the
offence, the nature and seriousness of the offence and the detriment to the University
occasioned by the offence, any extenuating or mitigating factors surrounding the
commission of the offence, and the need for specific and general deterrence. The
determination of an appropriate penalty in every case by the Tribunal will depend on an
assessment of these principles and factors in the individual circumstances of the case.
At the same time, it is important that there is general consistency in the approach of
Tribunals to sanction, so that students are treated fairly and equitably. (Discipline

12

Appeal Board, University of Toronto v. D.S, Case No. 451; August 24, 2007).

40.

The Student took a degree of responsibility for his own conduct, admitting that he

knew the rules of this examination, that he had documents in his possession during the
examination (after they had been discovered) and that these documents were not
authorized aids. He also expressed genuine regret and remorse and apologized for this
conduct immediately to the Professors and to the Dean's designate, and to some
extent, also in his testimony before the Tribunal. He did not, however, demonstrate any ·
insight into the reasons for his misconduct, other than attributing it unconvincingly to
illness and/or medication. This is also not an isolated incident, but the second academic
offence committed by the Student.

41.

The Student committed a second offence after receiving a relatively lenient

penalty for a prior offence and after receiving a strong warning that future misconduct
would be subject to severe penalties. The fact that the warning did not deter him from
committing a second offence increases the likelihood of repetition. On the other hand,
the prior offence was over three years ago, in the first term of his first year of studies,
and involved a different form of misconduct (plagiarism, not using an unauthorized aid).
These circumstances moderate somewhat the risk of repetition of the offence.

42.

The presence of mitigating or extenuating circumstances is another factor. For

the reasons set out in its decision on the charges, the Tribunal does not consider the
limited evidence it has received regarding the Student's illness and use of medication
on the day of the examination to amount to an extenuating or mitigating circumstance
for the commission of this offence.

43.

The misconduct is serious and causes serious detriment to the University. The

Code provides that the University has a responsibility to ensure that academic
achievement is not obscured or undermined by cheating, and both the University and
students have a responsibility to ensure that conditions that might enable cheating not
be tolerated. Bringing an unauthorized aid into a final examination threatens the

13

academic integrity of the University and breaks an important rule that guards against
cheating in final examinations. The Student was aware of the rule, yet brought three
unauthorized aids into the examination, two of which could potentially have provided
him with assistance in the examination. While he did not use the aids during the first
minutes of the examination before they were confiscated, which would have been even
more serious, they were potentially helpful and were available to him on his desk under
his examination booklet.

44.

Specific deterrence was the primary factor relied upon by the Student in arguing

that he should receive a mark reduction in the course to 50%, rather than to 0%. He
argues that a mark of zero would have a disproportionately severe impact on him,
because it would result in him being required to permanently withdraw from the
engineering program due to low overall grades. If he were to receive a mark of 50%, he
could continue in this program after the period of any suspension. The University does
not disagree that these would be the consequences of the grade of zero sanction it
seeks, but argues that the Student's poor academic record is not grounds for leniency
but instead should have made him more cautious about contravening the Code.

45.

The Student was on academic probation after the Fall 2010 session. He failed

and was required to withdraw for 8 months after the Fall 2011 session. He was
permitted to proceed again in the Fall of 2012. In Fall 2014 his cumulative GPA (not
including a grade for ECE 311) was 1.81 and his sessional GPA was 2.1. The Tribunal
was advised that the Student's examination was marked, and if no penalty at all were
assigned to it, he would have received a mark of 56% in ECE 311. Therefore, if the
grade in the course were lowered to 50% as requested by the Student , this would
amount to a 6% grade reduction in the course.

46.

The Student relies on University of Toronto v. P. T. (Case No. 655; September

26, 2012). In that case, a Tribunal reduced a course grade to 50% rather than zero on ·
the charge of possessing an unauthorized aid, where it was the last course the student
needed to complete his degree requirements. That case had different circumstances

14

than the present one, in that the student admitted misconduct at an early stage, had no
discipline history (although he admitted to 3 incidents of misconduct in the proceedings
before the Tribunal). Most significantly, the 50% grade sanction was agreed to by the
University and the student in a joint submission on penalty. The Tribunal itself
commented that the penalty was low, stating "absent the joint submission the Tribunal
would have considered a more serious penalty". We agree with the Tribunal's
comment in that decision that this penalty appears low, and we do not consider that the
different circumstances of the case before us, including the fact that it is a second
offence, warrant a similar penalty.

47.

The Tribunal recognizes that a grade of zero in this course is a penalty that

would have a severe impact on the Student's ability to continue in the engineering
program. However, it is the view of the Tribunal that a grade reduction of 6% is far too
little to reflect the seriousness of the misconduct in this case or to serve as deterrent to
other students. Further, the fact that the Student already has a poor academic record is
not a principled reason for granting leniency in a mark reduction penalty. Indeed,
reducing a penalty to cushion a student from the cumulative effect of that penalty on his
overall grades would run contrary to the principles of general deterrence, as it would
give students with a poor academic record less of a disincentive to cheat than those
with a good record.

48.

The University relies on a number of Tribunal cases dealing with sanctions for

possession of an unauthorized aid on the examination. In all of these cases, in contrast
to the University of Toronto v. P. T. case, a mark of zero in the course was imposed as
one of the sanctions to denote the seriousness of the misconduct and the need to deter
other students who might be tempted to cheat.

49.

Many of these Tribunal cases, including University of Toronto v. P. T., also

imposed a suspension and a notation of the suspension of 1-3 years. The Student did
not object to the University's proposed suspension of two years. In the view of the
Tribunal, the fact that this was a second offence, together with the other factors

15

reviewed above, warrants a suspension of two years and a notation of three years in
addition to the reduction of the course mark to zero.
Order of the Tribunal

50.

The Tribunal issued the following Order on June 22, 2015:
1.

THAT Mr.

ca is guilty of one count of unauthorized aid / assistance,

contrary to section B.1.1 (b) of the Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters;
2.
3.

ca receive a final grade of zero in ECE311 H1 in Fall 2014;
THAT Mr. ca be suspended from the University for a period of

_THAT Mr.

2 years, commencing on June 22, 2015 and ending on June 21, 2017;

4.

THAT the sanction be recorded on Mr.

ca·s academic record and

transcript to the effect that he was sanctioned for academic misconduct, for a
period of 3 years from the date of this Order, to June 21, 2018, or until his
graduation from the University, whichever is earlier;
5.

THAT this case shall be reported to the Provost for publication of a notice

of the decision of the Tribunal and the sanction or sanctions imposed, with the
name of the student withheld.

Dated at Toronto this /'()day of August, 2015

Ms.Sarah ~

