Case #985

   FILE: Case # 985 (18-19)
   DATE:Â March 4, 2019
   PARTIES:Â Â  Â University of Toronto v F.Y

   Hearing Date: December 6, 2018

   Panel Members:
   Mr. Shaun Laubman, Chair
   Professor Richard B. Day, Faculty Panel Member
   Ms. Emily Hawes, Student Panel Member

   Appearances:
   F.Y., the Student
   Ms. Tina Lie, Assistant Discipline Counsel,Â Palaire Roland Rosenberg
   Rothstein LLP

   In Attendance:
   Ms. Krista Osbourne, Administrative Clerk and Hearing Secretary, Office
   ofÂ Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances

   Trial Division â s. B.i.1(d) of Code - plagiarism â Student submitted
   paper for course credit containing work of another knowingly
   represented as Studentâs own work â Student denied charges and mounted
   attack on professorâs integrity as defence â guilty â no evidence of
   extenuating factors â no remorse - grade assignment of zero for course;
   two-year suspension; three-year notation on transcript or until
   graduation, whichever is earlier; and publication by Provost of notice
   of decision and sanctions with Studentâs name withheld

   The Student was charged with one count of academic misconduct under
   section B.i.1(d) of the Code. The Student knowingly represented the
   work of another as her own work in a final paper submitted for course
   credit.

   The Student pleaded not guilty at the hearing and testified in her own
   defence. The Student was not represented by legal counsel.Â  While the
   Student stridently denied the charges, the Panel found the Student
   guilty of plagiarism in violation of section B.i.1(d) of the Code
   because she presented no evidence demonstrating that she had
   independently come up with the thesis and arguments contained in her
   final paper. Moreover, the Panel accepted the course professorâs
   testimony that similarities between the Studentâs final paper and
   another paper published online (written by someone else) were striking
   and could not be explained away as mere coincidence.

   The Panel accepted the Universityâs proposed penalty, namely, a final
   grade of zero in the course; a two-year suspension; a three-year
   notation of sanction on the Studentâs transcript; and publication by
   the Provost of the notice of decision and sanctions with the Studentâs
   name withheld.Â  The Panel concluded that the Universityâs proposed
   penalty was reasonable and appropriate because the sanctions were well
   within the range of reasonable sanctions for similar offences in
   precedent decisions; the Student had no prior academic offences on her
   record; the Student showed no remorse and consistently refused to
   accept responsibility for the plagiarism and instead mounted an attack
   on the professorâs integrity in her defence; the Student blamed the
   professor for the Studentâs situation; the Student did not present any
   evidence of extenuating factors; and there was no indication the
   Student had learned from her mistake.Â  The Panel therefore ordered a
   final grade assignment of zero for the course; a two-year suspension; a
   three-year notation of sanction on the Studentâs transcript; and
   publication by the Provost of the notice of decision and sanctions with
   the Studentâs name withheld.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/28388
