Case #1004

   DATE: February 26, 2020

   PARTIES: University of Toronto v.Â G.Z.Â (âthe Studentâ)

   HEARING DATE: December 3, 2019

   Panel Members:
   Ms. IraÂ Parghi, Lawyer, Chair
   Professor Michael Evans, Faculty Panel Member Mr. Bradley Au, Student
   Panel Member

   Appearances:
   Ms. Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel,Â PaliareÂ Roland
   Rosenberg, Rothstein LLP

   Not in Attendance:
   The Student

   In Attendance:
   Mr. Christopher Lang, Director, Office of Appeals, Discipline and
   Faculty Grievances, University of Toronto

   The Student was charged under s.Â B.i.1(b)Â of theâ¯Code of Behaviour
   on Academic Matters, 1995â¯(the âCodeâ)Â forÂ knowinglyâ¯usingÂ or
   possessingÂ an unauthorized aid in a final exam that he wrote in
   partial completion of the requirements forÂ a course.

   TheÂ PanelÂ waited 15 minutes after theÂ hearing was scheduled to
   commence, but neither the Student nor a legal representative of the
   Student appeared at the hearing.â¯The University provided evidence that
   the Student had been served at his ROSI-listed email address with
   theâ¯charges,Â initialÂ notice of hearing, revised notice of
   hearing,Â severalÂ affidavits, the Universityâs Disclosure Brief and a
   copy of the UniversityâsÂ Policy on Official Correspondence with
   Students.Â The University alsoÂ contacted the Student
   viaÂ privateÂ messaging onÂ FacebookÂ and viaÂ hisÂ ROSI-listed
   telephone number.Â It alsoÂ provided evidence that the Student
   hadÂ accessed his ROSI email address four months after the
   UniversityÂ had first communicated with him in respect of the
   hearing.Â TheÂ PanelÂ granted an order permitting the hearing to
   proceed in the Studentâs absence.

   Relying onÂ Rule 61 of theÂ Rules of Practice and
   ProcedureÂ (âRulesâ),Â the UniversityÂ soughtÂ toÂ tender evidence by
   way of affidavit. The affiantsÂ were not in attendance at the
   hearing.Â Rule 62 ofÂ theÂ RulesÂ requires that an affiant must attend
   a hearing if an adverse party wishes to cross-examine on their
   affidavit.Â Since the StudentÂ had not indicated any wish
   toÂ cross-examineÂ the affiants, theÂ PanelÂ consented to the
   Universityâs request.Â No evidence was tendered on behalf of the
   Student.Â The hearing proceeded on the basis that the Student had
   denied the charges.Â The onus was on the University to establish on the
   balance of probabilities that the Student had committed the offence
   charged.

   The syllabus for the course in questionÂ stated, among other things,
   that students were not allowed to use anyÂ books, notes, calculators or
   scrap paperÂ while writing the final exam. During the final exam, the
   Chief Presiding OfficerÂ and theÂ Studentâs professorÂ sawÂ formulae on
   the Studentâs palm. That information was not permittedÂ in the
   exam.Â The Dean was subsequently informed and madeÂ numerousÂ attempts
   to meet with the Student.Â Due to the Studentâs unresponsiveness, the
   matter was forwarded to the Vice-Provost for review.

   TheÂ PanelÂ concluded that, on the balance of probabilities, the
   Student was in possession of an unauthorized aid during the final exam
   â namely, course content handwritten on the palm of his hand â and thus
   was in contravention of s. B.i.1(b) of
   theÂ Code.Â TheÂ PanelÂ acknowledged there was no evidence that the
   StudentÂ hadÂ actually used the notes to help him during the
   exam.Â TheÂ offenceÂ under s. B.i.1(b) is the possession of an
   unauthorized aid, whether or not the aid is used. No aids were
   permitted in the test. The notes on the Studentâs hand were capable of
   being used as an aid. As such the offence was made out on the facts.

   On the issue of sanction,Â theÂ PanelÂ noted that as a consequence
   ofÂ the StudentâsÂ non-participation,Â itÂ had no evidence before it as
   to any extenuating circumstances that might have weighed in the
   Studentâs favour by mitigating or explaining his conduct.Â Having
   regard to the character of the Student, theÂ PanelÂ noted that the
   Student did not participate in the hearing or pre-hearing University
   procedures. Had he done so, this might have signalled a willingness to
   respect theÂ Universityâs processes.Â TheÂ PanelÂ also observed that
   the offence was serious, the detriment caused to the University by the
   offence was significant, and the need to deter others from committing a
   similar offenceÂ was considerable. TheÂ PanelÂ further noted that
   theÂ use of unauthorized aids is a threat to the integrity of the
   Universityâs processes for evaluating students, is profoundly unfair to
   other students, and jeopardizes the Universityâs reputation.Â According
   to theÂ Panel, these considerations urged against imposing a milder
   sanction than those typically applied in similar cases.

   TheÂ PanelÂ imposed the followingÂ sanctions:Â a gradeÂ assignmentÂ of
   zero inÂ the course;Â two-year suspension;Â notationÂ onÂ the
   StudentâsÂ transcript and academic record, commencingÂ on December 3,
   2019 and ending on December 2, 2022;Â report toÂ the Provost for
   publication of a notice of the decision and the sanctions imposed, with
   the Studentâs name withheld.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/29250
