FILE: 2001/02-07
UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
TRIAL DIVISION
Members of the Panel:
Ronald G. Slaght, Q.C., Co-Chair
Daniel R. Brooks, faculty member, Department of Zoology
Karen Iverson, student member, Faculty of Medicine
IN THE MATTER of the University of Toronto Act, 1971, S.O. 1971, c. 56, as amended;
AND IN THE MATTER of the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic
Matters, 1995;
AND IN THE MATTER of disciplinary charges against D.B.
No one appearing for the student
Lily I. Harmer, for the University of Toronto
Appearances:
Paul Holmes, Judicial Affairs Officer, Governing Council Secretariat
Thomas Legler, Postdoctoral Fellow, Centre for Global Studies, University of Victoria
Liisa North, Faculty member, York University
Miguel Torrens, Reference Librarian, Ibero & Ibero-American Collection, Robarts Library
Susan Bartkiw, Administrative Assistant, Faculty of Arts and Science

BACKGROUND
[1]
A hearing of the Trial Division of the University Tribunal was convened at 5:00 p.m. on
Monday, April 22, 2002, in the Falconer Room, Simcoe Hall, to consider the following two
charges laid against D.B. under the Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters, 1995, by the VicePresident and Provost, Professor Adel Sedra:
1.

On or about November 30, 1998, you did knowingly represent as your own, an idea
or an expression of an idea, and/or a work of another in connection with a form of
academic work, namely, in an essay entitled “Poverty and Inequality in Latin
America” submitted to fulfill course requirements in POL305Y, contrary to Section
B.1.1.(d) of the Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters, 1995. Pursuant to Section

In the Matter of Disciplinary Charges Against D.B.
B of the Code you are deemed to have acted knowingly if you ought reasonably to
have known that you represented as your own, an idea or expression of an idea or
work of another.
2.

On or about November 30, 1998, you knowingly submitted an academic work
containing a purported statement of fact or reference to a source which has been
concocted, namely, in the sources set out in the bibliography to the essay entitled
“Poverty and Inequality in Latin America” submitted to fulfill course requirements in
POL 305Y, contrary to Section B.1.1(f) of the Code of Behaviour on Academic
Matters, 1995. Pursuant to Section B of the Code, your are deemed to have acted
knowingly if you ought reasonably to have known that the academic work contained
a purported statement of fact or reference to a source which has been concocted.

[2]
After several hours of evidence, the matter was adjourned to April 24, 2002. The hearing
was concluded on April 24, 2002. An oral ruling as to verdict was delivered at that time,
followed by an oral ruling as to sanction.
[3]
This matter concerned allegations that D.B. had submitted a paper that was plagiarized
and which contained concocted sources. Specifically, it was the University’s contention that Mr.
B. had submitted a paper that was originally written as an answer to a question on a take-home
examination given for a course at York University.
[4]
Mr. B. failed to appear for the hearing on April 22, 2002 and April 24, 2002. After
hearing the evidence of Paul Holmes, the Panel was satisfied that Mr. B. was given adequate
notice of the hearing dates.
[5]
Mr. B. was a student registered in the course POL305Y, Politics and Society in Latin
America, in the fall of 1998. Professor Thomas Legler, then an adjunct Professor at the
University of Toronto, taught the course in question. Professor Legler currently has a position
with the University of Victoria in British Columbia. As a graduate student, Professor Legler had
studied under, and worked closely with Professor Liisa North of York University, a Latin
America scholar.
[6]
POL305Y was a full year course. A first term written assignment required the students in
the course to choose a topic from amongst a list and write a literature review essay of ten to
fourteen pages in length.
[7]
Professor Legler provided students in his course with a three-page document prepared by
the Department of Political Science entitled “How Not to Plagiarize”. This document began by
quoting the relevant section from the Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters, 1995, and
continued:
You’ve already heard the warnings about plagiarism. Obviously it’s against the
rules to buy essays or copy chunks from your friend’s homework, and it’s also
plagiarism to borrow passages from books or articles or Web sites without

- Page 2 of 7 -

In the Matter of Disciplinary Charges Against D.B.
identifying them. You know that the purpose of any paper is to show your own
thinking, not create a patchwork of borrowed ideas. But you may still be
wondering how you’re supposed to give proper references to all the reading
you’ve done and all the ideas you’ve encountered.
The point of documenting sources in academic papers is not just to avoid
unpleasant visits to the Dean’s office, but to demonstrate that you know what is
going on in your field of study. It’s also a courtesy to your readers because it
helps them consult the material you’ve found. So mentioning what others have
said doesn’t lessen the credit you get for your own thinking—in fact, it adds to
your credibility.
[8]
Professor Liisa North has been a faculty member of York University since 1971 and
specializes in Latin American politics. For many years, Professor North has taught a course
called Power Relations and Development Policy Choices in Latin America (Political Science
4235.03A/5000T.03). Professor North taught this course in the 1997/1998 academic year, the
year preceding the events at issue in this matter. Each year Professor North assembles a “kit” of
required readings. The kit consists of a number of photocopied readings from various sources,
bound and paginated sequentially.
[9]
Professor North’s take-home examination in the fall of 1997 consisted of three questions.
Students were instructed to:
Identify the sources of quotations in parentheses, noting the author of the work,
the year in which the work was published, and the page from which your citation
is drawn. For example, (Burns 1980, 37) or (Baloyra 1983, 102) or (Lefeber
1974, 2).
The page reference referred to the page number in the kit prepared for the course, rather than the
page number from the original publication.
[10]

Question one from Professor North’s fall 1997 take-home examination read as follows:
1. Analyze all of the readings assigned and the specific countries treated in
this course in the light of Peter Evans’ statement that: “Latin Americanists
should be careful not to overprivelege industrial class relations when they analyze
the exclusionary character of dependent capitalist development, even in the most
industrialized NICs. The early work of such Latin American ‘structuralists’ as
Celso Furtado strongly emphasized the importance of rural class relations; more
recent analyses, my own among them, have tended to stress the industrial sector,
neglecting the continuing importance of rural social structures. The gains that
accrued to East Asian NICs from early, thorough transformations of the agrarian
sector remind use [sic] of the extent to which the persistence of traditional class
relations in rural Latin America has retarded and distorted the overall
development in the region” (p. 221).

- Page 3 of 7 -

In the Matter of Disciplinary Charges Against D.B.

In discussing this quotation, consider not only the degree of landlord
power as such but also the extent to which Latin America’s large landed interests
“fused” with other dominant sectors (industrialists, exporters, bankers) and
foreign capital in the course of the 20th century (as discussed by Evans, Zeitlin,
Balyora, Larrea and North, and others); the origins of the process of fusion
during 19th century export expansion and the ideological implications (as
discussed, for example, by Burns with regard to Latin America and by Moore in
broader theoretical terms); the impact of the “fusion” and of the degree of
landlord power on past and current social and economic conditions and policies
(e.g., the contrast between Costa Rica and El Salvador and the issue of “urban
bias”).
[11] Professor Legler suspected that the paper submitted by Mr. B. was, in fact, originally
written by another in response to Professor North’s fall 1997 take-home examination. As a
result, a meeting was held on January 31, 2000, with Professor Legler, Professor Rae (the Dean’s
designate), Ms. Bartkiw, and Mr. B. in attendance as required by the Code of Behaviour on
Academic Matters, 1995. Ms. Bartkiw kept notes of the meeting. Mr. B. denied the allegations
at that time.
REASONS FOR DECISION (Delivered Orally)
[12] It was clear to the Panel that Political Science students at the University of Toronto are
provided with a document both warning against, and defining, plagiarism. While there was no
direct evidence that Mr. B. received this document, on the evidence it is reasonable to infer that it
was made available to him, or that he may indeed have received it.
[13] The genesis of inquiry in this case was the continued collegiality between two teachers of
Latin American studies. Professor Legler read a submission, subsequently confirmed by D.B. to
be his. It was submitted in response to a requirement of POL305Y that the students in that
course write a literature review essay. In reading the paper, Professor Legler recognized a series
of references, citations and authors common to what he described in his evidence as a unique
reading list and course taught by Professor North, his former professor and current friend.
Professor Legler described the authors and the references as they appeared in the paper and in the
bibliography from his knowledge of the contents of Professor North’s course.
[14] Professor Legler, who clearly had detailed knowledge of Professor North’s course, was
further puzzled in that looking at the bibliography it appeared that familiar papers were said to
have been published in unfamiliar sources. These included, for example, books by “Farkin”, and
“Wilson”.
[15] Important evidence from Professor Legler was that this paper, as he reviewed it, was not
responsive to the assignment which was to conduct a literature review. He said he did not find
the analysis he was looking for in the paper. This paper, he testified, did not examine, for

- Page 4 of 7 -

In the Matter of Disciplinary Charges Against D.B.
example, theories of poverty and attempt to explain them. Upon our own examination of the
instructions for Professor Legler’s course (Exhibit 9) and review of the paper at issue (Exhibit
10), it was evident to the panel that the paper does not attempt that kind of exercise.
[16] As to the bibliography, particularly troublesome to us was that it appeared that changes
were made in references, particularly to dates, in an attempt to conform these references to the
requirements of Professor Legler’s assignment to conduct a review of recent literature.
[17] Professor North gave evidence and identified the paper as one that would be responsive
to her take-home exam in her fourth-year political science course in Latin American studies at
York University in 1997. She identified her reading list and described her “kit contents”
consisting of readings referenced in the paper at issue complete with typographical mistakes and
misdescriptions. For example, the History “of” … rather than the accurate, History “for …”.
She also identified an English translation of a paper she had published in Spanish (Exhibit 16).
The English translation of the paper has never been published, however it had been included in
her “kit” for her political science course at York. The paper at issue (Exhibit 10) included the
citation “(North, 1993, pp 302-303)”. Professor North testified that this citation corresponded to
pages 302 – 303 of her kit where the English translation of her paper appeared.
[18] The English translation of Professor North’s paper was cited in the bibliography of the
paper in question.
[19] There were other such examples in the evidence leading the Panel to the finding that the
paper that was submitted to Professor Legler was written using the kit contents and was written,
on the evidence of Professor North, as a response to her 1997 take-home examination
assignment.
[20] Finally, there was evidence that the references in the paper were consistent with Professor
North’s instructions to cite only the kit pages and not the original source references in the actual
articles. For example, the actual page number of an article by Evans (Exhibit 15) in the original
source is 221, but the cited number in the paper at issue is 86, which, inferentially, is the page
number in the kit.
[21] Professor Legler was committed to finding the unfamiliar sources referenced in the
bibliography, e.g. Farkin and Wilson. He attended at the Robarts Library and sought the
assistance of Miguel Torrens, an experienced Latin American bibliographer. The Panel heard
from Mr. Torrens who confirmed the conclusions he arrived at as set out in Exhibit 11, that after
an exhaustive search, the Farkin and Wilson references did not exist. The Panel was satisfied on
all the evidence that these two references in the bibliography were concocted. There were other
such alterations and clearly fictitious references. For example, the Forest Colbourne article
referenced in the bibliography (page 14) as published by Greenwood in Development Issues in
Latin America, was in fact published in the Journal of Development Studies. According to
Professor North and Professor Legler, the Colbourne article was only published in the Journal of
Development Studies. Miguel Torrens could find no evidence of the existence of Development
Issues in Latin America. There were others.

- Page 5 of 7 -

In the Matter of Disciplinary Charges Against D.B.
[22] Clearly this was a systematic attempt to alter sources from those found in the kit,
including as we have said, altering dates to more closely conform to Professor Legler’s
requirement for recent works. For example, Baloyra’s article published in 1983 has been altered
in the bibliography to 1993.
[23] The final issue we need to address is whether D.B. in fact submitted the paper at issue.
Susan Bartkiw gave evidence, consistent with her notes (Exhibit 24) that Mr. B. in the meeting
with Professor Rae, Professor Legler, and Ms. Bartkiw, said that he both wrote the paper and
confirmed, “it was his own work”. It is also to be noted that his name appears on the face of the
paper.
[24] On the basis of all the evidence, admittedly circumstantial in nature, and noting that Mr.
B. did not attend at the hearing, the Panel was satisfied that Mr. B. obtained this paper from a
third party, and probably also the kit contents index (Exhibit 19); concocted major elements of
the bibliography; and knowingly submitted another’s work as his own in purported compliance
with requirements of Professor Legler in the course POL305Y.
[25] The Panel was therefore satisfied that the two charges were proved on clear and
convincing evidence.
REASONS FOR SANCTION (Delivered Orally)
[26] The University submitted that Mr. B. should be suspended for two years; have a notation
on his record for a period of three years; receive a grade of zero in the course POL305Y; and
that this matter should be reported to the Provost for publication in the University papers with the
name of the student withheld.
[27]

The Panel imposed the penalty proposed by the University.

[28] The Panel felt that a suspension for two years was consistent with past decisions in like
cases. While this is an important principle, the Panel also found, in any case, that a two year
suspension was appropriate for this offence on the facts of this case.
[29] One might have been able to infer that this paper was purchased. If that had been the
case the penalty would have been greater according to the Provost’s guidelines. The Panel did
not draw any conclusion that the paper was purchased, and therefore the Panel considered two
years to be an appropriate period of suspension.
[30] As Mr. B. did not attend, the Panel was not in a position to consider mitigating evidence,
or any evidence, from which it could possibly consider a reduction of this otherwise appropriate
sentence.

- Page 6 of 7 -

In the Matter of Disciplinary Charges Against D.B.
[31] The Panel discussed the differential between two years suspension and three years
notation and was prepared to accept the three year notation on the basis of the University’s
submission that it would extend for a period of the year for which the student might come back
to complete his degree, but also, it might act as an incentive for the student to return to the
University of Toronto and effect some rehabilitation as opposed to his probably not being able to
go to some other institution for a third year anyway.
[32] The Panel did not ignore, in considering the sentence, that the student did not admit to the
offence in the interview and certainly made half-baked and unconvincing attempts to cover up
and deny. While noting this less than admirable behaviour, the Panel nevertheless felt that the
two-year suspension and three year notation took into account the Panel’s view of those
particular matters.
[33] While it is true that there were two offences here, the Panel did not place much emphasis
on that fact as opposed to, arguably, being so connected as to in effect constitute one offence.
The Panel was not of the opinion that the fact that there were two offences, technically should
lead it to impose a more severe sanction.
[34]

The Panel therefore imposed the following sanctions upon Mr. B.:
1.

Suspension from the University for a period of two years;

2.

A grade of zero in POL305Y;

3.

A three year notation on his transcript; and,

4.

This matter shall be reported to the Vice-President and Provost for publication in
the University newspapers with the name of the student withheld.

May 6, 2002
I certify that this is the decision of the Panel
R.G. Slaught
Ronald G. Slaght, Q.C.
Co-Chair

- Page 7 of 7 -

