Case 01-02-07

DATE:

   May 6, 2002

PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v. D.B.

Hearing Date(s):

   April 22, April 24, 2002

Panel Members:

   Ronald G. Slaght, Q.C., Co-Chair
   Daniel R. Brooks, faculty member
   Karen Iverson, student member

Appearances:

   No one appearing for the student
   Lily I. Harmer, for the University
   Paul Holmes, Judicial Affairs Officer, Governing Council Secretariat
   Thomas Legler, Postdoctoral Fellow, Centre for Global Studies,
   University of Victoria
   Liisa North, Faculty member, York University
   Miguel Torrens, Reference Librarian, Ibero & Ibero-American Collection,
   Robarts Library
   Susan Bartkiw, Administrative Assistant, Faculty of Arts and Science

   Student charged under s. B.i.1(d) and s. B.i.1(f) of the Code. The
   charges related to allegations that the Student submitted a paper that
   was plagiarized from an answer, written by another individual, to a
   question on a take-home examination given for a course at another
   university, and that he concocted the bibliography submitted with the
   paper. The Student did not attend the hearing. The Panel considered the
   evidence of the Judicial Affairs Officer and found that adequate notice
   of the hearing dates had been given. The Panel found that despite no
   direct evidence it was reasonable to infer that the Student received a
   document, or a document was made available to him, that warned against
   and defined plagiarism. The Panel examined the assignment instructions
   and reviewed the paper at issue and found that the paper was not
   responsive to the assignment. The Panel considered the bibliography and
   found that references were changed to conform to the assignment
   requirements. The Panel considered the testimony of the professor who
   wrote the exam question at the other university and found that the
   submitted paper was written using the articles from the course kit for
   the course at the other university, contained references consistent
   with the professorâs citation instructions, and was written as a
   response to the take-home examination assignment from that course. The
   Panel considered the evidence from a reference librarian and found that
   on all the evidence, two references in the bibliography were concocted
   and that other alterations and fictitious references in the
   bibliography were affected in an attempt to alter sources from those
   found in the course kit. The Panel found that, on the basis of all the
   circumstantial evidence and the fact that the Student did not attend at
   the hearing, the Student obtained the paper from a third party, and
   probably also the kit contents index; concocted major elements of the
   bibliography; knowingly submitted anotherâs work as his own; and that
   the charges were proved on clear and convincing evidence. The Panel
   found that a two-year suspension was consistent with past Tribunal
   decisions in like cases. The Panel found that as a result of the
   Student not being in attendance, it was not in a position to consider
   mitigating evidence. The Panel found that a three-year notation was
   acceptable because it might act as an incentive for the Student to
   return to the University and effect some rehabilitation. The Panel
   found that the fact that there were two offences should not technically
   lead to impose a more severe sanction. The Panel accepted the
   Universityâs submission on penalty and imposed a grade of zero in the
   course; a two-year suspension; a three-year notation on the Studentâs
   academic record and transcript; and that a report be issued to the
   Provost.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/28427
