Case 1386

   DATE:

   February 14, 2024

   PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v. Y.X. ("the Student")

   HEARING DATE:

   November 27, 2023, via Zoom

   PANEL MEMBERS:

   Michelle S. Henry, Chair
   Professor Irina D. Mihalache, Faculty Panel Member
   Brinda Batra, Student Panel Member

   APPEARANCES:
   Tina Lie, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg
   Rothstein LLP
   Janet Song, Co-Counsel,Â Paliare Roland Rosenberg Rothstein LLP

   NOT IN ATTENDANCE:

   The Student

   HEARING SECRETARY:

   Samanthe Huang, Coordinator & Hearing Secretary, Office of Appeals,
   Discipline and Faculty Grievances

   The Student was charged with four counts of knowingly obtaining
   unauthorized assistance in connection with term test and final exams in
   several courses (collectively, the âAssessmentsâ), contrary to section
   B.i.1(b) of the Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters, 2019 (the
   âCodeâ). In the alternative, the Student was charged with four counts
   for knowingly engaging in a form of cheating, academic dishonesty or
   misconduct, fraud or misrepresentation in connection with the
   Assessments, contrary to section B.i.3(b) of the Code. In the further
   alternative, the Student was charged with two counts under section
   B.i.1(d) of the Code for knowingly representing as the Studentâs own an
   idea or expression of an idea or work of another in connection with the
   final exams in two courses.

   Neither the Student nor a legal representative of the Student appeared
   at the hearing. The Panel considered evidence submitted by the
   University detailing several efforts to provide the Student with notice
   of the Charges and Virtual Hearing by telephone, mail, and email.
   Though there was no evidence that the Student received the notice by
   email or by mail, the Panel was satisfied that the Student had received
   reasonable notice of the charges and the hearing in accordance with the
   notice requirements set out in the Statutory Powers Procedure Act and
   the University Tribunal Rules of Practice and Procedure. Accordingly,
   the Panel proceeded to hear the case on its merits in the absence of
   the Student.

   The hearing proceeded on the basis of the submissions and affidavit
   evidence provided by the University. The Panel received evidence about
   the Studentâs conduct in three separate courses. In the first course,
   the Panel received evidence that the Student had participated in an
   online chat group in which participants shared answers to two tests. In
   the second course,Â  the Panel noted that the Professor in the course
   observed that the Studentâs answers were almost identical to those of
   another student, and suspected that the two students had collaborated
   on the final exam. Finally, in the third course, the Panel considered
   the evidence of the Professor in the course who outlined that the
   Studentâs answers for a particular question on the exam were identical
   or nearly identical to the answers of other students, including a
   similar level of detail, and a similar incorrect approach.

   Based on the all the evidence, the Panel found the Student guilty with
   respect to three counts of obtaining unauthorized assistance in
   connection with the Assessments, contrary to B.i.1(b) of the Code. In
   addition, the Panel found the Student guilty of one count of knowingly
   engaging in a form of cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct in
   connection with the final exam in the remaining course, contrary to
   B.i.3(b) of the Code. Given these findings, the University withdrew the
   alternative charges under ss. B.i.3(b) and B.i.1(d) of the Code.

   In determining the appropriate sanction, the Panel reviewed relevant
   past decisions of the Tribunal submitted by the University, and in
   particular, the sanctioning factors set out in University of Toronto v.
   C. (Case No. 1976/77-3) (âMr. Câ). With respect to the character of the
   Student, the Panel noted that the Student had failed to participate in
   the proceeding or to attend any meeting with the Deanâs Designate, and
   there was no evidence indicating that the Student had expressed remorse
   or insight into their actions. The Panel further noted, with respect to
   the likelihood of the offence, that the Student had previously
   committed one academic offence. With respect to the nature of the
   offences committed and the need for general deterrence, the Panel
   observed that obtaining unauthorized assistance on an academic
   examination is a serious offence that strikes at the heart of academic
   integrity, and that the appropriate sanction must send a strong message
   to other students that such misconduct is considered a serious offence.
   Finally, the Panel noted that the onus was on the Student to put
   forward any mitigating circumstances, and given their absence, there
   was no evidence before the Tribunal of any such circumstances. Based on
   the Universityâs submissions and the Mr. C factors, the Tribunal
   accepted the Universityâs proposed sanction.

   The Panel imposed the following sanction: a final grade of zero all
   three courses; a four-year suspension; a five-year notation, and a
   report to the Provost for publication.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/31489
