Case #503

   DATE: June 27, 2008
   PARTIES: University of Toronto v. X. Z. Hearing Date(s): information
   not available
   Panel Members:
   Janet E. Minor
   Professor Graham Trope
   Steven Meurrens
   Appearances:
   Jack Siegel, for the Student (Student not in attendance)
   Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel for the University
   Trial Division â s. B.i.3(a) of the CodeÂ  â forgery of documents â
   altered mid term and quiz submitted for reâgrading âAgreed Statement of
   Facts â guilty plea â Joint Submission on Penalty â no prior offences â
   cooperation with discipline process â academic status relative to
   graduation â misconduct affected acceptance to graduate school â Joint
   Submission on Penalty accepted â grade assignment of zero for two
   courses; two-year suspension; three-year notation on transcript; and
   report to Provost
   The Student was charged with six offences under the Code. The charges
   related to allegations that the Student submitted for re-grading an
   altered midterm test and quiz in two courses. The matter proceeded
   based upon an Agreed Statement of Facts. The Student pleaded guilty to
   two offences under s. B.i.3(a). On the basis of the Agreed Statement of
   Facts and the submissions of both parties, the Panel accepted the plea
   and found the Student guilty. The parties submitted a Joint Submission
   on Penalty. The Panel considered that the two incidents were the
   Studentâs first offence, and that she admitted her misconduct and
   cooperated with the proceedings. The Panel observed that the Student
   had completed all her program requirements and suffered repercussions
   from her misconduct, in that it had affected her acceptance to graduate
   school. The Panel found that the joint submission was appropriate and
   imposed a two-year suspension; a grade of zero in the two courses; a
   three-year notation on the Studentâs academic record and transcript;
   and that a report be issued to the Provost.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/13059
