THE UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO

IN THE MATTER of charges of academic dishonesty made on April 25, 2007;
AND IN THE MATTER of the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters,
1995;
IN THE MATTER of the University of Toronto Act, 1971, S.O. 1971, c. 56, as amended S.O.
1978, c.88;

BETWEEN:
UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO

- and X.Z,

Members of the panel:
• Janet E. Minor
• Professor Graham Trope
•

Steven Meurrens

Appearances:
• Jack Siegel, for the Student
(the Student not in attendance)
• Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel for the University of Toronto

REASONS FOR DECISION

I.

Hearing of The University Tribunal was convened to hear six (6) charges under the Code
1
of'Behaviour on Academic Matters, 1995 (the "Code") laid against the Student, by letter
of April 25, 2007 from the Vice-Provost, Academic Professor Edith Hillan.

2.

At the outset, Ms. Harmer advised the tribunal that the matter would proceed on an Agreed
Statement of Facts (dated August 29, 2007), and that four (4) charges were withdrawn.

3.

Counsel for the Student advised that she pied guilty to the two (2) remaining charges:
" 2. On or about November 3, 2006, you knowingly forged or in any other way
altered or falsified an academic record, and/or uttered, circulated or made use of

1

Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters, 1995

such forged, altered or falsified record, namely, a midterm test for the course
MGT4751F which you submitted for re-grading, contrary to Section B.I.3(a) of
the Code

5. On or about December 5, 2006, you knowingly forged or in any other way
altered or falsified an academic record, and/or uttered, circulated or made use of
such forged, altered or falsified record, namely, Quiz 3 for the course LIN200 IF
which you submitted for re-grading, contrary to Section B.I.3(a) of the Code."
4.

The Agreed Statement of Facts, signed by the Student and counsel for the University on
August 29, 2007, described the incidents as follows:
"On or about October 24, 2006, the Student wrote the Mid-Term which consisted
of 3 questions that students were required to answer within the two hour allotted
time period. At the Student's request and due to a conflict in her class schedule,
the Student wrote the Mid-Term earlier than the scheduled time, and she did so
alone in an unsupervised office. The Student recorded her answers to the MidTerm in one test booklet.
On October 31, 2006, Professor Berman returned the graded Mid-Terms to the
class. The Student received a grade of 81 which represented the sum of the
individual marks of 35, 24, and 22 that had been awarded for her answers to each
of the three questions.
After receiving her graded Mid-Term, the Student altered and falsified both the
answers and the marks in respect to the three Mid-Term questions. Specifically,
the Student enhanced the grades of 35, 24 and 22 that had been recorded to grades
of 38, 28 and 25, respectively, increasing the total grade from 81 to 91.
On November 3, 2006, the Student met with Professor Berman and re-submitted
the test booklet containing the altered answers and marks. The Student told
Professor Berman that there had been a mathematical error in the calculation of
her mark, and told him that it ought to have been 91 rather than the 81 that
appeared on the cover of the Mid-Term booklet. A copy of the re-submitted MidTerm booklet is attached to this Agreed Statement of Facts at Tab E.
After examining the Mid-Term booklet that the Student had re-submitted and
consulting with his TA, Professor Berman determined that the Student's original
Mid-Term booklet had been altered, in respect of both the answers and the
assigned marks, and re-submitted for academic credit.
The Student admitted that she altered or falsified the Mid-Term and re-submitted
the altered version of the Mid-Term to Professor Berman for academic credit,
contrary to Section B.i.3(a) of the Code, and that she did so to improve her grade
in the course.

2

In the Fall of 2006, the Stndent emolled in LIN200HI, Introduction to Language,
a second year course offered by the University's Department of Linguistics.
Richard Compton was the course instructor. Introduction to Language was a
general course which examined a range of topics associated with language. A
detailed course outline was provided to students. A copy of the course outline for
Introduction to Language is attached to this Agreed Statement of Facts at Tab F.
On or about Monday, November 27, 2006, the Stndent wrote a quiz that was
administered during her tntorial session ("Quiz 3"). Quiz 3 comprised 29
multiple choice questions. Stndents recorded their answers to Quiz 3 on Scantron
cards that they submitted to their respective tntorial leaders after completing the
quiz. The Stndent submitted the Scantron card containing her answers to Quiz 3
to her tutorial leader on November 27, 2006.
The graded Scantron cards were retnmed to the stndents the following week
during their respective tntorial sessions, which, in this Student's case, occurred on
Monday, December 4, 2006. During the tntorials, the TAs also reviewed the
correct answers to Quiz 3 with the class. The graded Scantrons were placed on
the tntorial leader's desk at the front of the room for pickup by the stndents. The
Student retrieved her graded Scantron during the tntorial session on December 4,
2006.
The Student's graded Scantron showed that she had 10/29 correct answers,
resulting in a grade of 'F-'. Mr. Compton recorded this grade on CCNet, a webbased course management and class communication tool.
After retrieving her graded Scantron card, the Stndent changed some of her
answers by altering bubble selections that she had initially made when she wrote
Quiz 3 on November 27, 2006. Specifically, the Stndent changed seven of her
multiple choice answers from incorrect to correct answers and an eighth correct
answer to an incorrect answer.
On December 5, 2006, the Student met with Mr. Compton and re-submitted her
altered Scantron card for re-grading. The Stndent told Mr. Compton that the
grade that had been posted for her on CCNet in respect of Quiz 3 did not reflect
the answers on her Scantron card. According to the Student, she had correctly
answered either 15 or 17 of the 29 questions rather than only the IO reflected in
the posted grade.
After comparing the re-submitted Scantron card with a copy he had made of the
Scantron card originally submitted by the Student on November 27, 2006, Mr.
Compton detected the alterations to the original answers. A copy of the altered
Scantron card is attached to this Agreed Statement of Facts at Tab G. A copy of a
printout of the correct answers is attached to this Agreed Statement of Facts at
Tab H. A copy of a table summarizing the alterations that the Stndent made to
her answers is at Tab I.

3

The Student admitted that on or about December 5, 2006, she altered or falsified
Quiz 3 by changing her answers and re-submitting the altered version of Quiz 3
for academic credit, contrary to Section B.i.3(a) of the Code, and that she did so
to improve her grade in the course."
5.

After reviewing the entire Agreed Statement of Facts, and hearing submissions from both
counsel, the tribunal accepted the plea and found that the facts support findings of
contraventions of the Code as set out in the two charges. It is clear that the Student wrote
two tests in the courses described and, after receiving her results, altered her original
responses to improve her answers. She re-submitted them as the original in order to
improve her grade.

PENALTY

6.

The parties' Joint Submission on Penalty, dated August 29, 2007, assisted the panel. The
following sanctions were recommended in the joint submission:
•

suspension from attendance at the University of Toronto for a period of 2
years, from January 1, 2008, or the date of the hearing, whichever is later;

•

assignment of a grade of zero in:
MGT475H (Management Science) for the 2006 Fall term;
LIN200H (Introduction to Language) for the 2006 Fall term

•

notation on the Student's transcript from the date of the suspension for a
period of 3 years or her graduation from the University, whichever occurs
first, to the effect that she was sanctioned for academic misconduct;

•

report to the Provost, who may publish a notice of the decision of the Tribunal
and the sanction or sanctions imposed with the Student's name withheld.

7.

Panels give careful consideration to joint submissions on penalty. While not obliged to do
so, panels generally accept a joint submission on penalty, unless it is outside a range of
penalties reasonable in the circumstances.

8.

The factors to be considered when determining penalty are well established:
(a) the character of the person charged;
(b) the likelihood of a repetition of the offence;
(c) the nature of the offence committed;
(d) any extenuating circumstances surrounding commission of the offence;
(e) the detriment to the University occasioned by the offence;
2
(f) the need to deter others from committing a similar offence.

In the Matter of the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour and an Appeal by Mr. C., November 1976 pg. 12

4

9.

We have considered and applied these factors. The Student was not in attendance at the
hearing. Her counsel advised that she was in China attending to her mother who was
suffering from a serious illness. No witnesses were called to present character evidence.

10.

The panel took into account that these two incidents were the Student's first offence. She
admitted her misconduct. Her willingness to proceed by way of an agreed statement of
facts resulted in a shorter hearing, without the attendance of a number of witnesses. The
University did not dispute the submission of counsel for the Student that she has had an
opportunity to reflect and acknowledges her misconduct was serious and accepts its
consequences. The Student has completed all program requirements. She has suffered
repercussions from her misconduct in that it has affected her acceptance to a graduate
school.

11.

The misconduct was serious. It occurred in two (2) incidents, both of which were
deliberate and premeditated. The misconduct was designed to unfairly advance her
position, undermining the standards of the University and disadvantaging other students.

12.

In our view the penalty suggested in the joint submission is appropriate and we so order.

ORDER

•

The Student is suspended from attendance at the University of Toronto for a period of
two (2) years, commencing January 24, 2008.

•

A grade of zero (0) is to be assigned to the Student in:
MGT475H (Management Science) for the 2006 Fall term;
LIN200H (Introduction to Language) for the 2006 Fall term.

•

There will be a notation on the Student's transcript from January 24, 2008 for a period
of three years or until her graduation from the University, whichever occurs first, to the
effect that she was sanctioned for academic misconduct.

•

The decision will be reported to the Provost, who may publish a notice of the decision
of the tribunal and sanctions imposed with the Student's name withheld.
;;i...

Dated at Toronto thi~ day of June, 2008.
'

Janet Minor, Chair

V~ov
'
5

