Report #353

   DATE: December 17, 2010
   PARTIES: A.D.Â  (the Student) v. UTM
   Hearing Date(s): December 10, 2010
   Committee Members:
   Professor Markus Dubber, Chair
   Professor Denise Belsham
   Dr. Gerald Halbert
   Jeff Peters
   Professor Arthur Ripstein
   Appearances:
   For the Student Appellant:
   A.D. (the Student)
   For the UTM:
   Professor Gordon Anderson
   UTM â reinstatement â lifting of suspension â early return from
   suspension â medical illness â previous reinstatement from suspension â
   reasonable imposition of suspension â no evidence of significant change
   in medical condition â no change in capacity for university studies â
   purpose of a suspension â dissenting opinion â likelihood of seeking
   academic counselling â appeal dismissed
   Appeal relates to the Studentâs wish to lift an imposed suspension. The
   Student sought early return from his suspension. The UTM Committee on
   Standing had previously placed the Student on a one-year suspension. On
   appeal, the UTM Academic Appeals Board lifted the suspension and placed
   the Student on probation, further advising the Student to seek academic
   skills advising and to restrict himself to no more than three courses
   over the fall and winter sessions. The Student was also advised by the
   Academic Appeals Board Chair to withdraw from courses when indications
   were that he was not progressing well. After the first suspension had
   been lifted, the Student increased his enrolment to five courses and,
   rather than withdrawing from some or all of the courses, he continued
   with poor results in his sessional, annual, and cumulative GPAs. The
   Student set up an appointment with the Academic Skills Center as per
   the first acceptance of their appeal from his first one-year
   suspension, but failed to attend. The Student was once again placed on
   a one-year suspension. The Committee considered the second suspension.
   The majority of the Committee concluded that the imposition of the
   suspension was reasonable and that the Student had failed to produce
   compelling evidence of the requisite change in circumstances needed for
   the extraordinary remedy of early return from a suspension. The
   Committee found the Student provided no evidence of significant change
   in his medical condition or in his capacity to produce academic work of
   a sufficient quality. The Student stated he still had not sought the
   support of the Academic Skills Centre and still believed no such
   support was required. The Committee characterized the purpose of a
   suspension as a chance for the Student to consider how university
   studies fit into his life and career path and to develop the maturity
   required for a successful completion of studies. The Committee found
   there was no indication or evidence that those purposes were met in the
   Studentâs case. Appeal dismissed.

   A dissenting member of the Committee was of the view that the appeal
   should be allowed because the Student would be no more likely to seek
   academic counselling during the remaining four months of his suspension
   than he was during the preceding eight months of the suspension and
   having the Student complete the entirety of his suspension would serve
   no purpose.
   [1]View Report

References

   1. file:///media/12597
