THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
THE GOVERNING COUNCIL
Report# 353 of the Academic Appeals Committee
December 17, 2010
To the Academic Board
University of Toronto
Your Committee reports that it held a hearing on Friday, December 10, 20 I 0, at which
the following members were present:
Professor lvlarkus Dubber, Chair
Professor Denise Belsham
Dr. Gerald Halbert
.tvfr. Jeff Peters
Professor Arthur Ripstein
Secretary: Ms Jasmin Olarte, Administrative Assistant, Office of Appeals,
Discipline and Faculty Grievances
Appearances:
For the Student Appellant:
the Student Appellant

For the University of Toronto at Mississauga (UTM):
Professor Gordon Anderson, Chair, UTM Academic Appeals Board

I.

Appeal

The Student appeals adecision of the University of Toronto Mississauga Academic
Appeals Board (AAB), dated September 29, 20 l 0, rejecting his appeal for lifting a oneyear suspension. He now seeks the remedy of early return from his suspension.

II,

Facts

The Student enrolled at UTM in Fall 2007 and has been plagued by cardiac health
problems, eventually requiring catheter ablation surgery on July 3, 2009. That surgery,
which the Student reported, at various points, as having a 1% and a 3% failure rate,'
proved \ll1S\Jccessful. He experienced cardiac tachycardia episodes on January 22 and 29,
20 I 0, and eventually underwent a second operation on March 26, 20 I 0. He reports that
his current health is "stable" and that the failure rate of a second operation is less than
1%.

In August 2009, the UTM Committee on Standing placed the Student on one-year
suspension. On appeal, the UTlv[ AAB lifted this suspension, and placed him on
probation advising him to seek academic skills advising and, in view of his health
concerns, to restrict himself to no more than three courses over the fall and winter
sessions. He also was personally advised by the AAB Chair to withdraw from courses
promptly when indications were that he was not progressing well.
After enrolling in three courses in Fall 2009, the Student increased his enrollment to five
comses in Winter 20 I 0. Rather than withdrawing from all or some of his courses during
the Winter Tenn, either before the drop deadline or after the deadline for medical
reasons, he soldiered on, behavior he attributed at the hearing to "overconfidence." He
did poorly, and ended the Term with a Sessional GPA of 1.29, an 1-\nnual GPA of 1.38,
and a Cumulative GPA of0.99.
The Student set up an appointment with the Academic Skills Centre in July 2010. He did
not keep this appointment; he has not scheduled another appointment since then. At the
hearing, the Sh1dent explained that he had failed to seek the support of the Academic
Skills Centre, as provided in the AAB's acceptance of his appeal from his first one-year
suspension, because he felt that he did not lack the requisite skills to succeed at
university, as evidenced by what he described as his stah1s as a "top-student ...
throughout my education over the past 13-14 years."
In June 2010, the Standing Committee once again placed him on one-year suspension.
The Student again appealed that decision to the AAB. In September, the AAB rejected
his appeal. From this decision, the Student appealed to the UoIT Academic Appeals
Committee.

III.

Decision

Early return from a suspension is an extraordinary remedy that will not be appropriate
unless the Student produces compelling evidence of a change in circumstances relevant to
the purposes of the suspension in question, which require a reassessment of the likelihood
of a recurrence of the poor performance that resulted in the suspension in the first place,
or unless the underlying decision to impose the suspension was unreasonable.
Here, there is no suggestion that the Standing Committee's imposition of the suspension
was unreasonable. The only question, therefore, is whether the Student has succeeded in
producing compelling evidence of the requisite change in circumstances relevant to the
puqioses of the concededly reasonable suspension.
·
A majority of your Conimittee concludes that the Student has not met this heavy bmden.
In fact, the Student produced no evidence of a change ofrelevant circumstances. There is
consensus among Committee members on this point; the difference of opinion among
Committee members concerns the significance of this fact. In the majority's view, the

2

absence of change requires rejecting the appeal; in the dissenting member's view, it
requires accepting it.
The Student still has not sought the support of the Academic Skills Centre and continues
to believe that no such support is required, given his success as a student before entering
Uoff. Rather than making realistic and specific plans about his future course of study, he
spoke of plans to enter law school as early as 2012, after raising his GPA to the "mid· to
high-2 range," from the current 0.99, by maintaining a GPA of3 in all his courses,
stmting in Winter 2011. He testified about regularly attending weekly undergraduate prelaw society meetings at Queen's University in Kingston and University of Western
Ontario in London, and reported that he had taken the Law School Admission Test
(LSAT), obtaining what he described, at various points, as "an excellent score," a 154,
and a 157 ( out of 180). In fact, a score of 157 wot1ld place the Student in the 72nd
percentile; a preliminary review of publicly available admissions criteria suggests that,
even if combined with a GPA in the "mid- to high-2 range," this score would be
insufficient to make him a competitive candidate for admission in the General category at
either Queen's or Western.
The Student also has provided no evidence of significant changes in either his medical
condition or in his capacity to produce academic work ofsut11cient quality. His medical
condition is not in doubt, nor has it changed since the Standing Committee's decision to
impose the one-year suspension in June 2010, or since the AAB 's rejection of his appeal
from that decision three months later. The Student also has not enrolled in programs at
other educational institutions during his suspension, pe1formance at which might have
been considered as evidence of a significant improvement in academic skills, skills that
the Student feels do not require improvement given his previous academic achievements.
The purpose of a suspension is not to punish the student but to allow him or her to
consider whether, and how, further university studies fit into his or her future life and
career path and to develop the level of maturity required for a successful completion of
his or her university studies, i(l the event he or she decides to resume them. There is no
indication, much less compelling evidence, that these goals have been achieved at this
time in this case, and there is therefore no reason for cutting sho11 the Student's
suspension.
One member of your Committee would have allowed the appeal on the ground that
having the Student complete his suspension would serve no purpose because he would be
no more likely lo seek academic counseling during the remaining four months of his
suspension than he was during the preceding eight months of the suspension already
served.
Your Committee very much hopes that the Student will take advantage of the various
support services available at UTM, both during the remaining four months of his
suspension and upon his return, including the Office of the Registrar, the Academic Skills
Centre, and the AccessAbility Resource Centre, to develop a sensible and feasible

3

curricular plan and to monitor adherence to that plan through the rest of his academic
career at UTM.
The appeal is dismissed.

4

