Case No.: 781

THE UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO

IN THE MATTER OF charges of academic dishonesty filed on November 25, 2014,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic
Matters, 1995,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Act 1971 S.O. 1971 , c.56 as amended
S.O. 1978 c. 88

BETWEEN:

THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
- AND -

Hearing Date: November 10, 2016
Members of the Panel:
Ms. Sana Halwani Barrister and Solicitor, Gilbert s LLP, Chair
Professor Katherine Larson Department of English Faculty Panel Member
Ms. Alanis Ortiz Espinoza, Student Panel Member
Appearances:
Ms. Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel for the University, Paliare Roland BaiTisters
Mr. . . the Student
In Attendance:
Professor Luc de Nil, Vice Dean Students, School of Graduate Studies
Ms. Krista Osbourne, Administrative Assistant, Office of the Appeals Discipline and Faculty
Grievances
Mr. Sean Lourim, Technology Assistant, Office of the Governing Council
Ms. Andrea Rico Wolf, Banister and Solicitor, Gilberf s LLP (notetaker)
Mr. Seumas Woods, (Observer New University Tribunal Chair)

A.

CHARGES AND HEARING

[I]

The Trial Division of the University Tribunal convened on November 10, 2016 to

consider charges of academic dishonesty brought by the University of Toronto (the "University")
against Mr. . . . -

(the "Student") under the Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters, 1995

(the "Code") by letter dated November 25, 2014 from the Interim Vice-Provost, Faculty &
Academic Life, Professor Sioban Nelson.
[2]

The Student was charged with the following:
Charge #1 - Concoction Charge

(a)

In or about Winter and/or Spring 2013 , you knowingly submitted academic work
containing a purported statement of fact which had been concocted, contrary to
section B.I. l(f) of the Code.
Charge #2 - Alternative Charge

(b)

In the alternative, in or about Winter and Spring 2013, you knowingly engaged in
a

form

of

cheating,

academic

dishonesty

or

misconduct,

fraud

or

misrepresentation in order to obtain academic credit or other academic advantage
of any kind, contrary to section B.I.3(b) of the Code .
[3]

The Student attended the hearing via Skye, was not represented by counsel, and pied

guilty to all the above charges.
[4]

Counsel for the University indicated that if the plea of guilty to the charge of concoction

was accepted by the Panel, the second charge would be withdrawn as it was in the alternative.
B.

AGREED STATEMENT OF FACTS AND FINDING OF GUILT

[5]

At the outset of the hearing, the Panel was advised that the Student and the University

had entered into an Agreed Statement of Facts. That Agreed Statement of Facts was introduced
as Exhibit I at the hearing and is attached as Appendix "A" to this decision. In the Agreed
Statement of Facts, the Student stated, inter alia, that:
(a)

he received a copy of the charges filed ;

2

(b)

he received reasonable notice of the hearing;

(c)

he waives the reading of the charges filed against him, and pleads guilty to all
charges;

(d)

the Provost of the University advised him of his right to obtain legal counsel and
he has not done so; and

(e)

he signs the Agreed Statement of Facts freely and voluntarily, knowing of the
potenti al consequences, and does so with the advice of counsel.

[6]

In addition, the Panel received into evidence, on consent, a Joint Book of Documents

containing the documents referred to in the Agreed Statement of Facts, introduced as Exhibit 2 at
the hearing. The Student and the University agreed that each document contained in the Joint
Book of Documents could be admitted into evidence for all purposes, including for the truth of
their contents, without fu1iher proof.
[7]

At the hearing, counsel for the University provided detailed submissions regarding the

evidence suppotiing the charges, during which she led the Panel through the Agreed Statement
of Facts and, in particular, the impugned work which the Student was charged with concocting.
(8]

As set out in detail in the Agreed Statement of Facts, the circumstances giving rise to the

charges involved the deliberate concoction, by the Student, of the results of research undertaken
as paii of his Master' s thesis. In particular, the Student admitted that:
(a)

he provided research data to his thesis supervisor, Dr. Andrew Wilde, in support
of work the Student was doing in respect of his Master's program, which data he
knew was to be included in the submission of an article to the Journal of Cell

Biology;
(b)

he knowingly manipulated, altered and falsified the research data that he
presented, which was ultimately included in the article submitted to the Journal of

Cell Biology in Supplementary Figure 3 of the article;
(c)

he did not provide lab notebooks or data files to verify some or all of the data he
reported;

3

(d)

he provided false explanations to Dr. Wilde when asked to explain anomalies
identified in the data contained in Supplementary Figure 3 of the article; and

(e)

he committed the academic offence of knowingly submitting an academic work
containing a purported statement of fact that had been concocted, contrary to
section B.I.1 (f) of the Code.

[9]

Following deliberation and based on the submissions of counsel fo r the University, the

facts set out in the Agreed Statement of Facts and Joint Book of Documents, and the Student' s
confirmation of his agreement with the University's review of the facts at the hearing, the Panel
found that the first charge was proven with clear and convincing evidence on a balance of
probabilities and accepted the Student's guilty plea in respect of that charge. Given that finding
of guilt, the University withdrew the alternative charge. The Panel therefore makes no finding
with respect to that alternative charge.
C.

PENALTY

[l O]

Following the Panel 's finding of guilt, the University and the Student submitted a Joint

Submission on Penalty, introduced as Exhibit 3 and attached as Appendix "B" to this decision.
[ 11]

The Joint Submission on Penalty proposed the following :
(a)

a final grade of zero in the course which was the subj ect matter of the offence
(RST9999Y - Research/Thesis);

(b)

an immediate suspension of the Student from the University, to commence on the
day the Tribunal makes its order for a period of up to five years;

(c)

a permanent notation of the sanction on the Student's academic record and
transcript; and

(d)

a recommendation by the Tribunal that the Student be expelled from the
University.

[12]

Tn addition, the University and the Student submitted that the Tribunal should report its

decision and the sanction(s) imposed to the Provost for publication in the University newspapers,
with the name of the Student withheld.
4

(13]

Counsel for the University submitted that a five year suspension and recommended

expulsion in this case was within the range of appropriate sanctions. In support of this
submission, counsel for the University reviewed a Book of Authorities setting out the sentencing
guidelines and sentences that have been adopted by other panels of the University Tribunal in
similar cases. According to these guidelines, the Panel should consider the following six criteria
when deciding on an appropriate sanction:

(14]

(a)

the character of the person charged;

(b)

the likelihood of a repetition of the offence;

(c)

the nature of the offence committed;

(d)

any extenuating circumstances surrounding the commission of the offence;

(e)

the detriment to the University occasioned by the offence; and

(f)

the need to deter others from committing a similar offence.

On the basis of the above factors and in light of the Joint Submission on Penalty, as

confinned by the Student at the hearing, the Panel concluded that there was no evidence of any
extenuating circumstances and that the sanction agreed to by the parties was appropriate in the
circumstances.
[15]

In support of its decision, the Panel took into account the following factors:
(a)

the offence involved dishonesty and called into question the Student's character;

(b)

the Student was enrolled in a research intensive program, where maintaining the
integrity of research was of utmost importance;

(c)

the Student deliberately manipulated and falsified research data, which he knew
would be counted towards his academic work and used for further publication;

(d)

the Student took additional steps to misrepresent the authenticity of the impugned
data when questioned by his thesis supervisor;

5

(e)

the Student was aware that the concocted research data was to be included in an
article to be submitted for publication in a peer-reviewed journal. In doing so, the
Student not only undermined the integrity of his academic work, but knowingly
risked the reputation of his thesis supervisor and the University. As a result of the
Student's academic misconduct, the Journal of Cell Biology revoked its
acceptance of the article and Dr. Wilde had to withdraw an application for a
government-funded research grant;

(f)

the Student did not admit his wrongdoing when he met with the Dean's Designate
to discuss the allegation that he had concocted research; and

(g)

the Student pleaded guilty at the hearing and cooperated with the University with
respect to the Agreed Statement of Facts and Joint Submission on Penalty.

[1 6]

We note that the Panel had no basis to consider any relevant mitigating factors beyond

the Student's cooperation with the University in the Agreed Statement of Facts and Joint
Submission. In particular, there was no evidence from the Student of any extenuating relevant
circumstances regarding his commission of the offence, his appreciation of the significance and
gravity of his actions, or any reason to suspect that there would not be a repetition of the offence
if the Student were to return to the University.
[17]

In determining the appropriateness of the penalty sought, the Panel took into account the

University' s submission on the significant weight to be accorded to the Joint Submission on
Penalty. While a panel is neither required nor obliged to accept a joint submission on penalty, the
Panel was cognizant that such submissions should only be rejected in limited circumstances,
where the proposed penalty is unreasonable, unconscionable, or would bring the administration
of justice into disrepute. (The University o_/Toronto v. SM. , September 12 2013, Case No. 696,
at para. 24; University o_[Toronto and S. F., October 20 20 14, Case No. 690 at para. 22)
[18]

The Panel was of the view that accepting the Joint Submission would not bring the

administration of justice into disrepute. The deliberate fabrication of research results in the
academic setting is an extremely serious offence and wanants an equally serious sanction . As
commented by this Tribunal on numerous occasions, this offence goes to the heart of the
academic integrity and reputation of the University and is inconsistent with the standards of
6

ethical research espoused by the University. As noted in the October 5, 2012 appeal decision
MK. and the University o_fToronto, Case No. 634:
Academic integrity is essential to the University community and to the pursuit and
transmission of knowledge in the University. Falsification of academic endeavour
undermines the role and reputation of the University in a fundamental way. This is
particularly the case when the dishonesty in question is, as it was here, at the highest level
of research in a research intensive depaitment.
[19]

Similarly, in the 2007 decision on fabrication of research data in University of Toronto

and JD. , Case No. 456 the Tribunal noted:
Actions of this kind undermine the integrity, reputation and credibility of the University,
its academic staff and students, and its academic mission, as well as the public need to
presume that a degree from the University is honestly earned. A serious penalty 1s
warranted in order to vindicate the interest of both specific and general dete1Tence.
[20]

In light of the foregoing, the Panel found that the sanctions requested by the University

and the Student represent a reasonable recognition of the factors of specific and general
deteITence in the context of a research intensive program, and are consistent with the principles
expressed in prior cases and the evidence before the Panel. The Panel therefore accepted the
Joint Submission on Penalty.

D.

DECISION OF THE PANEL

[21]

At the conclusion of the hearing, the Panel ordered that:
(a)

the Student is guilty of the academic offence of knowingly submitting an
academic work containing a purp011ed statement of fact that had been concocted,
contrary to section B.I.l(f) of the Code;

(b)

the Student shall receive a final grade of zero in RST9999Y;

(c)

the Student be immediately suspended from the University for a period of up to
five years;

(d)

the Tribunal recommends to the President of the University that he recommend to
the Governing Council that the Student be expelled from the University;

7

(e)

the sanction shall be permanently recorded on the Student's academic record and
transcript; and

(f)

this case shall be reported to the Provost for publication of a notice of the decision
of the Tribunal and the sanction or sanctions imposed, with the name of the
Student withheld.

DATED at Toronto, Januaryz.b, 2017

Sana Halwani , Co-Chair

8

APPENDIX A

THE UNIVERSITY TR IBUNAL
THE UNIVERS ITY OF TORO NTO
IN THE MATTER OF charges of academi c dishonesty filed on November 25 . 2014,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters,
1995,

AND IN THE MATTER OF the University or Toronto Act , 1971, S.O. Hl71 , c. 56 as am . S.O.
1978, c. 88

BETWEEN:

.... _ }

TH E UNIVE RSITY OF TOR.ONTO

• an d -

AGREED STATEMENT OF FACTS

1.

This hearing arises out of charges of academ ic misconduct filed by the

Provost of the University of Toronto (the "Provost"} under the Cocie of Behaviour

on Academic Matters ('Code"}. For the purpos13 of this hearing, the Provost and
~ -

("Mr . .

.. ) have prepared th is Agreed Statement of Facts ("ASF ")

and a joint book of documents ("JBD"). The Provost and Mr. -

(a)

agree that :

each docume nt contained in the JBD may be admitted into evidence at the
Tribunal for all purposes, including for the truth of the document's
contents , w ithout furiher need to prove the document; and

(b)

if a document . indicates that it was sent or received by someone, that is

prima facie proof that the document was sent and received as ind icated.
2.

Mr. -

admits that he received a copy of the charges filed by the

Provost. The charges are included in the JBD at Tab ·1.

3.

Mr.

f9 admi ts that he rece ived reasonab le notice of the hearing. The

notice of hearing in this matter is included in the JBD at Tab 2..

4.

Mr . •

waives lhe reading of the charges fi led against him, and pleads

gu ilty to all charges . Tile Provost agrees that if the Tribunal convicts Mr. -

on

charge ·1 th e Provost will withdraw charge 2.

5.

At all material times , Mr . •

was a registered student at the University

of Toronto enrolled in a Master of Science program in the Department of
Biochem istry. A copy of Mr. ·

·s academic re cord is included in the JBD at

Tab 3. A copy of the Program Outl ine is included in th e JBD at Tab 4.

6.

Dr. Andrew Wilde was Mr. ~

·s Master's thesis supervisor.

7.

In working on his Master's thesis under Dr. W ilde's direction, Mr. -

c·•

was requ ired to perform research and contribute lab results to a Joint project
involving Septin-Anillin filaments and the ir role in cytokinesis
The first stage of Mr . •

Research ").

,s analysis included separating proteins so that they

could be detected individually. This stage was to be done using a process ca lled
SOS gel electrophoresis . Tl1e ne xt stage included specifically detecting eacl, of
these proteins using a technique called Western Blotting . The presence of a
protein would be denoted by clark bands.

8.

The re search work carried out by Mr.

r=a

was expected to be eventually

incorporated into his Master th esis.

9.

Mr.

r=a

contributed the results of his research to a !Tlanuscript entitled

"Septin-Anillin filaments drive midbody maturation and the positioning of the
ESCRT Ill abscission machinery during cytokinesis", which was submitted by Dr .
Wilde to the Journal of Cell Biology in May, 20'13 ("Manuscript"). A copy of the
Manuscript is included in the JBD at Tab 5.

10.

Mr.

r=a•s

contrib ution to the Manuscript was panel 8 of Supplementary

Figure S3 (fou nd on the third last page of the Manuscript at Tab 5).

'7

L

11.

In the spring of 2013, Mr. -

tool< a reclassification exam lo move from

the MSc program to the PhD program . The report he submitted in that process
was of such concern that the examination corrirnittee req uired that it be
co mpletely re-written before he would be permitted to take the oral e:<ani . Mr.

f9 then stopped attending Dr. Wilde 's lab . On June 3, 2013 he provided Dr.
W ilde with a doctor's note dated June 1, 2013 which indicated that Mr. -

was

seen on June i, 2013 for medical reasons , and that he had been advised to stay
off school from May 29, 2013 to June 3, 2013.

A copy of the rned ica l note is

included in the JBD at Tab 6.

i 2.

Mr. -

returned to the lab on June 5, 2013 to advise Dr. Wilde tha t the

sti-ess of the MSc program was affecting his health ancl that he was not going to
proceed with recl assifying into the PhD program, but would instead write up and
finish the MSc program.

During that discussion Dr. Wilde asked Mr.

organize his reagents and his data that day. Mr.

f9 to

f9 never returned 10 the lab

after that meeting.

13.

The Manuscript was accepted by the Journal of Cell Biology for

publication on October 4, 20'13.

14.

On October 8 , 2013 the Executive Editor of the Journal of Cell Biology, Liz

Williams, invited Dr. Wilde to upload some or all of the original data so that it
could be made available to readers in a browser-based viewer tool for presenting
original image data as a supplement to the Manuscript. A copy of Dr. William 's
email to Dr . Wilde of October 8, 2013 , is included in the Jr3D at Tab 7.

15.

When effrn1s were made by Dr. Wilde and his colleague Dr. Renshaw io

upload high resolution images to the Journal of Ce/! Biology in response to Ms.
William's invitation to do so, they could not find Mr. -

·s original data or any

folders on the various lab computers belonging to Mr. -

which corresponded

to the images Mr.

f9 had provided for the Manuscript. They did find an image

with similar background markings , but it did not have the same pattern of bands

as had been submitted . A copy of the image ob tained by Dr . Wi lde from the
BioRad scanner with similar bacl<ground markings is inclu(J ed in the JBD at Tab
8.

16.

Dr. Wilde also could not find any of Mr.

F9111's lab notebooki;, which

res ea rchers are required to maintain in the lab .

·17.

Dr. Wild e requested that all conlributinrJ authors of the Manuscript ,

including Mr.

ra. submit a Manus cript content verification and provisional

license to publish form to the Journal of Cell Biology ("Verification Form") . Mr.
-

signed the Verification Form and se nt if directly to the Journa l of Cell

Biology. A copy of tl1e Verification Forrn signed by Mr.

i=a is included in the

JBD at T ab 9.

9 to provide him with his research data . In
addition, Dr. Wi ld e instructed Mr. FIii that he needed to inform the University if
18.

Dr. Wilde also asked Mr.

Ile was withdrawing or taking a medi cal leave of absence . An email from Dr.
Wilde to Mr.

19.

f9 on October 9, 2013 is included in the JBD at Tab 10.

On October 17 , 2013 Dr . Wilde received an email from Liz Williams

advising hirn that the Journal's review of high•resolution TIFF ve rsion s of th e
images shown in Figure S3B of the Manuscript revealed a number of anomalies
visible in the images. These included sharp, irregular outlines around some of
the bands , an area of smoothed pixels, and wha t appeared to be an area of
duplicated pixels . She attached two files showing some of these features.

Dr.

Williams asked Dr. Wilde to explain the origin of these image fea tures . /1. copy of
Dr. William's email to Dr. Wilde dated October 17, 2013, together with the
attachments , is included in the JBD at Tab 11.

20 .

Dr. Wilde was very concerned about the information relayed to him about

Dr. William's concerns with Figure S3B of th e Manuscript. In an email response
to Dr. W il liams on October 17, 2013, he expla ined that he had independen t data

f--

tl1at corroborated the findings so th at the conclusions did 1101 change, and offere d
to replace Fig S38 with new data and to remove Mr.

form the list of auth ors

on the Manuscript. He confirmed tl1a t he could not find the original data , but ha d
found a blot that bore resemblance in some lanes to the :septin 9 panel

He

pointed out anoma lies which led him to conclude that he had no confidence in
panel 8 of Fig S3 , the only contribution Mr.

9

made to the Manuscript. Dr.

Wilde told Dr . Williams that he was ashamed for not having discovered the
anomalies himself. A copy of Dr. Wilde's October 17, 2018 email is included in
the JBD at Tab 12 .

21.

Also on October 18, 2013, Lori Ferris, Associate Vice-Provost, Health

Sciences Policy and Strategy and Special Advisor to the Vice-President ,
Research and Innovation , wro te lo Dr. Williams on beha lf of the University. She
confirmed that the University would undertake a review of the matter, and
indicated that ''We sincerely hope this w ill be acceptable to the JCB and will allow
the journal to move forward with ils original ed itorial decision".

A copy of the

October 18, 2013 email from Dr. FerTis is included in the JBD at Tab 13.

22 .

On Octobe r 18, 2013, Liz Williams advised that the image manipulation

evident in Figure S3B of the Manuscript was in direct violation of the Journal of
Cell Biology's ed itorial policies and was unacceptable. The Journal's editors thus
revoked their previous acceptance of the Manuscript, making it clear th at "we
take th e integrity of primary data very seriously and know of no better way to
convey the importance we attach to this principle". A copy of the email from Dr.
Williams on October 18, 20'13 is included in the JBD at Tab 14.

23.

As a resu lt Dr. Wilde withdrew an application for a Canadian Institute of

Health l~esearch governme nt funded grant that he had submitted in the Fa ll of
2013 because Mr . -

ha d co ntributed data to that grant application, and Dr.

Wilde could not be 100% certain of the data U1at Mr.

i=a had provided to him .

24 .

On January 29 , 2014 , Dr. W ilde emailed Mr. ~ wilh t1is con cerns about

the data Mr . •

had provided to D r. Wi lde for th e Manu:,cript. and asf, ed Mr.

r-a to add re ss those concerns .
25 .

Mr. -

replied to Dr. W ilde that same day indicating tha t "these are t11e

images I have ". Dr. W il de was unable to open Mr. -

l'i; file , and so sent a

follow-up ema il, thi s time attach ing the electron ic fil es Dr. W ilde had recei ve d

rJ•

from the Journal in October 2013 indicating tt1eir concerns (des cribed in
paragraph 18 above and included in the JBD at Tab 11 ). Mr .
attach ing three .tif files "TIF Files").

responded by

He expl ained that the round spotty regions

cou ld be explained because he grabbed the blot too hard , and the sharpness
cou ld be because of the gamma adjustment to sha rpen the image to get rid of
the background noise . La ter that day Mr.
Wilcle ,

claiming

to

have

FIii provided a furthe r image fi le to Dr .

overexposed

gamma

adjustment.

He

included

explanations for the anomalies directly on the image file . The email exchange
between Dr. W il de and Mr. -

on January 29 , 20i4 , together with th e related

attached im age fil es, is included in the JBD at Tabs 15, '16 and 17 respectively .

26 .

The data that Mr. -

provicjed to Dr. W ilde was in the fo rm of .tif image

files which were generated in the Adobe Photos t1op CS4 program , and not on the
BioRad image scanner that was the piece of lab equ ipm ent used to generate the
orig ina l resea rch data.

27.

Dr. Wild e cou ld not find a .sen fi le generated by the BioRacl image

scanner that co rresponded to the .tif imag es in the TIF Fi les and da ta provid ed
by Mr.

19 in his responses to Dr. Wilde .

28 .

Dr. Wilde did find a .sen fi le w ith the sa me fi le acqu isition time and

exposure leng th as one of th e images sent by Mr.

9 , and a .sen fil e with the

same name as th e .tif fil e se nt by Mr . •

, but the pattern of pro tein bands in

th es e two images di ffers dram ati cally.

At the sa me time , there were many

mark ings on the image in th e .sen fil e th at were identica l to th e T IF Fil es that Mr.

i=al provided , suggesting that il was this .sen file that wa:;. manipulate(i by Mr.
i=al to form the basis of th e TIF Fi les Mr. Patel provided to Dr. Wilde .
29.

A copy of a report prepared by Dr. Wilde to document the tirneline of

events and supporting documentation is included in the JBD at Tab 18.

30 .

tv1r.

i=al attended a meeiing with the dean 's desi9nate to discuss the

allegation that he had concocted researcr, for the Manuscript on September 10,
2014 . Mr.

i=a did not admit at that meeting that he concocted the research

submitted to Dr. Wilde to be included in the Manuscript submitted to the Journal

of Cell Biology..

9

31.

Mr.

now admits that he :

(a)

provided research data to Dr. Andrew Wilde in suppoIi of the work he
was doing in respect of his Master's program, which data Mr.

F-:al knew

was to be included in the submission of an article to the Journal of Cell

Biology;
(b)

knowingly manipulated , altered

and

falsified

the

research

data

he

presented which was ultimately included in the Manuscript submitted to
the Journal of Cell Biology;
(c)

did not provide lab notebooks or data files to verify some or all of the data
he reported;

(d)

provided false explanations to Dr . Wilde when asked to explain the
anomalies in the data co ntained in Fig S38 of the Manuscript; and

(e)

com mitted the academic offence of knowi ngly sub mitting an academic
work containing a purpo1ied statemen t of fact tl1at had been concocted ,
contrary to section B.1.1 (f) of the Corle .

7

9

32.

Mr.

acknowledges that :

(a)

the Prnvost of the University of Toronto has advised Mr.
to obtain legal counsel a nd that Mr. P.

(b)

f9 oi his right

has done so; and

he is signing this ASF freely and voluntari ly, knowing of the potential
consequences he faces. and does so with the advice of counsel.

Signed on November 9, 20i6.

·- S igned on November 9, 2016

Lily Hanner
Assistant Discipline Counsel
University of Toronto

Due 1987747v,

,..,r,

E Tl
\

" *"'" ·«11 11 ;.,.,

this

,. day of

j

APPEN DIXB
·rHE Ut 'IVER.SITY "iR18UMAL
THE UMIVt::RSrTY OF- TORONTO
!M THE MP.TTER OF charges of academic dishonesty filed on November 25 , 20 14,
AND l,·l THE M::J,TTER OF the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters ,
1995,

foJ,liJ H·i THE i,11ATTER. OF the University of Toronto Act, 1971. S.O. 1971, c 56 as am . S.O.
1978 .c. 88
BET VI/EE N:

THE UN IVERSiTY OF TORONTO

- and-

JOINT SUBM1SS~OM ON PENALTY

1.

For the pu rposes of th e sanction pl1ase of thi s hearing under the Code of

Behaviour on Academic Matters (" Code") , the Un iversity of Toronto (the "U niversity")
and ~ 2.

have prepared this Joint Submission on Penalty.

The Provost and IVi r. -

submit that the appropria te penalty in all the

circumstances of the case is that the University Tribunal impose the followi ng sanctions
on fvir.

f9:
(a)

a fina l grade of zero (0) in RST9999Y ;

(b)

an immediate suspension from the University to commence on the day the
Tribunal makes its order for a period of up to five years:

(c}

a permanent notation of the sanction on his academic record and
tra nscript; and

(d)

a recommendation that Mr.

i=al be expelled from the University.

3. ·

The Pa1iies further submit that it is appropriate for the Tribunal to rnport this case

to the Provost for publication of a notice of the decision of the Tribunal and the sanction

or sanctions imposed in the University newspapers, with the name of the student
withheld.
4.

Mr.

FIii admits that he is signing this JSP free ly and that he has been given the

opportunity to obtain independent legal advice before signing th is JSP , and has done
so .

Signed on l\!ove~ber

9, 20-16.

Signed on November ~, 2016.

$~L~
Lily Harmer \
Assistant Discipline Counsel
University of Toronto

Doc 1987748 v1

~- -~ _I
! .

....... ..
i
.. ..

l[ly of

r". · , 20 . .<.. •• •

,,

~

............ .. ..LL_.';.·•••- ... ...... .
I

