Case #781

   DATE: January 26, 2017

   PARTIES: University of Toronto v. J.P. ("the Student")

   Hearing Date(s): November 10, 2016

   Panel Members:
   Ms. Sana Halwani, Barrister and Solicitor, Gilbert's LLP, Chair
   Professor Katherine Larson, Department of English, Faculty Panel Member
   Ms. Alanis Ortiz Espinoza, Student Panel Member

   Appearances:
   Ms. Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel for the University,
   Paliare Roland Barristers
   J.P., the Student

   In Attendance:
   Professor Luc de Nil, Vice Dean, Students, School of Graduate Studies
   Ms. Krista Osbourne, Administrative Assistant, Office of the Appeals,
   Discipline and Faculty Grievances
   Mr. Sean Lourim, Technology Assistant, Office of the Governing Council
   Ms. Andrea Rico Wolf, Barrister and Solicitor, Gilbert's LLP
   (notetaker)
   Mr. Seumas Woods (Observer, New University Tribunal Chair)

   Trial Division - s. B.i.1(f) of Code - concoction - student falsified
   data for thesis project - guilty plea - agreed statement of fact -
   joint submission on penalty - zero on thesis, five year suspension,
   expulsion, permanent notation

   The Student was charged with one offence of concoction under s.
   B.i.1(f) of the Code, and alternatively, academic dishonesty under s.
   B.i.3(b) of the Code. The charges related to falsified research data
   presented as part of the Student's Master's thesis, which the Student
   admitted to knowingly manipulating, altering and falsifying.

   The Student pled guilty to the concoction charge. The University then
   withdrew the academic dishonesty charge.

   An Agreed Statement of Facts and Joint Submission on Penalty was
   submitted by the Student and the University, agreeing to a grade of
   zero on the Student's thesis, suspension for five years, a permanent
   notation and a recommendation for expulsion.

   The Tribunal held that a Joint Submission on Penalty should only be
   rejected when the proposed penalty is unreasonable, unconscionable, or
   would bring the administration of justice into disrepute. The Tribunal
   accepted the submission.

   In reviewing the criteria relevant to sentencing, the Tribunal took
   into account the dishonesty of the offence, the importance of integrity
   in a research program, that the Student knew the data would be used for
   publication and that this risked the reputation of their supervisor and
   the University, that the supervisor was in fact harmed as a result of
   the offence, that the Student took additional steps to cover up the lie
   when later questioned, did not admit wrong-doing at the Dean's meeting.
   The Tribunal also considered the mitigating factors that the Student
   pled guilty at the hearing and co-operated with the University in an
   Agreed Statement of Facts and Joint Submission on Penalty. There were
   no extenuating circumstances. The Tribunal found that accepting the
   Joint Submission on Penalty would not bring the administration of
   justice into disrepute, and noted that this was an extremely serious
   offence that went to the heart of academic integrity and the reputation
   of the University.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12929
