THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
THE GOVERNING COUNCIL
Report # 362 of the Academic Appeals Committee
January 5, 2012

To the Academic Board
University of Toronto
Your Committee reports that it held a hearing on Wednesday, December 14, 2011, at which the
following members were present:
Emily Orchard, Chair
Professor Elizabeth Smyth
Mr. Chirag Variawa
Secretary: Mr. Christopher Lang, Director, Office of Appeals, Discipline and Faculty
Grievances

Appearances:
For the Student Appellant:
The Student Appellant

For the University of Toronto at Mississauga (UTM):
Professor Kelly Hannah-Moffat, Vice-Dean, Undergraduate
Ms. Michelle Daley, Assistant Registrar, Academic Standards and Petitions

I. Appeal
The Student appeals a decision of the University of Toronto Mississauga Academic Appeals
Board (hereinafter, the "AAB"), dated September 8, 2011, which dismissed an appeal from a
decision of the Committee on Standing dated on July 13, 2011, which denied her request to lift a
one-year suspension.

II. Facts
The Student first enrolled at UTM in Fall 2009 in the first year program in Humanities. The
Student's academic performance was poor from the start of her academic career at UTM. By the
encl of the Fall 2009 term, she had completed 0.5 credits. During the Winter 2010 term, she

completed 2.0 additional credits, earning a sessional GPA of0.39, an annual GPA of0.53 and a
cumulative GPA of0.53. By the encl of her first year, the Student had completed 2.5 ofan
attempted 4.5 credits and was placed on academic probation. The record reflects, and the
Student confirmed, that on or about April 30, 20 l 0, she attended a probationary interview at the
Office of the Registrar, such a meeting being standard practice at UTM when a student is placed
on academic probation. During this meeting, the Student was told about the importance of
monitoring drop elates and deadlines. Your Committee also heard evidence that the Student met
or spoke with a representative of the Office of the Registrar in early October 2009, as a result of
her inadvertent dropping of a course. During this meeting/conversation, the Student was referred
to UTM's Registration Guide and encouraged to have regard for term drop dates.
The Student also successfully petitioned to defer the writing of a final examination from Winter
20 l Oclue to illness.

A. The Student's Upbringing
The Student was raised in a family home, which she shared with her parents, grandparents, and
(until they reached University age) her siblings. The Student told the Committee that her parents
ran a family business and were, therefore, often away from the home, returning on most days late
in the evening. For much of her life, the Student was essentially raised by her grandparents. She
told the Committee that they were her suppo11 mechanism and that she was deeply involved in
their lives and care giving. The impact, therefore, of the decline in her grandparent's health
(which will be discussed in greater detail below) was particularly upsetting to the Student.

B. Decline in Student's Grandparents' Health
In 2008, before the Student had registered at UTM, her grandfather was diagnosed with kidney
failure and commenced regular kidney dialysis. The Committee heard that the Sh1clent often
accompanied him to these treatments. In December 2009, mid-way through the Student's first
year, her grandmother was diagnosed with multiple myeloma.

C. Second Year Studies
In Summer 20 I 0, shortly before the Student commenced second year, her grandmother's
condition deteriorated. The Student commenced second year and she reported to the Committee
that she did so with the knowledge that she would "have to put 110% into school" because she
was on academic probation. On November 13, 2010, mid-way through the Fall term, the
Student's grandmother was admitted into the hospital and three days later, on or about November
16, 2010, the Student's family was encouraged to "pull the plug". The Student told the
Committee that it was very difficult to watch her family and grandfather go through this
experience.
Following her grandmother's death, the Student elected to take two weeks off school. She told
the Committee that she had hoped to use this time to "discover a different sense of personality".
Importantly, however, at no point did she speak to anyone at UTM about the options available to
her academically, such as deferring her exams and/or taking a leave during second semester

though she was clearly aware of this option given she had previously availed herself of the
deferral mechanisms the previous year. In Fall 2010, the student completed 1.0 credit, earning a
sessional GPA of 1.20 and a cumulative GPA of 0.65.
On February 14, 20 l 0, the Student's grandfather went to India in order to administrate a cultural
component of her grandmother's death. Unfortunately, approximately one month into his visit,
on or about March l 7, 20 I 0, he passed away from a brain hemorrhage. The Student described
how she struggled with her grandfather's death and that the second loss sent her into an
emotional tail spin.
Although the Student successfully applied to write (and wrote) a deferred exam from Fall
2010/Winter 2011 in the Spring of 2011, she did not complete any credits during the Winter
2011 term, finishing second year with a sessional GPA of0.00, an annual GPA of0.40 and a
cumulative GPA of0.48. She was placed on a one-year academic suspension at the end of the
2011 Winter term. Again, the Student failed to seek any academic counseling or guidance
during second semester, though she admits both in her written submissions to the AAB and in
her oral submissions before your Committee, that she was aware of her responsibility to monitor
and comply with drop deadlines or "to drop these courses well in advance." During the hearing,
the Student also admitted that she was aware of the academic supports available to her, but failed
to take advantage of them.

n. The Student's Failure to Seek Help
In both her oral and written submissions, the Student painted a picture of her herself during
second year as being socially isolated. She told the Committee that in January 20 l 0, she stopped
engaging with her studies and peers and spent more time at home than school because "she
wasn't used to getting help from friends". She also described how despite her best efforts, she
wasn't able to "handle her studies while struggling with her new reality". She felt, she said, as
though her "whole life had crashed".
The Student did not seek any academic counseling or support of any other sort at any point
during her first or second year of studies. She told the Committee that she was unaware of any
of the psychological support services available to her on campus and was more comfortable
keeping her grief and struggles private. Prior to their deaths, the Student had been accustomed to
relying on her grandparents for emotional support and, in their absence, she struggled with on
whom else to rely, "trying, instead, to handle everything alone."
Although your Committee sympathizes immensely with the grief the Student must have
experienced at this time, we had trouble reconciling this image painted by the Student with the
fact that throughout her second year, she was actively involved in extracurricular activities at
UTM. From September 20 IO to January 2011, for example, the Student served as President of
the South Asian Alliance Club. This role involved organizing events in partnership with six
other schools, and running cultural events throughout the year. In addition, between January and
March 2011, the Student was helping with the election campaign of two of her friends; a role,
which entailed, amongst other things, assisting with the organization of a culture show, including
the handling of monies, meeting with sponsors, and more.

Ill. Decision
Early return from a suspension is an extraordinary remedy that will not be appropriate unless the
Student produces compelling evidence of a change in circumstances relevant to the purposes of
the suspension in question, which require a reassessment of the likelihood of a recurrence of the
poor performance that resulted in the suspension in the first place.
The only issue before this Committee is whether the Student has produced compelling evidence
of the requisite change in her circumstances.
In Report #330, this Committee considered the reasons behind the imposition of a suspension for
poor academic performance, noting as follows:
The University sets minimum academic standards that apply to all students. Where a student
fails to meet these minimum standards, he or she can be suspended or denied further registration
at the University. Implicit in the imposition of a suspension is the expectation that the student
will use the time to address the circumstances that may have led to his or her poor performance
prior to re-enrolling at the University. Consistent with this underlying purpose, early return from
suspension is an extraordinary remedy that is normally only granted in cases where there has
been some substantive and well-documented change in the student's circumstances which
indicates that his or her previous record of poor academic performance is not likely to recur.
In reaching its decision, the AAB rejected the Student's submission that her circumstances had
changed sufficiently to justify early return. The AAB found that on the basis of the Student's
overall academic record (which preceded the death of her grandparents), the Student had failed
to present a compelling case for an exemption from the regulations that apply to all students.
The AAB sympathized with the circumstances presented by the Student, but felt that she needed
to serve the one-year suspension in order to ready herself both personally and academically for
her continued studies at the University.
The Student only recently availed herself of the academic counseling available to her at UTM
and to which the AAB directed her in its decision. It is noteworthy that her first counseling
session did not take place until on or about the time she filed her Notice of Appeal to this
Committee. Since then, she has met with the staff of the Academic Skills Centre a second time.
During these meetings, she has discussed the courses she would like to take when she returns to
her studies, has commenced putting together an action plan, and has sought out information
about the academic support that she should be receiving. She has also started to examine her
patterns of learning and work ethics. The Student has also sought emotional and psychological
support from her family doctor and has recently been prescribed anti-anxiety medication.
Finally, the Student has been working on strengthening her relationship with her parents and on
learning how to seek help from others when necessary. We commend the Student for her efforts
in this regard and encourage her to continue to avail herself of the academic support available to
her at UTM and to the other forms of counseling and medical advice she requires. However,
these efforts are all quite recent and do not demonstrate a change in circumstances that could
justify early return from suspension.

As noted above and by the AAB in its decision, the Student's poor academic performance predated the deaths of her grandparents. It is also clear based on the totality of the evidence that the
Student was aware of her duty to monitor drop dates and the options available to her to drop
courses or seek to have certain exams deferred. She was also aware, as noted above, of the
academic support services available to her. She was advised no later than the April 2010 during
her probationary meeting to be mindful of course drop dates. Unfortunately, she did not consult
with the Office of the Registrar and at point during her second year and opted not to pursue any
of these options. The Student herself admitted that she "was not concentrating on anything" and
"should have done it, but did not." It is clear that the death of her grandparents' was extremely
traumatic to the Student and that she is only now shedding some of the resultant fragility. We
believe strongly that the Student will benefit from having the opporhmity during the remainder
of the one-year suspension period to continue to her efforts in this regard to ready herself
personally and academically for her continued studies and academic success at the University.
Again, your Committee is tremendously sympathetic to the hardship and grief the Student was
experiencing in 2009/20 IO while attempting to balance her academic studies with her
commitment to her family and, eventually, her grief. However, based on the information
presented by the Student in her original petition and the appeal, we find that the AAB
appropriately applied its discretion in not granting early return from academic suspension. Your
Committee is of the view that the AAB's decision was appropriate in the circumstances and
unanimously denies the Student's appeal.
The Appeal is dismissed.

