UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
GOVERNING COUNCIL
Report #435 of the Academic Appeals Committee
July 4, 2024
To the Academic Board
University of Toronto
Your Committee reports that it held a hearing on Thursday, April 11, 2024, at which the
following members were present:
Academic Appeal Committee Members:
Sara Faherty, Chair
Professor Sotirios Damouras, Faculty Governor
Nelson Lee, Student Governor
Hearing Secretary:
Carmelle Salomon-Labbé, Associate Director, Office of Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances
For the Student Appellant:
S.R.K. (the “Student Appellant”)
For the Toronto School of Theology:
Catherine Fan, Paliare Roland Rosenberg Rothstein LLP

I.

Overview:

This is an appeal from a decision made after a hearing on May 16, 2023, by the Toronto School of
Theology Academic Appeals Committee (TST-AAC). The Student Appellant filed two appeals that were
heard together.
(1) The first appeal (filed on December 2, 2021) disputed the grades she received on her
Specialization and Breadth comprehensive examinations and asked for different examiners to reevaluate the examinations.
(2) The second appeal (filed on December 20, 2021) challenged the fairness of an administrative
action communicated in a November 2, 2021 letter from Associate Director Professor Jesse Billet
which established a 15-day deadline for her to transfer from the ThD program to the ThM
program. The Student Appellant asked to have her eligibility restored to apply for that transfer.
The TST-AAC denied both appeals.
The Student Appellant’s Notice of Appeal to this Committee raises the issues that were addressed in the
TST-AAC decision after the May 16, 2023, hearing, and it resurrects many other issues connected to her
long and often unhappy tenure at the Toronto School of Theology (TST). Complex and important issues
such as:
▪
▪
▪

the Student Appellant’s perception of bias against her,
whether she was appropriately accommodated for bereavement and disabilities,
procedural misunderstandings about how to register for examinations,
1

▪
▪
▪
▪

misunderstandings about the timing of her examinations,
disconnects on getting feedback about her examinations,
the fact that the Student Appellant felt stress and intimidation during her oral defence, and
changes to the composition of her Committee

are intertwined with the narrow issues in front of this Committee, and several of them have already been
brought to the Governing Council’s Academic Appeals Committee and decided in two previous
decisions.
The response to the December 2 appeal, asking for a re-evaluation of her exams by different faculty from
the original assessors was complicated because related and overlapping questions had twice been posed to
the TST-AAC, decided by that body, and later appealed to and decided by the Governing Council’s
Academic Appeals Committee. The TST-AAC tried to disentangle issues that had already been decided
by those binding decisions. It determined that the TST had appropriately accommodated the Student
Appellant and provided qualified faculty members to assess her work. The TST-AAC found that its
policies and regulations had been applied fairly.
The TST-AAC also made findings on the December 20 appeal. A difficult aspect of the TST-AAC’s
policy about allowing ThD students to transfer to the master’s program is that it is premised on transfer
applicants being current ThD students. The policy’s timing allowed the Student Appellant a pathway to
the master’s program, but it would result in her voluntarily withdrawing from the ThD program before
knowing whether her appeal had been successful. While the Student Appellant did not address this point
in front of the TST-AAC, the TST raised the possibility of a different solution: an administrative path
that would entail her re-applying for Admission to Emmanual College and then invoking section 12 of the
ThD/PhD Handbook to request to transfer to the ThM on recommendation of her supervisor. The TSTAAC found that the rules had been applied fairly since she did not make a transfer when she was still
enrolled and suggested that the Student Appellant pursue the alternate path set forth by the TST.
II.

The Facts

Previous Reports by the Governing Council’s Academic Appeals Committee
We will rehearse the facts of this case here, but first note two important points in the timeline:
the Student Appellant has already challenged the results of her comprehensive examinations at the TST in
front of this Governing Council Academic Appeals Committee twice before this. Some of the issues have
been directly decided by a previous panel of the Academic Appeals Committee. Others have been
discussed in part but not finally decided at this Committee, and still others are closely connected to issues
decided here. The principle of estoppel applies not only to issues that have been directly articulated in
previous cases. It also applies to issues related to previously litigated issues (cause of action estoppel)
that could have been raised in an earlier action. The Student Appellant had an opportunity to challenge
Professor Wilson’s presence on her Committee in her earlier submissions to this Committee. She did
(unsuccessfully) assert that he was improperly included as an assessor of her Analytic essay and its oral
defence at that time. She continues to make that assertion in this action and has added that he should not
have been an assessor of her Breadth and Specialization examinations either. The similarity in these
claims and the underlying facts, which are asserted over again in this action, lead your Committee to the
conclusion that this question could have and should have been expressly asserted then. It is so closely
intertwined with the issues before this Committee that it could be inferred that it was implicitly decided at
the time the earlier decisions were made. We must include many of these points to contextualise the
issues raised by the Student Appellant but will limit our findings to issues that have not been decided
before and could not have been raised before.
2

Comprehensive Exams
The Student Appellant first registered at the TST in September of 2012. She completed her course work
in 2015. In that academic year the Student Appellant worked with a Committee made up of Professor
Paul Wilson (Supervisor), Dr. Dorcas Gordon, and Professor Glen Taylor.
In 2017 the Student Appellant applied for and was granted a leave of absence for the 2017-2018 academic
year. The Student Appellant returned to the TST in September of 2018. At that time the Division made it
clear that no more extensions or leaves would be made available to the Student Appellant. It was
established that the Student Appellant had one more year in which to write all three of her Comprehensive
examinations (Specialization, Breadth, and Analytic). The Student Appellant was told the written exams
would need to be submitted by the end of August 2019. The Student Appellant was aware of the August
31 deadline, well in advance of that date, as evidenced by her email dated March 1, 2019, in which she
wrote, under the heading “Administrative Questions” “I know I need to complete my comps by the end of
August 2019 as this is my second extension of my comps.”
The Student Appellant registered her exam topics in February of 2019. There was an incomplete effort to
register for the examinations. Registering for Comprehensive exams is a process that takes several steps.
The Student Appellant completed some of those steps, apparently unaware that there were additional
steps that needed to be taken before she would be formally registered. This created confusion and
frustration on the part of the Student Appellant.
During this period there were fluctuations in the make up of the Student Appellant’s Committee. This is
something that seems likely to happen when a student’s enrolment stretches out over many years. At
some point during the Student Appellant’s term of studies Professor Glen Taylor needed to be replaced.
The composition of a graduate student’s Committee is critical. It is vitally important that the members of
the Committee have appropriate expertise. They are charged with setting the questions for the student’s
comprehensive exams and competently assessing the written submissions. They are also charged with
conducting the oral component of the analytic exam. The composition of the Student Appellant’s
committee was made in consultation with the Student Appellant. On March 1, 2019, Professor Wilson
suggested Professor Reynolds (“as he at least has some interest in aesthetics”) and asked the Student
Appellant whether she had any ideas for a Professor that might be knowledgeable about Coleridge and
Wilder.
In September of 2019 the Committee and the Student Appellant agreed to change their examiners: Dr.
Judtih Newman replaced Dr. Glen Taylor as the Second reader of the Breadth Examination. The Student
Appellant reports that “the substitution was agreed because the focus of the Breadth Examination
included attention to ‘women’s reality’ in biblical material.” In an earlier discussion the Student
Appellant sent some notes about the composition of her Committee. In an email dated August 27, 2019,
the Student Appellant wrote to Professor Gordon, “I am ‘S
R K . I am writing this email as I
wonder about a second reader of my Bible comp paper. Prof. Wilson told me you approached Prof.
Newman for the second reader of my Bible comp paper. I just wonder as you have mentioned Prof. Ann
Anderson or Prof. Nam Soon Song before. I would like to ask whether there are any reasons for changing
your mind from having either of these professors. Is it necessary to have a second reader of the bible
comp from the biblical field?” Clearly in the TST’s view, subject matter expertise was necessary.
The Student Appellant’s awareness of her deadlines was documented by the TST, and has been finally
determined by this Academic Appeals Committee in Report #413:
“When she did return from her leave, in 2018, the Student Appellant met with her supervisory
committee on or about September 25. The next day, she received an e-mail from her supervisor,
3

Professor Wilson, with respect to extending the deadline for completing her comprehensive
examinations. He advised her that it would be the final allowable extension and echoed what
Professor Skira had already told her: that her comprehensive examination would have to be
completed by the end of the summer of 2019. He wrote:
‘Just so we are all clear…this will be your final extension meaning you must finish your comps
by the end of the summer 2019. Since you entered Fall 2012 you cannot lapse and ask for
terminal reinstatement. Your program must be competed in ten years, and you are now in your
6th.’”
Results on the Three Exams
1. The Student Appellant submitted all three of her written examinations close to the end of the year
she was given to make her submissions. Her Specialization Exam (Pastoral) (TSP8001H) was
submitted on Friday, August 9, 2019. The exam was graded by Paul Wilson and Thomas
Reynolds (substituting for Glen Taylor). The Student Appellant received a 74. A passing mark
is 77.
2. The Student Appellant received feedback on that first comprehensive exam, and then submitted
her Breadth Exam (TSP8002H) on Tuesday, August 27, 2019. This exam was graded by Dorcas
Gordon and Judith Newman (substituting for Glen Taylor). The Student Appellant received a 76.
A passing mark is 77.
3. The Student Appellant did not receive feedback on that exam in the four days before she
submitted her Comprehensive Essay (Analytic Exam) (TSP8003H) on Saturday, August 31,
2019. That exam was graded by Paul Wilson, Dorcas Gordon, and while the form lists Glen
Taylor it also indicates that “Judith Newman and Thomas Reynolds were substituted as agreed by
the student.” Student received a 74. A passing mark is 77.
The Student Appellant appeared in front of a different constellation of Governing Council’s Academic
Appeals Committee on March 26 of 2021 (resulting in the May 10, 2021, Report #413) and later an
appeal was conducted on the basis of written submissions (resulting in the July 4, 2022, Report #421).
The issues driving these appeals are intertwined and sometimes overlapping, with the 2021 proceeding
revolving around whether the Student Appellant was properly accommodated, whether it was appropriate
to have Professor Judith Newman serve as her second examiner, whether the TST was biased against the
Student Appellant, and whether she was entitled to launch an oral defence of her Analytic Comprehensive
exam.
The last factor was extremely important because students at the TST are permitted to rewrite up to two
unsuccessful comprehensive exams. The Student Appellant had not received a passing mark on any of her
three exams, and the TST did not allow her to make new submissions. However, if the Student Appellant
had been permitted to orally defend her Analytic exam, and if that oral defence resulted in raising the
mark on that exam to a passing mark, then she would be permitted to rewrite her Specialization and
Breadth exams, and to continue in the ThD program. In Report #413, the Committee rejected the other
arguments, but decided in her favour on this factor, and determined that the Student Appellant should be
allowed to defend her Analytic exam.

4

The original, and ultimately rejected, position of the TST was that the Student Appellant did not need to
write the Oral component of the Comprehensive Essay (Analytic Exam) (TSP8003H) because she had
failed the three written examinations, and re-writes are allowed on at most two exams. Their view was
that it was not possible for her to succeed, regardless of her performance on an oral examination. The
Student Appellant argued that the oral component of the Analytic exam should take place. If her
performance on that examination raise her score by three points, then she would have failed only two of
her written examinations and then she would be eligible to rewrite her other two submissions. This is one
of the issues that has already been considered and decided by a previous Committee panel of the
Academic Appeals Committee.
That Committee found in the Student Appellant’s favour on that issue in its Report #413, dated May 10,
2021. That Committee concluded that the Student Appellant should be allowed to complete an oral
defence of her Analytic exam. They recommended that the Student Appellant work with the TST
regarding timing, and that upon conclusion of the oral defence “the TST should assess the comprehensive
essay and its oral defence together and assign an overall grade.” The Committee was silent on the
identity of the assessors, but it did go on to specify that if the Student Appellant were successful in her
oral defence, then the TST should follow its normal practices and procedures to identify and confirm
examiners to mark the two rewritten supplemental examinations if she became eligible to write them.
The Student Appellant ended up scheduling her oral defense of her Analytic exam for October 26, 2021.
The administration of the oral defence of the Analytic examination was not smooth. The TST Director
Pamela Couture worked with the University Ombuds Office, Accessibility Services, and Elsie ObengKingsley from Student Progress and Support to arrange for the exam, which took place on October 26,
2021. The Student Appellant raised concerns about academic accommodations and raised objections to
the presence of Professors Wilson and Gordon (the two faculty members who had assessed her written
examination) on the oral defence Committee. On October 12, 2021, Ms. Obeng-Kingsley wrote to
Professor Couture, thanking her for taking the time to explore whether other examiners with the relevant
knowledge on the student’s topic of theological imagination were available. The TST had been unable to
identify other faculty members qualified to serve on the Committee.
As one of her accommodations, the Student Appellant asked that Professor Wilson not only turn his
camera off, but also not speak during the defence, allowing Professor Gordon to ask all the questions.
The Division asked the faculty members about this request, which they considered. They agreed that they
could turn their video cameras off but did not agree to channel Professor Wilson’s questions through Dr.
Gordon. Professor Couture explained, “We had a lengthy discussion…about whether we should vary the
format of the exam by asking Prof. Gordon to do all the questioning based on a series of time outs and
conferences. They did not feel they could maintain the integrity of the exam in that format, especially
since this exam is specifically in Prof. Wilson’s area of expertise, with Dr. Gordon as the second reader.”
She also pointed out that she believes in depending on Accessibility Services to determine
accommodations, and that lacking a definite recommendation from them they would proceed with both
faculty members asking questions.
In the end, despite being accompanied by Elsie Obeng-Kingsley, from the University’s Student Life
Programs and Support, and having Professors Wilson and Gordon leave their cameras off (in addition to
any other exam accommodations recommended by Accessibility Services), the Student did not succeed in
her oral defence, achieving a combined score of 74 for the essay and its oral defence. 77 was the passing
mark.

5

The Student Appellant’s concerns about the administration of the oral defence made their way to this
Governing Council’s Academic Appeals Committee again, and were dealt with in its Report #421, dated
July 4, 2022. Once again, there were overlapping, and repetitive issues raised by the Student Appellant.
She alleged that the TST did not properly implement the remedy set forth in Report #413 and asked to be
allowed to repeat the Analytic exam and oral defence “with different and relevant
examiners/advisors/supervisors.” Her allegations in this appeal were that (1) she was not given enough
time to write her Analytic essay due to confusing administration; (2) the student was unwell when she
took her oral examination; and (3) the student was forced to take the oral examination with an examiner
with whom she had serious stresses. Report #421 resolved some issues regarding the appropriate
pathway for appeals. (New issues needed to be brought before division, and old issues were quashed
because they had already been decided.)
In that decision the Senior Chair found that the remedy granted by Report #413 “was implemented in
accordance with its terms.” It disallowed some of the issues raised on the grounds that they were not
related to the implementation of the remedy set forth in Report #413. It disallowed some issues on the
grounds that they were new issues that had not been properly heard by the Division before coming to this
Committee. Finally, it disallowed some issues because they had been finally determined by Report #413.
When read together, Reports #413 and #421 indicate that the issue of the constitution of the Committee
hearing the Student Appellant’s oral defence was to be conducted by the Committee members who had
assessed the written essay (Comprehensive Essay (Analytic Exam) (TSP8003H).
The Breakdown in the Relationship with Professor Wilson
This is the Student Appellant’s third interaction with the Governing Council’s Academic Appeals
Committee. She argues that after the Report #413 determined she was entitled to an oral defence; she
became aware of a communication from Professor Wilson that caused her to stop trusting him and made it
inappropriate for him to continue sitting on her Committee for purposes of assessing her oral defence of
her Comprehensive essay.
The next hearing in front of the Governing Council Academic Appeals Committee, like the current case,
involved the Student Appellant’s challenge to the way the TST implemented the decision set forth in
Report #413.
The Student Appellant defended her Analytic exam on October 26, 2021. The examiners were Professors
Wilson and Gordon, who had evaluated the written Analytic essay. The Student Appellant was not
successful in raising the overall grade on the Analytic examination. The Student Appellant sought the
remedy of being permitted to re-write and conduct a new oral defense of the Analytic exam “with
different and relevant examiners/advisors/supervisors.” This request echoes earlier requests made
concerning the Specialization and Breadth examinations. The identity of the examiners for the Student
Appellant’s Oral defense was directly raised in that appeal. The Student Appellant challenged the validity
of the outcome of that examination score on three grounds, one of which was that she had been required
to take the Oral examination with examiners with whom she had serious stresses. This is important,
because that issue is raised again in the present appeal. We note that the decision of the previous Report
was final, and that it is binding on your Committee.
Report #421 addresses this challenge carefully and thoroughly. It concluded “[t]here is nothing in the
remedy granted by your Committee in Report 413 to suggest that the oral defence should be conducted by
examiners other than those who had read the analytic essay.” The Report reviews the Student Appellant’s
concerns about Professor Wilson and the email he wrote reporting that the Student “has made no progress
and will be seeking an extension.” Like the author of that Report, your Committee is uncertain why the
Student Appellant has such a strong reaction to the language in that Report. It is the role of Committee
6

Supervisors to monitor student progress and keep the institution apprised of their progress. The language
in this Report, which the Student Appellant identified as the “most horrible” example of Professor
Wilson’s treatment of her, seems neutral and accurate to your Committee. We are persuaded that the
Student Appellant’s reaction is genuine, but we cannot agree that this language on the part of Professor
Wilson, nor the other inconsequential clerical errors that may have occurred over the years the Student
Appellant has been enrolled at the TST, objectively warranted his removal from the Student Appellant’s
Committee. We note that Report #413 specifically directed the TST to identify a new set of Committee
members if the Student Appellant were successful in orally defending her Analytical essay and was given
the opportunity to rewrite her Specialization and Breadth examinations. This would be where we would
expect to see direction on the identity of Committee members for the Oral defence of the Analytic exam,
but it seems the University Academic Appeals Committee panel agreed that the standard practice of
having the Committee members with appropriate expertise who meet with a student over the course of
their studies to collaboratively define examination topics, then set the examination questions and assess
the final written submissions. The members of the Committee are expected to be the most appropriate
examiners to conduct the oral examination of the same.
If, as the Student Appellant argued, and this Academic Appeals Committee determined in Report #413,
the Comprehensive Exam (TSP8003H1) was a single examination composed of two parts (the written
essay and the oral defense of that essay) then it is fair to conclude that the faculty assessors who graded
the written essay should also assess the oral defence. The Oral defence was of the third, analytic essay
and it was included as part of that examination. That is what led to the conclusion that the Oral defense
had to be allowed before a failing grade could be assigned. But this same proposition also supports the
conclusion that the people who graded the written component were intended to grade the oral
component—it was a single evaluation. The panel quoted the Student Appellant’s submission that “the
third comprehensive examination includes the oral assessment” [Emphasis added by the Academic
Appeals Committee that decided Report #413]. The Committee pointed out that the TST’s rule 8.6.3.3,
was entitled “The comprehensive essay and oral defense” and found that this “suggest[s] that the two
elements-the essay and its oral defence--are inextricably linked.” They quote the rule’s mandate that
“The grade for the third examination incudes an assessment of the oral defence.” Finally, and most
specifically, the Committee quoted the Handbook’s dictate that “After the defence, the Student
Appellant will be excused while the examiners (a) determine a letter and number grade for the
comprehensive essay with the oral defence.” All the language quoted from the Handbook contemplates
the examiners who assign a mark to the third essay are the same examiners who conduct the oral
examination. In their interpretation, these are two parts of the same examination. The Committee that
decided #413 concluded that it was unreasonable for the TST to evaluate the Student Appellant’s
comprehensive essay without including her oral defence of that essay as an essential component of that
evaluation. The Committee’s Remedy was to instruct the Student Appellant to begin preparation for
defending her comprehensive essay and instructed that the TST “should assess the comprehensive essay
and its oral defence together and assign an overall grade to that effort with both thoroughness and
expedition.” It instructed the TST to “follow its normal practices and procedures as outlined in its
Handbook, to identify and confirm the examiners to mark the two supplemental examinations if she
becomes eligible to write them.”
Reports #413 and #421 determine that the constellation of faculty members who conducted the oral
defence was appropriate. The Division has argued that issue estoppel and cause of action estoppel dictate
that it is inappropriate for the Student Appellant to continue to raise arguments arising from the
examinations that were administered in August of 2019 and have been heard and determined by the
Academic Appeals Committee. This Committee has heard and determined the Student Appellant’s
request to retake her examinations with “new and relevant examiners” and these requests included a
request for new examiners for her oral defence.
7

Report #421 reads, in pertinent part:
“As to [the student appellant’s appeal in TST to change the examiner for taking the Oral
examination], in her appeal to [the Graduate Studies Council Academic Appeal Committee
(GSCAAC)], the student asked for the remedy of “[r]etaking the exams with new relevant
examiners ([Book of Documents (BoD)], p. 126). The GSCAAC dismissed her appeal and
therefore did not grant this remedy. On her appeal to your Committee the Student again asked for
this remedy (BoD, p. 136). Your Committee did not grant it. She asks for it again (BoD, p. 210).
She cannot, because your Committee’s decision in Report 413 was final.”
Although we do not fully understand her reasoning, your Committee is sympathetic to the Student
Appellant’s claim that there had been a breakdown in her relationship with her Committee members
before she sat for her oral defence. Based on her acquisition of an email she had not seen before (it is
unclear when she became aware of the document), the Student Appellant establishes that she lost
confidence in Professor Paul Wilson. Even apart from the binding decisions cited above, we cannot agree
that this loss of trust absolutely required the TST to use different examiners for the oral defence of the
Student Appellant’s Comprehensive examination. The evidence set forth by the Student Appellant to
justify the breakdown is not compelling. The Student Appellant ties the breakdown to a report that was
written in 2017 that stated that the Student Appellant “has made no progress and will be seeking an
extension.” This Governing Council’s Academic Appeals Committee addressed this problematic
document in its Report #421:
“the ‘official academic report written in 2017’ appears to be a report of the Student’s supervisory
committee, dated September 15, 2017, which states in material part that the Student ‘has made no
progress and will be seeking an extension.’ The supervisory committee consisted of Professors
Taylor, Kervin, and Wilson; as noted, Professor Wilson was one of the Student’s examiners in
October 2021. It is not clear when the Student received the supervisory report, why she found it
objectionable, or how she thinks it might have affected the conduct of the oral examination.”
The Student Appellant found the 2017 Homiletics Report problematic for more than one reason. First,
she did not receive a copy of the report. Though the 2016 annual report had been sent to the Student
Appellant, the 2017 Homiletic Report was not sent to the Student Appellant. The report had been written
and submitted to GCTS on September 15, 2017, by Prof. Paul Scott Wilson.
Second, it erroneously included the name of a faculty member who was not, in fact, on her Committee
(Professor Kervin was not on her Committee—the Report should have included Professor Dorcas Gordon
in place of that name.) She may also have been troubled by the brief content of the email. Like the
Senior Chair who authored Report #421, your current Committee does not fully understand why the
Student Appellant found the report problematic or thinks it should disqualify Professor Wilson from
acting as the Chair of her Committee.
Despite a clear argument for keeping Professor Wilson on the Committee, the TST made a good faith
effort to comply with the Student Appellant’s request. In an email dated October 4, 2021, the Director of
the TST, Professor Pamela Couture explained, “I have had conversations with the School of Graduate
Studies and three possible TST examiners who have the knowledge of the subject matter of “theological
imagination” who could potentially be qualified to substitute for Professor Wilson on the third exam. But
none is available to step into his place as they have either been involved [in] your examination and appeal
already or are on research leave. Therefore, I cannot substitute another professor without compromising
the integrity of the exam.”

8

The TST consulted extensively with the Ombuds Office to help resolve the Student Appellant’s concerns
about the oral defence. On October 14, 2021, Kristi Gourlay wrote a lengthy email to Pamela Couture.
She explained that she had consulted with Accessibility Services and noted that while they gave
accommodations like extra time or using software to support audio or visual disabilities “[d]isabilityrelated academic accommodations do not generally include making decision on who is responsible for
academically evaluating a student—that is at the discretion of the academic unit.” She noted that the
academic unit could offer considerations to address a student’s concerns, but only insofar as “the
considerations do not impact the integrity of the academic work or compromise learning objectives.”
In addition to the ultimately unsuccessful efforts to find suitable, qualified replacements the Toronto
School of Theology accommodated the Student Appellants requests to mitigate her anxiety about facing
her assessors by allowing the Student Appellant to be accompanied by supportive staff members, by
appointing a different faculty member to take the lead in questioning and asking Professors Wilson and
Gordon to leave their cameras off during the oral defence.
Deadline for transferring from the ThD program to the ThM program.
The Student Appellant also raised the issue of a letter sent by Associate Director of Graduate Programs,
Jesse Billett on November 2, 2021. That letter imposed a deadline of November 17 (15 days from the
date of the letter) to voluntarily transfer. The deadline fell within the 30-day period the Student Appellant
had to appeal the decision to withdraw the Student Appellant from the program.
The November 2, 2021, letter from Professor Billett was implicated in the Student Appellant’s previous
appeal to the Governing Council’s Academic Appeals Committee. In her earlier appeal, the Student
Appellant identified a different provision of the letter. (“If you believe that the remedy was not correctly
implemented, you may wish to seek further redress from the Academic Appeal Committee of the
Governing Council of the University of Toronto.”) This was considered and decided by Report #421.
The issue raised now involves a different section of the November 2 letter, that reads: “If you would like
to graduate with a ThM (Option II), you will need to fill out a “Change of Program Request” form and
ask the Emmanuel College Graduate Director, Prof. HyeRan Kim-Cragg, to sign it and submit it to the
GCTS office (gcts.office@utoronto.ca) If you wish to take this route, completed form must be received
by the GCTS Office no later than 4:00 pm on Wednesday November 17, 2021.”
The Student Appellant did not address this issue in the hearing below nor did she raise it at the hearing in
front of your Committee. We surmise that the Student Appellant felt that while her eligibility to appeal
the decision to remove her from the ThD program was still open she did not want to voluntarily transfer
out of the ThD program. The Student Appellant may find it problematic to be required to make that
decision when they were still hoping to revive their enrolment in the ThD program. We note that the
TST has been in the process of discontinuing components of its programming, and some of the options
available to the Student Appellant in late 2021 may not still be feasible.
III.

Decision

One theme that emerges in many of the Student Appellant’s documents and arguments and that was
repeated during the hearing is her desire to “explain correctly what really happened to the student during
her doctoral study.’ (Page 13 of Student Appeal Package.) The submitted materials and the hearing
provided genuine opportunities to understand the Student Appellant’s perspective. The Student
Appellant’s experience throughout her time at the TST has been troubled and plagued by tragedy. She
acknowledges that she has struggled with mental health issues. The Student Appellant has been
disadvantaged by passage of time. There was attrition over of faculty members who retired or moved to
9

different institutions. There was turn over among the administrators. The number of issues that were
raised and disputed by the Student Appellant continued to decrease the pool of faculty members who were
available to work with her, as some faculty felt conflicted their previous involvement with the Student
Appellant posed a conflict of interest. These issues are not the fault of the Student Appellant, but they are
not the fault of the TST, either. These are thorny issues and they have been complicated by the pending
closure of the ThD program.
The Student Appellant has offered a moving description of having felt misunderstood and having
experienced miscommunications, alienation, invisibility, and forgottenness. While your Committee does
not agree that Professor Wilson’s actions were unfair to the Student Appellant, we acknowledge that her
anxiety about him was very real to her. The record shows that since her return to the program after
Report #413 determined she should be allowed to conduct an oral defence of her Comprehensive
examination the TST has worked with Accessibility Services and the Student Crisis Response Programs,
and the University Ombudsperson to accommodate the Student Appellant’s needs and provide a pathway
to completion of her degree. In addition to the efforts to find suitable, qualified replacements, the TST
accommodated the Student Appellant’s requests to mitigate her anxiety about facing her assessors by
allowing the Student Appellant to be accompanied by supportive staff members, by appointing a different
faculty member to take the lead in questioning and asking Professors Wilson and Gordon to leave their
cameras off during the oral defence.
The TST accommodated the Student Appellant’s requests up until the point of impairing the academic
integrity of the oral defence. While your Committee was moved by the Student Appellant’s subjective
perceptions, we cannot find the TST ’s actions to protect academic integrity to have been unfair or
unreasonable.
Your Committee appreciates a remedy proposed by the Division in an earlier divisional hearing where
they suggested that the Student Appellant apply for readmission to Emmanuel College and then make a
request to transfer to the master’s program. We continue to support that path of resolution if it is still
possible. The TST has indicated that the program in question is being discontinued, and this may no
longer be a feasible option. We view this as another unfortunate consequence of the length of the Student
Appellant’s tenure.
IV.

Conclusion

Your Committee is mindful that our role is carefully limited by its Terms of Reference. Our function is
“[t]o hear and consider appeals made by students in the application of academic regulations
and requirements and to report its decisions, which shall be final”.
The Student Appellant’s appeal must be judged against the TST’s ThD Handbook and their academic
regulations. Although the Student Appellant experienced some difficult and painful circumstances, we
cannot assess their impact, or that of the provided (and accepted) accommodations, on her comprehensive
exam results.
The Committee cannot assess whether the grades were just or right either; we can only opine on the
process. The Student Appellant’s main grievance was that Professor Wilson should not be part of the oral
examination committee because he was biased. We believe this issue was correctly addressed in Report
#421, which determined that the written and oral parts of the Analytical exam are linked and are not
meant to be assessed by a different committee composition.
Report #413 determined that the TST should have conducted the Oral exam for procedural completeness,
and it expressly stated that the Oral examination was not a separate or new examination; in fact it decided,
“[f]urthermore, your Committee recommends that, upon the conclusion of the Student Appellant’s oral
10

defense, the TST should assess the comprehensive essay and its oral defense together and assign an
overall grade to that effort with both thoroughness and expedition. Your Committee also recommends that
the TST follow its normal practices and procedures, as outlined in its Handbook, to identify and confirm
the examiners to mark the two supplemental examinations, if she becomes eligible to write them”.
The Student Appellant was given a chance to properly complete her comprehensive examinations with the
Governing Council’s Academic Appeals Committee’s first decision on this matter, (Report #413), which
was not meant as an opportunity to retake the oral part under a new committee composition (as expressed
in the Governing Council’s Academic Appeals Committee’s second decision on this matter, Report
#421). The Student Appellant is currently asking the Governing Council’s Academic Appeals Committee
to disregard all her comprehensive exam marks as unjust and reinstate her in the TST ThD program.
Your Committee does not find any grounds on which we can retroactively dismiss the grades of the
Student Appellant’s first three written comprehensive exams. Moreover, the claim that they are unjust
was not brought up in the first two appeals, which would have been the appropriate time and place for
consideration of those issues.
Your Committee feels compassion for the Student Appellant. She went through difficult personal
circumstances. The TST has provided an opportunity to take an oral examination that might have raised
her grade on one exam and made her eligible to retake the other two. It provided accommodations to the
extent recommended and possible within the parameters of academic integrity. We cannot find
justification for disregarding her deficient performance on her comprehensive examinations and
reinstating her in the program.
Appeal dismissed.

11

