Case 798

DATE:

   March 1, 2016

PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v S.J.

Hearing Date(s):

   December 8, 2015

Panel Members:

   Andrew Pinto, Chair
   Kathi Wilson, Faculty Member
   Yusra Qazi, Student Member

Appearances:

   Tina Lie, Assistant Discipline Counsel
   Lauren Pearce, Student-at-Law, Paliare Roland Barristers
   John Carter, Deanâs Designate, Academic Integrity, Faculty of Applied
   Science and Engineering
   Neeraj Sood, Course Teaching Assistant
   Piero Triverio, Assistant Professor, Faculty of Applied Science and
   Engineering
   Jaro Pristupa, Director, Information Technology

In Attendance:

   Christopher Lang, Director, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances
   Krista Obsourne, Administrative Assistant, Appeals, Discipline and
   Faculty Grievances
   Student charged with one offence under s. B.i.1(d) , three offences
   under s. B.i.1(b) , one offence under s. B.ii.2 , one offence under s.
   B.i.1(c) and, in the alternative to those charges, three offences under
   s. B.i.3(b) and one offence under s. B.i.1(d) of the Code . The charges
   related to separate allegations that the Student committed plagiarism
   with respect to an Assignment in one Course, that the Student attempted
   to obtain an advance copy of the final examination in another Course by
   personating a professor of the Course via email, and that the Student
   used unauthorized assistance in the final examination in the second
   Course by copying from another student during the examination. The
   Panel noted that the Student had no prior offences, and that the acts
   happened within a reasonably short amount of time (2 months) such that
   they should be considered three first-time offences. The Student was
   not present at the hearing. The Panel concluded that the Student had
   reasonable notice of the hearing via email, and the Studentâs lawyer
   acknowledged that the Student knew the hearing would proceed in his
   absence. The Panel held that the lawyerâs reference to âmedical
   reasonsâ as a reason for the Studentâs absence did not constitute a
   request for an adjournment.
   Student was found guilty of the plagiarism charge, the impersonation
   charge, and the unauthorized aid charge. The other charges against the
   Student were withdrawn. The Panel accepted the evidence of the
   Universityâs witnesses, who described how the Student copied directly
   from a publicly available software repository for the Assignment, how
   the Student obtained the login information of three other University of
   Toronto students and sent an email to a professor as if coming from the
   Course Professorâs email but really coming from another studentâs
   account, and how the Student copied from his lab partnerâs examination.
   The Panel noted that the Student had gone to extraordinary lengths to
   commit academic misconduct. The circumstances surrounding the phishing
   email were particularly egregious because of the considerable planning,
   deliberation, and deception involved, including the identity theft of
   three university studentsâ userIDs and passwords and the personation of
   a professor. The Student showed no remorse when confronted with the
   charges; accordingly, a more severe sanction was required here than
   would be had the Student pleaded guilty and expressed remorse. The
   Studentâs statement that he was depressed and anxious, without more,
   did not rise to the level of sufficiency required for the Panel to
   consider it a mitigating circumstance. The Panel imposed a grade
   assignment of zero in both courses; a 5-year suspension or a suspension
   until the Governing Councilâs decision on expulsion; a corresponding
   notation on the Studentâs academic record and transcript; a
   recommendation of expulsion; and that the case be reported to the
   Provost for publication.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12896
