Case 684

   [1]Case 684 - Sanction
   [2]Case 684 - Appeal

DATE:

   July 11, 2013

PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v. C.A.M.

Hearing Date(s):

   February 20; May 2, 2013

Panel Members:

   Ms. Lisa Brownstone, Chair
   Prof. Pascal Van Lieshout, Faculty Member
   Mr. Yingxiang Li, Student Member

Appearances:

   Mr. Robert Centa, Assistant Discipline Counsel for the University
   Ms. Tina Lie, Assistant Discipline Counsel for the University
   The Student
   Stewart Aitchison, Professor (Feb 20, 2013)
   Nick Carriere, Teaching Assistant (Feb 20, 2013)
   Alex Wong, Teaching Assistant (Feb 20, 2013)
   John Carter, Dean's Designate (Feb 20, 2013)
   Diane Kruger, Forensic Document Examiner (Feb 20, 2013)

In Attendance:

   Adam Goodman, to advise student, not on record (Feb 20, 2013)
   Ms. Natalie Ramtahal, Coordinator, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty
   Grievances

   Student charged with one offence under s. B.i.1(a). Student was charged
   in the alternative with one offence under s. B.i.3(a) and in the
   further alternative, with one offence under s. B.i.3(b). The charges
   related to an allegation that the Student advised the professor a test
   mark was erroneously recorded as a zero and altered and submitted to
   the professor another studentâs test claiming it to be the Student's
   own. The Student attended the hearing. The Student was accompanied at
   the hearing by the Studentâs former counsel who was not on the record
   but had come to provide the Student with advice.

   Both the Student and the University had retained their own forensic
   document examiners. A week prior to the hearing, an order was made by a
   Proceedings Chair that University counsel was to deliver the
   Universityâs expert report by February 13, 2013. The Proceedings Chair
   also held that if the Studentâs expert did not attend the hearing, the
   evidence of the Studentâs expert would not be admitted. The Student
   received a report from a forensic document examiner in Michigan on
   February 18, 2013. No arrangements were made to have the expert appear
   in person or by video conference. The Student delivered the report to
   University counsel, unsigned and in draft form, minutes before the
   hearing on February 20, 2013. The Student attempted to cross examine
   the Universityâs expert on the contents of the report prepared by the
   Studentâs expert. University counsel objected and the Panel ruled that
   the Student could ask questions based on information learned from the
   report of his expert, but that the Student could not tender the report
   as evidence, nor refer to the report in cross-examination.

   The Panel determined that the evidence that the Student did not write
   the test was substantial and unambiguous. The Panel found that the
   emails between the Student and the TA were sent from the Student,
   notwithstanding the Studentâs attempts to characterize these emails as
   abnormal. The Panel stated that the contents of the email the Student
   sent to the TA and the email the student provided to the professor,
   along with the Studentâs desire to keep the original test paper, all
   supported the Universityâs allegations. The Panel accepted the evidence
   of the Universityâs expert and concluded that there was no doubt that
   the Studentâs name and student number had been written over top of
   those of the original studentâs whose test had been altered. The Panel
   held that the admission made by the Student at the Deanâs Meeting was
   of limited assistance. The Student had retracted the admission and the
   Panel agreed that it was possible that the Student had never meant to
   plead guilty and had only said âyesâ to âget it over with.â The Student
   had not signed any documents at the Deanâs Meeting. The Panel concluded
   that the standard of proof set out in F.H. v McDougall was met and
   found the Student guilty of the offence alleged under s. B.i.1(a) of
   the Code.

   The sanction phase of the hearing occurred on a separate day. At the
   sanction phase the Student sought to introduce a variety of documents
   relevant to liability. The Panel considered whether it was appropriate
   to reconsider liability at the sanction phase. The Panel observed the
   existence of a broad right of appeal wherein fresh evidence may
   sometimes be admitted. The Panel noted that the right of
   reconsideration is never explicitly addressed in either the Code or the
   Rules. The Panel also stated that it was unclear whether it had
   jurisdiction to reconsider liability at the sanction phase, after
   considering the Statutory Powers and Procedure Act and the Rules. The
   Panel concluded that even if it had this jurisdiction, it would not
   exercise its discretion to admit new materials relevant only to the
   issue of liability at this stage given the full hearing had already
   occurred, the Student had access to counsel at the hearing, and all the
   information the Student wished the Panel to consider had been available
   to the Student at the time of the initial hearing.

   The Panel underscored the seriousness of the offence and noted that
   there was a high degree of planning and deliberation involved. The
   Panel observed that there was no evidence of mitigating factors and was
   concerned that the Student had implicated one of the TAs and the
   professor by suggesting they either fabricated or possessed âbogusâ
   emails. The Panel disagreed, however, with the Universityâs submission
   that it was an aggravating factor for the Student to suggest that there
   was a problem with âthe system.â The Panel concluded that this
   suggestion was not sufficient to call into question the Universityâs
   integrity and students must be able to bring forward concerns about the
   systems in place without fear of those concerns being cast as
   aggravating factors. The Panel imposed a final grade of zero in the
   course, a recommendation that the Student be expelled from the
   University, a suspension of five years or until the Governing Council
   makes a decision on expulsion, whichever comes first, and ordered that
   the case be reported to the Provost for publication.
   NOTE: This case was appealed. The majority allowed the appeal to the
   extent that it related to the recommendation for expulsion.
   [3]View Case

References

   1. http://live-the-office-of-the-governing-council.pantheonsite.io/media/12806
   2. http://live-the-office-of-the-governing-council.pantheonsite.io/media/12853
   3. file:///media/12805
