Case 796

DATE:

   November 10, 2016

PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v. R.D. (âthe Studentâ)

Hearing Date(s):

   August 11, 2016

Panel Members:

   Ms. Johanna Braden, Barrister and Solicitor,
   Chair Professor Bruno Magliocchetti, Faculty Panel Member
   Mr. Sean McGowan, Student Panel Member

Appearances:

   Ms. Tina Lie, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland, Barristers
   Ms. Ejona Xega, Student-at-law, Downtown Legal Services

In Attendance:

   The Student
   Ms. Lucy Gaspini, Manager, Academic lntegrity and Affairs, Office of
   the Dean, U of T, Mississauga
   Mr. H.D., the Student's brother
   Ms. S.D., the Student's mother
   Mr. D.D., the Student's father
   Mr. Paul Michell, Observer, newly appointed Tribunal Co-Chair
   Ms. Tracey Gameiro, Associate Director, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty
   Grievances
   Student charged with two charges of plagiarism contrary to s. B.i.1(d)
   of the Code and one charge of obtaining unauthorized assistance during
   a test contrary to s . B.i.1(b) of the Code . Alternative charges
   included academic dishonesty contrary to s. B.i.3(b) of the Code,
   obtaining unauthorized assistance contrary to s. B.i.1(b) of the Code ,
   and being a party to obtaining unauthorized assistance contrary to s.
   B.i.1(b) and s. B.ii.1 of the Code . The charges related to allegations
   that the Student shared answers with another student during a test, and
   had represented ideas as his own from unattributed sources in two
   separate written assignments.
   The matter proceeded by an Agreed Statement of Facts. Â In relation to
   the charge of unauthorized assistance, the Student admitted that he had
   shared answers with a classmate during a test. The plagiarism charges
   related to essays that had been turned in for course credit in two
   separate courses. Â Both essays copied text directly from internet
   sources (Wikipedia, the BBC website, and others) that had not been
   accompanied by proper citations. The Student did not admit liability at
   the Deanâs Designate meetings with respect to the offences but at the
   Tribunal, pled guilty to the unauthorized assistance charge as well as
   the two charges of forgery. Upon the Panel finding guilt on these
   charges, the University withdrew the alternative charges.
   The parties submitted a Joint Submission on Penalty. Â In determining
   the appropriateness of the proposed penalty, the Panel took into
   consideration that the Studentâs admissions of guilt only came after
   his co-conspirator had admitted to unauthorized assistance during the
   test; that the Student had past academic misconduct (he had two prior
   charges of plagiarism in addition to three charges dealt with at the
   hearing); that the Student would be graduating after the completion of
   the sanction so it was the last chance to stress the importance of the
   Code; and the need for general deterrence. The Panel reviewed other
   cases advanced by the University which suggested that a two-year
   suspension is a threshold penalty for plagiarism, and that a three-year
   suspension is a "baseline" where there have been multiple offences. In
   light of the Studentâs history of academic misconduct, the Panel noted
   that a suspension of three to four years may have been appropriate in
   this case, but recognized the need to respect and defer to the Joint
   Submission on Penalty. Though it was on the low end of sanctions where
   a student was found guilty of multiple offences, the Panel accepted the
   partiesâ Joint Submission on Penalty of a grade assignment of zero in
   the two courses associated with the plagiarism charges; a suspension of
   two years and eight months; a notation on the Studentâs transcript
   until graduation; and a report to the Provost.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12924
