Case No.: 796
THE UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
lN THE MATTER OF charges of academic dishonesty filed on February 11,2015 and March 2,2016

AND lN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters, 1995,
AND lN THE MATTER OF the Llniversity of Toronto Act, 1971, S.O. 1971, c,56 as amended S.O. 1978, c. 88

BETWEEN

UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO

-andR

D

REASONS FOR DECISION

Hearing Date: August 11,2016
Members of the Panel:
Ms. Johanna Braden, Barrister and Solicitor, Chair
Professor Bruno Magliocchetti, Faculty Panel Member
Mr. Sean McGowan, Student Panel Member
Appearances:
Ms. Tina Lie, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland, Barristers
Ms. Ejona Xega, Student-at-law, Downtown Legal Services
ln Attendance:
Ms. Lucy Gaspini, Manager, Academic lntegrity and Affairs, Office of the Dean, U of T,
Mississauga
D
Mr. R

D

Mr. H
Ms. S

, Student

D

, the Student's brother

, the Student's mother

D
, the Student's father
Mr. D
Mr. Paul Michell, Observer, newly appointing Tribunal Co-Chair
Ms. Tracey Gameiro, Associate Director, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances

2

1.

The Trial Division of the University Tribunal was convened on August 11,2016, to
consider charges brought by the University of Toronto (the "University") against Mr. R
D

(the "Student") under the lJniversity of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters,

1995 (the "Code").

The Charges and Particulars

2.

There were two sets of Charges and Particulars alleged against the Student. The first

set, filed February 11,2015 (the '2015 Charges"), alleged as follows:
1

On or about November 29, 2012, you knowingly obtained unauthorized assistance in
an in-class test in WGS2OOYS (the "Course"), contrary to section 8.1.1(b) of the Code.

2.

ln the alternative, on or about November 29,2012you were a party to the offence of
obtaining unauthorized assistance committed by R.S. in an in-class test in the Course,
contrary to sections 8.1.1(b) and B.ll.1 of the Code'

3

ln the further alternative, on or about November 29,2012, you knowingly engaged in a
form of cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or misrepresentation not
otherwise described in the Code in order to obtain academic credit or other academic
advantage of any kind in connection with an in-class test in the Course, contrary to
section B.¡.3(b) of the Code.

4

On or about March 7, 2013, you knowingly represented as your own an idea or
expression of an idea or work of another in an essay that you submitted in the Course,
contrary to section 8.1.1(d) of the Code.

5.

ln the alternative, on or about March 7, 2013, you knowingly obtained unauthorized
assistance in connection with an essay that you submitted in the Course, contrary to
section 8.1.1(b) of the Code.

6

ln the further alternative, on or about March 7,2013, you knowingly engaged in a form
of cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or misrepresentation not

otherwise described in the Code in order to obtain academic credit or other academic

3

advantage of any kind in connection with an essay that you submitted in the Course,
contrary to section 8.1.3(b) of the Code.

Particulars of the offences charged are as follows:
7

At all material times you were a student at the University of Toronto Mississauga. ln

Fall 2012 andWinter 2013, you enrolled in the Course, which was taught by Dr. Karen
Ruffle.

(1)

The ln-Class Tesú

I

On November 29, 2012, you wrote an in-class test in the Course, which was worth
15o/o of your final grade in the Course (the "ln-Class Test").

I

You knew that collaborating and/or communicating with other students during the lnClass Test was not permitted.

10. During the ln-Class Test, You
(a)

obtained unauthorized assistance from Mr. S. by communicating with Mr. S
about the ln-Class Test;

(b)

(c)

communicated with Mr. S. about the ln-Class Test for the purpose of aiding or
assisting Mr. S. to obtain unauthorized assistance in the ln-Class Test; and

communicated with Mr. S. about the ln-Class

counseling, procuring or conspiring with Mr. S

Test, thereby abetting,
to obtain unauthorized

assistance in the ln-Class Test.
11

you engaged in the foregoing conduct for the purpose of obtaining academic credit or
academic advantage.

(2)

The Essay

12.

On March 7, 2013, you submitted an essay in the Course, which was worth 15o/o of
your final grade in the Course (the "Essay").

4

13. You submitted the EssaY:
(a)

to obtain academic credit;

(b)

knowing that it contained verbatim or nearly verbatim text from online sources,
including but not limited to the following URLs:

(i)

http://www.markfoster.net/struc/intersectionalitv-wiki.pdf;

( i¡)

http://www.torontol¡p,com/services/workino-women-communitv-centre-services-

immiqrant-women-and-their-families; and

(¡¡¡) http://en.wikipedia.orq/wiki/Homelessness
(the "Sources");
(c)

knowing that it contained ideas or expressions of ideas which were not your
own, but were the ideas or expressions of ideas of others, including the authors

ofthe Sources; and
(d)

14

knowing that you did not properly reference the ideas, the expression of ideas
and the verbatim or nearly verbatim text that you drew from the Sources.

you knowingly obtained unauthorized assistance in connection with the Essay,
including from the Sources.

1S. you knowingly submitted the Essay with the intention that the University of Toronto

Mississauga rely on it as containing your own ideas or work in considering the
appropriate academic credit to be assigned to your work'

3.

The second set of Charges and Particulars were filed on March 2,2016 (the "2016

Charges") and were as follows.
On or about April 3, 2015, you knowingly represented as your own an idea or expression of an
idea or work of another in an essay that you submitted in CCT314H5 (Representation
in Language, Mind and Art) (the "Course"), contrary to section 8,1.1(d) of the Code.

5

ln the alternative, on or about April 3, 2015, you knowingly engaged in a form of cheating,
academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or misrepresentation not othenruise
described. in the Code in order to obtain academic credit or other academic advantage
of any kind in connection with an essay that you submitted in the Course, contrary to
section 8.1.3(b) of the Code.

Particulars of the offences charged are as follows:

At all material times you were a student at the University of Toronto Mississauga. ln Winter
2015, you enrolled in the Course, which was taught by Professor Anil Narine.

On or about April 3, 2015, you submitted an essay in the Course, which was worth 30o/o of
your final grade in the Course (the "Essay").

You submitted the Essay:

(a)
(b)

to obtain academic credit;

knowing that it contained verbatim or nearly verbatim text from sources,
including from "The Hidden Story of Partition and its Legacies" by Dr. Crispin
Bates (http ://vrnryw. bbc. co. uk/h istorv/british/m odern/partition 1 947 0 1 shtm l)
.

(the "Sources");
(c)

knowing that it contained ideas or expressions of ideas which were not your
own, but were the ideas or expressions of ideas of others, including the authors

ofthe Sources; and
(d)

knowing that you did not properly reference the ideas, the expression of ideas

and the verbatim or nearly verbatim text that you drew from the Sources,
including through the use of quotation marks.

you knowingly submitted the Essay with the intention that the University of Toronto
Mississauga rely on it as containing your own ideas or work in considering the
appropriate academic credit to be assigned to your work.

6

The Student's Plea

4.

The Student was present and represented by a Student-at-Law from Downtown Legal
Services. Of the 2O1S Charges, the Student admitted Charge 1 and 4. Of the 2016 Charges,

the Student admitted Charge 1. With the permission of the Tribunal, the University withdrew
all other charges against the Student.

The Evidence

S.

The evidence before the Tribunal was presented by an Agreed Statement of Facts,

which is reproduced here without the documents referred to therein.

1.

This matter arises out of charges of academic misconduct filed on February 11,2015
(the,'February2015 Charges") and on March 2,2A16 ("March 2016 Charges" and, collectively

with the February 201S Charges, the "Charges") by the Provost of the University of Toronto
(the ,,provost") under the Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters ("Code"). The Provost and
D have prepared this Agreed Statement of Facts ("ASF") and a joint book of
R
documents ("JBD"). The Provost and Mr. D

(a)

agree that:

each document contained in the JBD may be admitted into evidence for all
purposes, including for the truth of the document's contents, without further
need to Prove the document; and

(b)

A.
2.

if a document indicates that it was sent or received by someone, that is prima
facie proof that the document was sent and received as indicated.

Charges and guiltY PIea

admits that he received a copy of the February 2015 Charges and a copy of
1 and 2,
the March 2016 Charges filed by the Provost, which are included in the JBD at Tabs

Mr. D

respectively.

7

3.

admits that he received a copy of the notice of hearing in this matter and that
he has received reasonable notice of this hearing. A copy of the notice of hearing is included
Mr. D

in the JBD at Tab 3.

4.

waives the reading of the Charges filed against him. He pleads guilty to
charges #1 and #4 of the February 2015 Charges, and charge #1 of the March 2016 Charges.

Mr. D

S.

The provost agrees that if the Tribunal convicts Mr. D on charges #1 and #4, the
provost will withdraw charges #2, #3, #5 and #6 of the February 2015 Charges. The Provost
further agrees that if the Tribunal convicts Mr. D on charge #1, the Provost will withdraw
charge #2 of the March 2016 Charges.

6.

At all material times, Mr. D

Mississauga. A copy of Mr. D

B.

7.

was a registered student at the University of Toronto

's current academic record is included in the JBD at Tab 4'

wGs200
ln Fall 2012 andwinter 2013, Mr. D

enrolled in wGS200Y5 (Theories in women and

Gender Studies) ('WGS2OO"), which was taught by Dr. Karen Ruffle.

g.

A copy of the syllabus for WGS200 (the "WGS2OO Syllabus") is included in the JBD at
(at
Tab 5. The wGS200 Syllabus included the following with respect to academic integrity
pages 7 and 8):
Academic lnteqritv
For the university's Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters, please see the

website: http,//**w. utoronto.calooucn"l/pap/polici"s/behauea". httl/

following

,,Plagiarism is a very serious, punishable offence that can result in a failing
gradä tor this courså. All use of words or ideas from the published works of
ãnother individual or individuals must be properly acknowledged. Failure to do
io constitutes plagiarism, a serious academic offence that will not be tolerated.
Please note that ðnanging a few words in text (s) from other writers does not
own. rf you paraphrase, please give the name of the authors,
rãr.ã ¡t your
'publication
ãnO þage numbers. ln general, you should use direct
dates of
regarding what is
luotations and paraphrase's sparingly.' lf there is uncertainty
students
referencing'
and
Ëtagiarism, or" what ãre acceptable forms of citation

ino-uld consult the instructor. Please see the following website for more
information: http://www. utoronto.calwritino/plaqseo'html/

I

g.

1.

The ln-Class Test

On November 2g, 2012, students in WGS200 wrote an in-class test worth 15% (the
,,Test',). The Test was held in Davis Building, DV2O74, which is the classroom in which the
lectures in the course were held. A copy of a floor plan depicting DV2074 is included in the
JBD at Tab 6.

10. Dr. Ruffle invigilated the Test. No aids were permitted during the Test and students

were not permitted to speak with one another during the Test'

11. Mr. D

attended the Test and sat next to another student, R. S. (with one seat in
between them), During the Test, Mr. D and Mr. S. whispered to one another in an attempt to
communicate with one another during the Test.

12. Near the end of the test, another student, S. S., asked to speak with Dr. Rutfle in the

hall as she was handing in her test paper. Ms. Smith was seated in the row directly above Mr.
S. and Mr. D . ln the hall, Ms. Smith advised Dr. Ruffle that the two students in front of her

(whom Dr. Ruffle identified as Mr. S. and Mr. D

) were whispering throughout the test. Dr.

that
Ruffle returned to the lecture hall, and spoke with Mr. S. and Mr. D . Dr. Ruffle indicated
she would have to take their test papers because another student had heard them whispering.

Dr. Ruffle confiscated Mr. S. and Mr. D

's test papers and gave Mr. S. and Mr. D

each a

clean copy of the test to permit them to finish the Test.

13. At the end of the Test, Mr. S. and Mr. D

each handed in a second copy of theirtest

papers, containing their answers after Dr. Ruffle confiscated their original test papers.

14. A copy of the test that Dr. Ruffle confiscated from Mr. D

when she spoke with him

in
during the Test is included in the JBD at Tab 7. A copy of the test that Mr, D handed
(containing his answers after his original test paper was confiscated) is included in the JBD at

Tab 8.

1S. After the Test, on November 29,2012, Dr. Rutfle spoke with Mr. D

the allegation of academic misconduct in the Test.

and Mr. S. about

I

2.
16

The lntersectionality Essay

On March 8,2013, Mr. D

submitted an essay entitled "intersectionality" in WGS200,

which was worth 15o/o of his final grade (the "lntersectionality Essay"), Mr. D

submitted the

lntersectionality Essay through Turnitin, a service that assesses the originality of texts using
comparisons with documents contained in its database and online sources. The Turnitin
report for the lntersectionality Essay revealed a 43o/o similarity index with other sources (the
"Turnitin Report"). A copy of the Turnitin Report for the lntersectionality Essay is included in
the JBD at Tab 9. A copy of the lntersectionality Essay is included in the JBD at Tab 10.

17. Upon seeing the Turnitin Report, Dr. Ruffle reviewed the lntersectionality Essay and

determined that the lntersectionality Essay contained passages that were taken verbatim or
nearly verbatim from several sources without appropriate attribution, including:
(a)

"lntersectionality", which

is

found

online

at

http://www.markfoster.net/struc/intersectionalitv-wiki.pdf, and which was not

cited in the lntersectionality Essay, An excerpt of this document is included in
the JBD at Tab 104;
(b)

A presentation given by the Working Women Community Centre, which was
cited in the lntersectionality Essay, but was not referenced appropriately
including through the use of quotation marks. This document is included in the
JBD at Tab 108;

(c)

"Working Women Community Centre Services for lmmigrant Women and their

Families", which is found online at http://torontollp.com/services/workino-

women-communitv-centre-services-immiorant-women-and-their-families,

and

which was not cited in the lntersectionality Essay, An excerpt of this document
is included in the JBD at Tab 10C;
(d)

"Homelessness", which

is

found

online

at

http://en.wikipedia.orq/wiki/Homelessness, and which was not cited in the
lntersectionality Essay. An excerpt of this document is included in the JBD at

Tab 10D; and

(e)

"Homelessness in

Peel", which is

found online at

http://peelreqion.calhousinq/initiativess-resources/proqrams/homelessness.htm,

10

which was cited in the lntersectionality Essay, but was not referenced
appropriately including through the use of quotation marks. This document is
included in the JBD at Tab 10E
(collectively, the "lntersectionality Sources")

18. The copy of the lntersectionality Essay submitted by Mr. D

at Tab 10 of the JBD

includes comments in the margin from Dr. Ruffle, as well as highlighting to indicate the text
that was taken verbatim or nearly verbatim from the lntersectionality Sources. The highlighting
in the lntersectionality Essay at Tab 10 of the JBD corresponds to the highlighting contained in

the lntersectionality Sources at Tabs 104, 108, 10C, 10D and 10E of the JBD.

3.

Meeting with Dean's Designate re WGS200

19. On July 4,2013, Mr. D

met with Professor Emmanuel Nikiema, Dean's Designate for

Academic lntegrity to discuss the allegation of academic misconduct in WGS200. At the
meeting, Mr. D denied committing the offence of unauthorized assistance in the Test, but
pleaded guilty to the offence of plagiarism in respect of the lntersectionality Essay and signed
an admission of guilt form, a copy of which is found in the JBD at Tab 11.

ZA. On January 14,2015, Mr. S. pleaded guilty to the offence of unauthorized assistance in

connection with the Test. A copy of the admission form signed by Mr. S., together with the
letter referenced in the form, are included in the JBD at Tab 12. Mr. S. received an assigned
final grade of 60 in WGS200 and a one-year annotation on his transcript.

c.

ccr314

21. ln Winter 2015, Mr. D

enrolled in CCT314H5S (Representation in Language, Mind

and Art Course Outline) ("CCT314'), which was taught by Professor Anil Narine.

22. A copy of the syllabus for CCT314 (the "CCT314 Syllabus") is included in the JBD at
Tab 13. The CCT314 Syllabus included the following with respect to academic integrity (at
page 3):
From

"lt

the

shall

Code

be

an

of

Behaviour

offence for

on
a

Academic
student

Matters:
knowingly:

11

idea or expression of an idea or work of another in
(d)
'anyto represenf as one's own any
acàaemic examination or term test or in connection with any other form of
academic work, i.e. to commit ptagiarism. Wherever in the Code an offence ls descnbed
as depending on "knowing", the offence shall likewise be deemed to have been
committed if the person ought reasonably to have known."

of

T

Mississauga Academic calendar:
to the University's mission, and, as a
fundamental
considered
fairness
are
and
Honesty
result, áll tnose who violate those principles are dealt with as if they were damaging the
integrity of the University itself. The University of Toronto treats academic offences very
seriõuity. Students snout¿ note that copying, plàgiarizing, or other forms of academic
misconduct wilt not be tolerated. Any students caught engaging in such activities will be
subject to academic discipline ranging from a mark of zero on the assignment, test or
examination to dismissal from the University as outlined in the UTM calendar. Any

From the

u

student abetting or otherwise assisting in such misconduct will also be subject to
academic penalties.
Students are assumed to be informed about plagiarism and are expected to read the

handout, How Not to Plaqiarize (http://www.writinq.utoronto.ca/advice/using-

sources/how+ot-to+làgiarize) written by Margaret Procter. lt is a valuable and succinct

ffithetopic.Youarealsosupposedtobefamiliar,and (see
considered as being familiar, with the Code of Behaviour on Academic Maffers
Policies or
and
Calendar: Codes
UTM

http://www.qoverninqcouncil.utoronto.calpolicies/behaveac.htm) and Code of Student

), which sPell
out your iightq your duties and provide all the details on grading regulations and
acad-emic offences at the university of Toronto. [Emphasis in original]

4.

The Partition EssaY

23. On April 3,2015, Mr. D

submitted an essay entitled "Unhealed Wounds - Partition of
lndia, 1 g47" in CCT314, which was worth 30% of his final grade (the "Partition Essay"). A
copy of the Partition Essay is included in the JBD at Tab 14'

24. Upon reviewing the Partition Essay, Professor Narine determined that it contained

passages that were taken verbatim without appropriate attribution from "The Hidden Story of

Partition and

its

Legacies", which is

found online at

http://www,bbc,co.uki/history/british/modern/partition1947 01,shtml. While this source was
cited in the partition Essay, Mr. D included a verbatim passage without using quotation

marks or othenruise indicating that it was a direct quote. This source is included in the JBD at

Tab 144 (the "Partition Source").

25. The copy of the Partition Essay submitted by Mr. D

at Tab 10 of the JBD includes a

note in the margin, as well as highlighting, to indicate the text that was taken verbatim from the

12

Partition Source. The highlighting in the Partition Essay at Tab 10 of the JBD corresponds to
the highlighting contained in the Partition Source at Tab 104 of the JBD.

5.

Meeting with Dean's Designate re CGT314

26. On January 20,2016, Mr. D

met with Professor Catherine Seguin, Dean's Designate

for Academic lntegrity to discuss the allegation of academic misconduct in CCT314. Mr. D
attended the meeting with a representative of Downtown Legal Services. At the meeting, Mr.
Ð

indicated that he was not ready to make a plea in respect of the Partition Essay.

Adm issi o n s an d Acknowl edgem ents

D.

27. Mr. D

admits that he knowingly sought assistance from or sought to give assistance

to Mr. S. during the Test, and that such assistance was unauthorized.

28. Mr. D
(a)

admits that he knowingly
included verbatim or nearly verbatim excerpts from the lntersectionality Sources
in the lntersectionality Essay;

(b)

failed to attribute those verbatim or nearly verbatim excerpts appropriately using

citations, quotation marks or other appropriate means;
(c)

represented in the lntersectionality Essay the ideas of another person, the
expression of the ideas of another person, or the work of another person as his
own; and

(d)
29. Mr. D

committed plagiarism, contrary to section B'1.1(d) of the Code
admits that he knowingly:

(a)

included verbatim excerpts from the Partition Source in the Partition Essay;

(b)

failed to attribute those verbatim excerpts appropriately using quotation marks
or other appropriate means;

(c)

represented in the Partition Essay the ideas of another person, the expression
of the ideas of another person, or the work of another person as his own; and

13

(d)
30. Mr. D
(a)

committed plagiarism, contrary to section 8.1.1(d) of the Code
acknowledges that

the Provost has advised Mr. D

of his right to obtain legal counsel and that he

has done so; and
(b)

he is signing this ASF freely and voluntarily, knowing of the potential

consequences he faces, and does so with the advice of counsel.

Decision of the Tribunal on the Charges

6.

The onus is on the University to establish on the balance of probabilities, using clear

and convincing evidence, that one or more of the academic offences charged has been
committed by the Student.

7.

ln this case, the Student admitted to three of the Charges. The Tribunal was satisfied

that the Student's admissions were voluntary, informed and unequivocal. Further, the
evidence contained in the Agreed Statement of Facts and accompanying documents clearly
proved the admitted Charges.

8.

ln light of the Tribunal's finding, Charges 2,3 and 5 from the 2015 Charges, and

Charge 2from the 2016 Charges, were withdrawn by the University.

Evidence on Penalty

9.

There was some additional evidence on penalty, also admitted by way of an Agreed
Statement of Facts on Penalty. This evidence established that the Student had admitted to

two previous incidents of plagiarism in connection with a course he took in the 2012 Winter
term. He admitted to having used substantial passages from improperly attributed sources in
two written assignments for that course, together worth a total of 25o/o of his course grade.
On July 26, 2012, a sanction for those offences was imposed by the Vice-Dean

Undergraduate at the University of Toronto-Mississauga. lt consisted of a grade of zero for
each of the two assignments; a further grade reduction of 10 marks from the Student's final

14

grade in the Course; and an annotation on the Student's transcript for 6 months, from July 20,
2012 to January 20,2013.

10. ln imposing that sanction, the Vice-Dean wrote:
I trust that you have had time to reflect on the seriousness of this incident and will not commit
another acådemic offence. Please be advised that any subsequent allegations of offence are
usually referred directly to the Tribunal for investigation. I urge you to do everything in your
poweito make a success of your academic career at the University of Toronto Mississauga'

Submissions on Penalty
11

There was a joint submission on penalty, in which both parties requested that the
Tribunal make an order as follows:
(a)

a final grade of zero in the course WGS200Y5;

(b)

a final grade of zero in the course CCT314H5;

(c)

a suspension from the University of Toronto until May 31,2019; and

(d)

a notation of the sanction on the Student's academic record and transcript from
the day the Tribunal makes its order until graduation.

12. The parties also submitted that it would be appropriate for the Tribunal to report this

case to the provost for publication of a notice of the decision of the Tribunal and the sanction
or sanctions imposed in the University newspapers, with the name of the student withheld.

13. As to the length of the proposed suspension, the parties explained that the Student

has enough credits to graduate. lf the suspension ends May 31 , 2019, he can graduate in
June of that year. The parties also submitted that the Student was prepared to have this

hearing and admit his guilt some months ago, but that the hearing date was delayed for

institutional reasons unrelated to the Student.

15

Decision of the Tribunal on Penalty

14. The Tribunal considered the factors and principles relevant to sanction set out by this

Tribunal in lJniversity of Toronto and Mr. C (Case No. 1976177-3, November 5, 1976). The
most significant factors for the Tribunal were as follows.
(a)

The character of the Student: the Student attended at the hearing and made
admissions of misconduct. The admissions with respect to the Test were

made somewhat late in the day, and only after another student - R.S. admitted to his part in whispering with the Student and engaging in

unauthorized assistance during the Test. Nonetheless, the Tribunal recognizes
that by admitting his guilt the Student has spared the University and its
witnesses the challenges of a contested hearing relating to events that began
almost four years ago. The Student's representative at this hearing submitted

that the Student is truly remorseful, and the Tribunal is prepared to accept
those submissions.

(b)

The likelihood of a repetition of the offence: this was a very serious concern'
The evidence in this case reveals the Student has a history of academic
misconduct.

(i) On January 26,2012, the Student submitted an assignment containing
significant passages that he did not write nor properly attribute.

(ii) On Febru ary 16, 2012, the Student submitted a second assignment

containing significant passages that he did not write nor properly

attribute.

(¡ii) On July 26, 2012, the Student was sanctioned for his plagiarism and
specifically warned to avoid further academic misconduct.

(iv) On November 29, 2012, the Student knowingly obtained unauthorized
assistance from another student, R.S., during the Test'

16

(v) On March 8, 2013, the Student submitted an essay that contained
passages that he did not write nor properly attribute.

(vi) Finally, on April 3, 2015, the Student submitted an essay that again
contained passages that he did not write nor properly attribute,

The Tribunal is aware that the sanction imposed relates only to the final three
incidents of misconduct. However, this pattern of behaviour cannot help but

give rise to a concern that a significant penalty is required in order to ensure

specific deterrence. The Student will apparently be graduating once the
suspension is lifted. This would seem to be the Tribunal's last chance to
impresses upon the Student the importance of honesty and integrity.
(c)

The nature of the offence committed: while all academic dishonesty is serious,
the Tribunal recognizes that the unauthorized assistance and the plagiarism in
this case were not the most egregious examples of their kind. The number of
offences is more worrying, as it suggests the Student may be unwilling or
unable to abide by the University's Code of Conduct.

(d)

The need to deter others from committing similar offences: deliberate
dishonesty must always be denounced and deterred, especially when it is part
of a pattern as it is here. But for the vigilance of the student S.S., who reported

the whispering during the Test, and the honesty of the student R.S., who
admitted his part in it, the Student might never have been caught in obtaining
unauthorized assistance during the Test. As to the plagiarism offences, it is
clear that plagiarism continues to be a scourge on academia, and that a strong

message is needed to ensure general deterrence.

1S. ln addition to the factors from the C. case, the Tribunal considered other cases of this

Tribunal in similar circumstances. The University submitted a Book of Authorities including
twelve cases from this Tribunal of offences involving unauthorized assistance during tests
and plagiarism. No two cases are identical, and the Tribunal is not bound by past decisions.

However, the Tribunal strives to develop a consistent body of case law so that students are
treated fairly and equitably.

17

16

The cases submitted by the University suggest that a two-year suspension is a
threshold penalty for plagiarism, and that a three year suspension is a "baseline"
where there have been multiple offences: see, for example, University of Toronto and
S

A

(Case No. 591, May 13,2011). Onlytwo of the cases submitted by

the University involved a sanction of less than three years.
(a)

ln lJniversity of Toronto and S

R

(Case No. 708, June 6,2014) a student

obtained unauthorized assistance during a test, and had one prior offence of

being in possession of a phone during an exam. That student did not
participate in his hearing. The Tribunal imposed a suspension of two years

and five months.
(b)

ln lJniversity of Toronto and Y.W. and D.L. (Case No. 04-05-08 / 04-05-09,
May 31, 2005), two students were disciplined after admitting that they had
colluded during an examination, in that Mr. L. had permitted Ms. W. to copy his

answers. Following a joint submission on sanction, both students received a
two year suspension.

17. The case before us has aggravating factors not present in the above two cases,

particularly the number of charges and the Student's history of misconduct. The facts of this
case are more in line with cases where a three and even four year suspension was imposed.

18. However, this is not a case where the Tribunal is entirely free to fashion its own

sanction. The Tribunal is aware of the value in respecting and deferring to joint submissions.
While the Tribunal retains the discretion to reject joint submissions in appropriate cases, the
fact that adversarial parties have been able to agree on the appropriate sanction is a good
indication in and of itself that the appropriate balance of interests has occurred.

19. The joint submission in this case was at the very low end of the range, especially as

the Student admitted three separate charges of misconduct and had two prior offences
resolved at the decanal level. But for the University's submission that there was a delay in
setting the hearing date that cannot be attributed to the Student, the Tribunal would have

18

considered imposing a three-year suspension, rather than the proposed suspension, which
works out to approximately 2 years and 8 months.

20. In all of the circumstances, and with regard to the factors identified in the C. case, the
Tribunal is satisfied that the following Order is appropriate:

1.

THAT the Student is guilty of one count of obtaining unauthorized assistance in
an academic examination or term test or in connection with any other form of
academic work, contrary to section B.l.1 (b) of the Codei

2.

THAT the Student is guilty of two counts of knowingly representing as his own

the ideas or the expressions of the ideas or work of another in an academic
examination or term test or in connection with any other form of academic work,
contrary to section 8.1.1.(d) of the Code;

3.

THAT the following sanctions shall be imposed on the Student:

(a) a final grade of zero in the course WGS200Y5;
(b) a final grade of zero in the course CCT314H5;
(c) a suspension from the University of Toronto to commence on the day the
Tribunal makes this order until May 31,2019; and

(d) a notation of the sanction on the Student's academic record and
transcript from the day the Tribunal makes its order until graduation; and

4.

THAT this case be reported to the Provost for publication of a notice of the
decision of the Tribunal and the sanction imposed, with the Student's name withheld.

Dated at Toronto tniJ

Þ

4y ot LPr'¿¿'¡ ,2016

19

Ms. ohanna Braden, Panel Chair

