Case #707

   DATE: January 13, 2014
   PARTIES: University of Toronto v A.B.
   Hearing Date(s): June 27 & September 23, 2013
   Panel Members:
   Paul Morrison, Chair
   Louis Florence, Faculty Member
   Oni Oman, Student Member
   Appearances:
   Robert Centa, Discipline Counsel for the University
   In Attendance:
   The Student (June 27th only)
   Sara Faherty, Assistant Dean Faculty of Law, University of Toronto
   Ian Lee, Associate Professor, Associate Dean (J.D. Program), University
   of Toronto
   Natalie Ramtahal, Coordinator, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty
   Grievances
   Trial Division â s. B.i.1(d) and s. B.i.3(b) of the Code â
   misrepresentation and plagiarism â Â three counts in three different
   classes â Agreed Statement of Facts â requested conditional adjournment
   granted â Student breaches condition, does not appear at penalty
   hearing â evidence of misleading behavior in career related
   applications and in communication with the University â Panel concerned
   that pattern of misconduct will likely continue if Student remains at
   University Â â grade of zero in three courses; suspension no more than
   five years; recommendation of expulsion; report to Provost for
   publication
   Student charged with three offences under s. B.i.1(d) and, in the
   alternative, three offences under s. B.i.3(b) of the Code . The charges
   related to alleged misconduct in three distinct courses.
   The three charges under s. B.i.1(d) all related to allegations that the
   Student knowingly represented anotherâs work as his own in essays in
   three separate classes. The three offences under s. B.i.3(b) related to
   allegations that the Student knowingly engaged in a form of cheating
   not otherwise described in the Code .
   The Student pleaded guilty in a June 27th, 2013 hearing and the matter
   proceeded by way of an Agreed Statement of Facts including a Joint Book
   of Documents. The Student entered a guilty plea. After reviewing the
   facts contained in those documents the Panel determined that the facts
   demonstrated that the charges to which the Student plead guilty were
   proven. A finding of guilt was entered on the three charges under s.
   B.i.1(d) . The University withdrew the three alternative charges under
   s. B.i.3(b) . Â The Student requested adjournment of the Penalty phase
   of the hearing. Adjournment granted so that the Student could prepare,
   and the Panel urged the Student to take advantage of their indulgence.
   The penalty phase proceeded on September 23, 2013 to which the Student
   failed to appear. The University sought a final grade of zero in the
   three courses in question, suspension from the University for a period
   no greater than five years, and that the Panel recommend the Student be
   expelled. The University highlighted several other instances in which
   the Student misled or concealed the truth in connection with job
   applications or in communication with the University. Additionally, the
   University noted the Student sought an adjournment of the penalty
   phase, ceased communication with the University, and breached the
   conditions upon which the adjournment was granted. The Student also
   neglected to disclose his admitted plagiarism in an application to the
   Gowlings law firm.
   The Panel noted the seriousness of the charges and that the Student
   failed to attend a hearing for which he had requested an adjournment,
   breaching the conditions on which it was granted. The Panel was also
   concerned that the pattern of misconduct will likely continue if the
   Student were to remain at the University. The Panel accepted the
   Penalty submission of counsel for the University. Â The Panel found the
   Student guilty on three counts of plagiarism contrary to s. B.i.1(d) of
   the Code and Â imposed a final grade of zero in three courses, a
   suspension of no more than five years, a recommendation that the
   Student be expelled, Â and ordered that the case be reported to the
   Provost for publication.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12818
