THE UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO

IN THE MATTER OF charges of academic dishonesty made on March 4, 2013,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic
Matters, 1995,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto, Act, 1971, S.O. 1971, c. 56 as
amended S.O. 1978, c. 88.

BETWEEN:
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
- and -

REASONS FOR DECISION

Date of Hearing: June 27, 2013 and September 23, 2013
Panel:
Mr. F. Paul Morrison, Barrister and Solicitor, Chair
Professor Louis Florence, University of Toronto Mississauga, Department of
Management, Faculty Panel Member
Mr. Oni Oman, Student Panel Member
Appearances:
Mr. Robert Genta, Discipline Counsel for the University, Paliare Roland Barristers
In Attendance:
Mr. ~ ~ . the Student attended on June 27, 2013 only
Ms. Sara Faherty, Assistant Dean Faculty of Law, University of Toronto
Professor Ian Lee, Associate Professor, Associate Dean (J.D. Program), University of Toronto
Ms. Natalie Ramtahal, Coordinator, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances

-2-

REASONS FOR DECISION
Hearing:

1.

The Trial Division of the Tribunal held a hearing on June 27, 2013, which
continued on September 23, 2013, to consider the following charges brought by
the University of Toronto against~~ (the "Student") under the Code of
Behaviour on Academic Matters, 1995 (the "Code"):

Charges:
International Trade Regulation (LAW 285)

· 2.

On or about December 19, 2012, you knowingly represented the ideas, or the
expressions of the ideas of another as your own work in an essay that you
submitted in the University of Toronto course International Trade Regulation,
contrary to section B.1.1 (d) of the Code.

3.

In the alternative, by submitting the essay in International Trade Regulation, you
knowingly engaged in a form of cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct,
fraud or misrepresentation not otherwise described in the Code in order to obtain
academic credit or other academic advantage of any kind, contrary to section
B.1.3(b) of the Code.

Environmental Law (LAW 239)

4.

On or about December 18, 2012, you knowingly represented the ideas, or the
expressions of the ideas of another as your own work in an essay that you

-3-

submitted in the University of Toronto course Environmental Law, contrary to
section B.1.1 (d) of the Code.
5.

In the alternative, by submitting the essay in Environmental Law, you knowingly
engaged in a form of cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or
misrepresentation not otherwise described in the Code in order to obtain
academic credit or other academic advantage of any kind, contrary to section
B.1.3(b) of the Code.

Sports law (LAW 256)

6.

On or about December 19, 2012 you knowingly represented the ideas, or the
expressions of the ideas of another as your own work in an essay that you
submitted in the University of Toronto course Sports Law, contrary to section
B.1.1 (d) of the Code.

7.

In the alternative, by submitting the essay in Sports Law, you knowingly engaged
in a form

of cheating,

academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or

misrepresentation not otherwise described in the Code in order to obtain
academic credit or other academic advantage of any kind, contrary to section
B.1.3(b) of the Code.
Plea:

8.

The Student attended the hearing on June 27, 2013 and entered a plea of guilty
to all six charges listed above.

Counsel for the University indicated that if a

finding of guilt were entered with respect to the charges in paragraphs 2, 4 and 6

-

-------------~-----~----------~

-4-

above, the University would withdraw the charges in paragraphs 3, 5 and 7
above.
9.

The Student's plea of guilty was accepted by the Tribunal.

Agreed Statement of Facts and Finding on Charges:
10.

At the outset of the hearing, the Tribunal was advised that the University had
entered into an Agreed Statement of Facts with the Student.

The Agreed

Statement of Facts was marked as Exhibit 1 at the Hearing and is attached as
Appendix A to this Decision.

The Tribunal also received into evidence, on

consent, a Joint Book of Documents, which was marked as Exhibit 2 at the
Hearing.
11.

As set out in more detail in the Agreed Statement of Facts, the circumstances
giving rise to the charges involved multiple occasions on which the Student
submitted an essay as part of his required work for completion of the course in
question, which essay was plagiarized from the work of another person. This
occurred in three different courses, summarized briefly as follows:
(a)

In December 2012, the Student submitted an essay in partial completion
of the requirements for a course in which he was enrolled, International
Trade Regulation.

Except for some minor wording changes, the essay

submitted by the Student was identical to the essay submitted by another
student in the previous academic year. As set out in paragraph 14 of the
Agreed Statement of Facts, the Student admitted his plagiarism.

-5-

(b)

In December 2012, in partial completion of the requirements of a course in
which he was enrolled, Environmental Law, the Student submitted a
paper. This paper, except for some minor wording changes and certain
omissions, was identical to a thesis submitted by another student. As set
out at paragraph 19 of the Agreed Statement of Facts, the Student
admitted his plagiarism.

(c)

In December 2012, in partial completion of the requirements for a course
in which he was enrolled, Sports Law, the Student submitted an essay.
That essay, except for the introduction, the conclusion, some minor
wording changes and certain omissions, was identical to an article
published in a publicly available journal. As set out at paragraph 23 of the
Agreed Statement of Facts, the Student admitted his plagiarism.

12.

After reviewing the facts contained in the Agreed Statement of Facts and the
Joint

Book

of

Documents,

including

the

Student's

admissions

and

acknowledgments contained in the Agreed Statement of Facts, the Tribunal
deliberated and concluded that the facts demonstrated that the charges to which
the Student had entered a plea of guilty were proven. The Tribunal agreed to
accept the guilty pleas. A finding of guilt was entered on Charges as listed in
paragraphs 2, 4 and 6 above. Counsel for the University withdrew the Charges
listed in paragraphs 3, 5 and 7 above.

-6-

Adjournment:

13.

After the findings of guilt were entered, the Student requested that the Tribunal
grant him an adjournment of the penalty phase of the Hearing, so as to enable
the Student to retain counsel and to prepare for the sanction phase of the
Hearing. Counsel for the University indicated that he was prepared to consent to
the Student's adjournment request on certain conditions, to which the Student
agreed.

14.

After deliberating upon the request, the Tribunal granted the Student's request
and adjourned the Hearing. In so doing, the Tribunal indicated to the Student
that it was granting him a considerable indulgence in order to allow him to
prepare for the penalty phase of his Hearing and the Tribunal urged the Student
to take advantage of the granted adjournment.

15.

The Hearing was subsequently scheduled to continue on September 23, 2013.

16.

The adjournment of the Hearing and the conditions on which the adjournment
was granted to the Student were confirmed by letter from the University to the
Student dated July 4, 2013, which was subsequently marked as Exhibit 3 at the
Hearing.

The date of September 23, 2013 was confirmed by email to the

Student, which email was marked as Exhibit 4 at the resumed Hearing.

Penalty:

17.

As scheduled, the penalty phase of the Hearing proceeded on September 23,
2013. Despite the conditions on which his request for adjournment was granted,
and despite subsequent communications from the University to the Student at his

-7-

acknowledged residence address and email address, the Student failed to
appear.
18.

After deliberation, being satisfied that the University had taken all requisite steps
to communicate with the Student with respect to the continued Hearing, the
Tribunal decided that it was appropriate to proceed with the penalty phase of the
Hearing in the absence of the Student.

19.

Counsel for the University filed a Book of Documents on Sanction, which was
received by the Tribunal. Documents from the Book of Documents on Sanction
were marked as Exhibits 3 and 4, confirming communication by the University
with the Student for purposes of the penalty phase of the Hearing.

20.

Affidavits contained in the Book of Documents on Sanction were marked as
Exhibits 5, 6 and 7 in the course of the penalty phase of the Hearing.

21.

Counsel for the University indicated that the University was seeking, as penalty,
that a final grade of zero be recorded in each of the three courses in question;
that the Student be suspended from the University for a period no greater than
five years; and that the Tribunal recommend to the President of the University
that he recommend to Governing Council that the Student be expelled from the
University.

22.

In support of the requested penalty, counsel for the University, in oral
submissions, referred to evidence filed of several additional instances in which
the Student misled or concealed the truth in connection with career-related job

-8-

applications, or in connection with other instances of communication with the
University. In addition, it was noted that the Student sought an adjournment of
the Hearing in order to retain counsel and prepare for the sanction phase of the
Hearing, where after the Student ceased communications with the University,
failed to respond to communications from the University, and breached the
conditions on which his requested adjournment was granted.
23.

In addition, in an application for summer employment with the -

law firm,

the Student failed to disclose his admitted plagiarism in three courses at the
University, even though this summer employment took place during the summer
of 2013, i.e. , after the Student had entered pleas of guilty and been found guilty
on three of the Charges, particularized above.
24.

Other instances of misleading and untruthful conduct are contained in the
Affidavit of Sara Faherty, Exhibit 6 at the Hearing.

25.

Counsel for the University submitted that there was a likelihood that the Student
would engage in similar offences if allowed to return as a Student at the
University.

He noted that there was no evidence from the Student as to

mitigation; rather, in each of the three courses in question, his acts of plagiarism
were apparently deliberate and ca lculated.
26.

Counsel for the University emphasized that the requested penalty ought to be
granted in order to reflect the principle of general deterrence, i.e., to demonstrate
that blatant acts of plagiarism can result in the most serious penalty.

-9-

27.

The Tribunal considered all of the evidence in the context of the factors that
govern its decision, and considered the authorities contained in the Book of
Authorities provided by counsel for the University.

28.

The proven charges are very serious, particularly the Student's knowing,
acknowledged, and admitted plagiarism in three different courses. The Tribunal
further noted the failure of the Student to attend for the penalty phase of the
Hearing, the Student's breaches of the conditions on which his requested
adjournment was granted, the Student's failure to mitigate his conduct at all, and
the need for general deterrence to be reflected in the penalty for such serious
and deliberate offences.

29.

The Tribunal, therefore, accepted the submissions of counsel for the University
with respect to Penalty.

Decision of the Tribunal:

30.

The Tribunal issued the following Order:
1.

Mr. ~ is found guilty of three counts of the academic offence of

plagiarism, contrary to section B.1.1 (d) of the Code of Behaviour on Academic
Matters;

2.

The sanction phase of the hearing may proceed in the absence of Mr.

~ ' who received reasonable notice of the continuation of the hearing;
3.

The following sanctions shall be imposed on Mr. ~

:

- 10 -

(a)

he shall receive a fina l grade of zero in each of the course LAW 285, LAW

239 and LAW 256;
(b)

he be suspended from the University commencing June 27, 2013, for a

period not to exceed 5 years;
4.

The Tribunal recommends to the President of the University that he

recommend to the Governing Council that Mr. ~ be expelled from the
University;
5.

This case shall be reported to the Provost for publication of a notice of the

decision of the Tribunal and the sanction or sanction imposed, with the name of
the student withheld.

'fL_

.--

DATED at Toronto this(J day oLJ~...,.~/ 201 f

~
F. Paul Morrison, Chair

·-------.;..--

APPENDIX A

THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL

IN THE MATTER OF charges of academic dishonesty filed on March 4, 2013
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University ofToronto Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters, 1995,

..
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Act, 1971 , S.0. 1971, c. 56 as am. S .0. 1978, c. 88

BETWEEN:
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO

-AND-

AGREED STATEMENT OF FACTS

1.

This hearing arises out of charges of academic misconduct filed by the Provost of the

University of Toronto (the "Provost") under the Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters
("Code"). For the purpose of this hearing, the Provost and ~

'=- ("Mr. '=-")have

prepared this Agreed Statement of Facts ("ASF") and a joint book of documents ("JBD"). The
Provost and Mr.

(a)

'=- agree that:

each document contained in the JBD may be admitted into evidence at the
Tribunal for all purposes, including for the truth of the document's contents,
without further need to prove the document; and

(b)

if a document indicates that it was sent or received by someone, that is prima

facie proof that the document was sent and received as indicated.
2.

Mr. ~ admits that he received a copy of the charges filed by the Provost. The

charges are included in the JBD at Tab 1.

\

910414-2

i·\

"

2

3.

Mr. ~ admits that he received the notice of hearing dated May 6, 2013, which is

included in the JBD at Tab 2. He acknowledges that he received reasonable notice of the
hearing.

4.

Mr.

EIIII waives the reading of the charges filed against him and pleads guilty to all 6

charges. The Provost agrees that if the Tribunal convicts -Mr. ~ :
(a}

on charge 1, the Provost will withdraw charge 2;

(b)

on charge 3, the Provost will withdraw charge 4; and

(c) ·

on charge 5, the Provost will withdraw charge 6.

5.

In September 2012, Mr.~ was admitted as a transfer student from the University of

Detroit Mercy into the second year of the J.D. program at the Faculty of Law at the University of
Toronto. A copy of Mr. ~ academic record dated June 21, 2013, is included in the JBD at
Tab 3.
In Fall 2012, Mr. ~ enrolled in International Trade Regulation (LAW 285),

6.

Environmental Law (LAW 239), and Sports Law (LAW 256). Copies of the course outlines for
these three courses are included in the JBD at Tab 4.
7.

The Faculty of Law requires that all academic work be submitted under a student's

"Pseudoname" to ensure that work is evaluated without the professor knowing the author's
identity. Mr. B - Pseudoname for academic year 2012 was "Waxwing".

A.

International Trade Regulation

8.

In Fall 2012, Mr.

EIII enrolled in International Trade Regulation (LAW 285), which was

taught by Prof. Michael Trebilcock ("ITR"). The academic requirements for ITR included a 3750word paper, which, in Mr. ~ case, was worth 75% of the final grade.
9.

On December 19, 2012, Mr.

EIII submitted an essay titled "Trade Strategy, Forum

Shopping in International Trade" in partial completion of the requirements of ITR ("ITR Essay").
A copy of the ITR Essay is included in the JBD at Tab 5.

910414_2

3

10.

On January 16, 2013, Prof. Trebilcock wrote to Prof. Ian Lee to advise that he had

uncovered a serious issue of plagiarism in Mr. ~ ITR Essay. The next day, Prof.
Trebilcock advised that he had concluded that Mr.

Blllllllls paper contained "rampant copying"

from a paper submitted the year before by a student named Y.S. A copy of the e-mail chain
between Prof. Trebilcock and Prof. Lee is found in the JBD at Tab 6.

11 .

In the previous academic year, which was 2011-2012, a student named Y.S. had taken

ITR. He had submitted an essay titled Precedential Value, Trade Strategy, and Forum Shopping
in International Trade ("Y.S. Essay"). The Y.S. Essay was graded and left to be picked up in an
unattended area of Prof. Trebilcock's office. Y.S. never picked up the Y.S. Essay.

12.

In December 2012, Y.S. asked Prof. Trebilcock to supervise him in a directed research

project in which Y.S. would elaborate on the Y.S. Essay. A copy of Y.S. 's e-mail message, and
the Y.S. Essay that he attached to the message, is included in the JBD in Tab 7.

13.

Mr. -does not know Y.S. and did not receive the Y.S. Essay from Y .S.

14.

Except for some minor wording changes, and the omission of Y.S.'s formal game theory

model of parties' choice of forum, the ITR Essay is identical to the Y .S. Essay in all material
respects. With respect to the ITR Essay, Mr. ~ admits that he knowingly:
(a)

included verbatim and nearly verbatim excerpts from the Y,S. Essay;

(b)

failed to attribute those verbatim and nearly verbatim excerpts appropriately
using quotation marks

(c)

represented the ideas and work of Y.S. as his own;

(d)

committed plagiarism contrary to section B.1.1(d) of the Code; and

(e)

engaged in a form of cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or
misrepresentation in order to obtain academic credit, contrary to section B.l.3(b)
of the Code.

910414_2

4

B.

Environmental Law

15.

In Fall 2012, Mr. ~ enrolled in Environmental Law (LAW 239), which was taught by

Prof. Andrew Green ("Environmental Law"). The academic requirements for Environmental Law
included a 5000-word paper, which was worth 80% of the final grade.
16.

On December 18, 2012, Mr. ~ submitted an essay titled "Environmental Tribunal

Reform" in partial completion of the requirements of Environmental Law ("Environmental
Essay"). A copy of the Environmental Essay is included in the JBD at Tab 8.
17.

On January 24, 2013, Prof. Green advised Prof. Lee that he had compared the

Environmental Essay to an LL.M. thesis previously submitted by a student named M.L. Prof.
Green suspected that Mr. ~ had committed academic misconduct "given the striking
similarity" between the Environmental Essay and M.L.'s thesis. A copy of Prof. Green's e-mail to
Prof. Lee is found in the JBD at Tab 9.
18.

A copy of M.L.'s thesis is found in the JBD at Tab 10. M.L.'s thesis was available in hard

copy and on-line in .PDF format through the Bora Laskin Law Library.
19.

Except for the introduction, the conclusion, some minor wording changes, and the

omission of certain parts of the M.L.'s thesis, the Environmental Essay is identical to M.L.'s
thesis in all material respects. With respect to the Environmental Essay, Mr.

'=- admits that

he knowingly:
(a)

included verbatim and nearly verbatim excerpts from M.L.'s thesis;

(b)

failed to attribute those verbatim and nearly verbatim excerpts appropriately
using quotation marks or any other method of attribution;

910414_2

(c)

did not list M.L.'s thesis in his bibliography;

(d)

represented the ideas and work of M.L. as his own;

(e)

committed plagiarism contrary. to section 8.1.1 (d) of the Code; and

5

(f)

engaged in a form of cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or
misrepresentation in order to obtain academic credit, contrary to section B.l.3(b)
of the Code.

C.

Sports Law

20.

In Fall 2012, Mr. ~

enrolled in Sports Law (LAW 256), which was taught by Gordon

Kirke ("Sports Law"). The academic requirements for Sports Law included a 5250-word paper,
which was worth 80% of the final grade.
21.

On December 19, 2012, Mr. ~ submitted an essay titled "A Canadian Legal

Perspective to the Current N.H.L. Lockout" in partial completion of the requirements of Sports
Law ("Sports Essay"). A copy of the Sports Essay is included in the JBD at Tab 11 .
22.

A copy of an article by Stephen F. Ross, "The NHL Labour Dispute and the Common

Law, the Competition Act, and Public Policy", (2004) 37 U.B.C. L. Rev. 343 ("Ross Article") is
found in the JBD at Tab 12. The Ross Article was available hard copy and on-line through the
Bora Laskin Law Library.
23.

Except for the introduction, the conclusion, some minor wording changes, and the

omission of certain parts of the Ross Article, the Sports Essay is identical to the Ross Article in
all material respects. With respect to the Sports Essay, Mr. ~ admits that he knowingly:
(a)

included verbatim and nearly verbatim excerpts from the Ross Article;

(b)

failed to attribute those verbatim and nearly verbatim excerpts appropriately
using quotation marks or any other method of attribution;

910414_2

(c)

did not list the Ross Article in his bibliography;

(d)

represented the ideas and work of Ross as his own;

(e)

committed plagiarism contrary to section B.1.1 (d) of the Code; and

6

(f)

engaged in a form of cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or
misrepresentation in order to obtain academic credit, contrary to section B.l.3(b)
of the Code.

D.

The meetings with the Dean's Designate

24.

On January 22, 2013, Prof. Lee invited Mr. ~ to discuss Prof. Trebilcock's concerns

that Mr. ~ had committed plagiarism in the ITR Essay. A copy of Prof. Lee's letter is
included in the JBD at Tab 13.
25.

On January 22, 2013, Mr. ~

met with Prof. Lee and Sara Faherty, an Assistant Dean

at the Faculty of Law, Mr. ~ admits that Prof. Lee provided the warning that was required to
be given to him under the Code.
26.

Mr. ~ stated that Prof. Trebilcock's concerns arose from a misunderstanding. Mr.

1=- stated that he had accidently printed out and handed in the wrong document. He had,
unintentionally, handed in Y.S.'s paper instead of his own. He explained that Y.S.'s paper had
been given to him by a friend, Steve Hurst, who had dropped out of Osgoode Hall Law School.
Mr. ~ stated that while he had used Y.S.'s paper as a jumping off point, he had written his
own paper.
Prof. Lee invited Mr. ~ to return on January 24 along with any corroborating

27.

evidence that would support his version of events.
28.

On January 24, 2013, Mr. ~ met again with Prof. Lee and Assistant Dean Faherty.

Mr. ~ admits that Prof. Lee provided the warning that was required to be given to him under
the Code. Prof. Lee handed Mr. ~ a copy of a letter dated January 24, 2013, which
indicated that Prof. Lee was also investigating Prof. Green's concerns regarding the paper
submitted in Environmental Law. Prof. Lee indicated that Prof. Green believed that Mr. ~
paper had been copied from M.L.'s thesis.
29.

Prof. Lee asked Mr. ~ if he wanted to revise anything that he had said on January

22. Mr. ~ stated that he had, in fact, intentionally handed in a modified version of the Y.S.
Essay and that it did not happen by accident. He said that he knew what he was doing and he
910414_2

7

had handed in a slightly altered version of the Y.S. Essay because he was not happy with the
quality of his own work.
30.

Mr. ~ then indicated that he had done "the same thing" in Environmental Law.

31 .

Prof. Lee asked Mr. ~ if there was anything he wanted to tell them about Sports

Law. Mr. ~ indicated that he had done "pretty much the same thing" in Sports Law.
32.

Mr. ~ admitted that he had committed the academic offence of plagiarism in each of

the three courses.
33.

On January 29, 2013, Assistant Dean Faherty wrote to Mr. ~ to schedule a meeting

to discuss whether or not the matter would be referred to the Provost. Mr. ~ did not respond
to this message, a copy of which is included in the JBD at Tab 14.
34.

On January 31, 2013, Prof. Lee wrote to Mr. ~ and invited him to a meeting on

February 4, 2013, to discuss the matter. Mr. ~

did not respond to this letter, a copy of which

is included in the JBD at Tab 15.

E.

Acknowledgments

35.

Mr. ~ acknowledges that:
(a)

the Provost has advised Mr.~ of his right to obtain legal counsel and that Mr.
~ has either done so or waived his right to obtain counsel;

(b)

the Provost has made no representations or promises as to what sanction the
Provost will seek in this case; and

(c)

he is signing this ASF freely and voluntarily, knowing of the potential
consequences he faces, and does so either with the advice of counsel or having
waived his right to obtain counsel.

910414_2

8

Signed on June 27, 2013

Signed on June 27, 2013

Robert A. Centa
Assistant Discipline Counsel
University of Toronto

E;J
THE UNIVERS!TV irRUBU~-'Al

.UNIVIEIRSITV OF TORONTO

This Exhibit is produced by

[AN I Vr?\2-~ --r. \,I

tf1e ···················••c••···························

13
, 20.,.......
910414_2

0

¥ ~ ---·········-·····

