Case No. 1093
THE DISCIPLINE APPEALS BOARD
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
IN THE MATTER of charges of academic dishonesty filed on July 15, 2020,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters,
2019 (the "Code"),
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Act, 1971, S.O. 1971, c. 56 as amended
S.O. 1978, c. 88
B E T W E E N:
S

Y
Appellant
- and –

UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
Respondent
REASONS FOR DECISION
Appeal Hearing Date: November 22, 2023, via Zoom
Members of the Discipline Appeals Board Panel:
Roslyn M. Tsao, Chair
Professor Ramona Alaggia, Faculty Panel Member
Emily Hawes, Student Panel Member
Appearances:
Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel for the University, Paliare Roland Rosenberg
Rothstein LLP
Janet Song, Co-Counsel for the University, Paliare Roland Rosenberg Rothstein LLP
S
Y
Hearing Secretary:
Carmelle Salomon-Labbé, Associate Director, Office of Appeals, Discipline and Faculty
Grievances

-2Delivered by Ms. Roslyn M. Tsao
PROCEDURAL BACKGROUND
1.

The Discipline Appeals Board of the University Tribunal ("DAB") heard S
Y

s (“the Student”) appeal in this matter on November 22, 2023, via the Zoom

video platform.
2.

On July 15, 2020, the Student was charged with academic offences arising from their
submission of an assignment (the "Assignment") in HLTB16H3: Introduction to Public
Health (the "Course") on November 13, 2019.

3.

The Student was charged with the following offences in conjunction with the Assignment
(a) plagiarism – Code B.I.1(d); (b) obtaining unauthorized assistance – Code B.I.1(b); and
(c) having engaged in academic dishonesty – Code B.I.3(b).

4.

On August 16, 2022, the Student attended before the Trial Division, self-represented, and
was found guilty of the offence of obtaining unauthorized assistance contrary to Code
B.I.1(b) pursuant to an Agreed Statement of Facts ("ASF") based on the following
admissions by the Student:
(a)

The Student received unauthorized assistance for her Assignment through the
purchase of a version of the Assignment;

(b)

Another student in the same course, S.G., had also purchased the same assignment
at the same time;

(c)

Turnitin.com review found both the Student's and S.G.'s assignments to be
sufficiently similar to alert the professor to further investigate for academic
dishonesty;

(d)

The Student admitted at her meeting with the Dean's Designate, on June 4, 2020,
to having purchased the Assignment.

The Student explained that she was

struggling with her mental health leading up to the due date for the assignment;

-3(e)

The Student admitted that she made numerous word substitutions and re-ordering
of text in the Assignment to attempt to avoid detection; and

(f)
5.

On November 24, 2021, S.G. pleaded guilty to use an unauthorized aid.

The Student also signed a Joint Submission on Penalty ("JSP") before her hearing and
received the following sanctions pursuant to the JSP:
(a)

a final grade of zero in the Course;

(b)

a suspension from the University for four years (from August 31, 2022);

(c)

a notation of the sanction on the Student's academic record for five years (from
August 16, 2022); and

(d)

a report of the decision and sanctions to be provided to the Provost for
publication, with the name of the Student withheld.

6.

We were provided with the Tribunal decision for S.G. who received the same sanction as
above for the Student with a start date for his suspension being November 24, 2021.

7.

On September 9, 2022, the Student gave notice of her desire to appeal the sanction by
submitted a document entitled "Appeal Statement".

THE STUDENT'S APPEAL
8.

The Student delivered her Appeal Statement within the requisite time. The Student also
delivered a "Factum" in advance of the appeal hearing. The Factum contained similar
statements as set out in the Appeal Statement.

9.

The Student sought to admit "fresh evidence" regarding her circumstances leading up to
the offence and since, including her mental health and personal struggles.

10.

The Student's written and oral submissions at the hearing in support of her request to
reduce the length of the suspension can be summarized as follows:

-4(a)

Upon being asked by the Panel, the Student confirmed that she was only
appealing penalty and, in particular, sought to reduce the suspension.

(b)

The Student felt that she has been on her own the "whole time" since the charges
and unable to have representation or assistance;

(c)

The Student had limited financial means and has had to work during school;

(d)

By way of fresh evidence (which was only proffered in the Student's Factum
(unsworn):
(i)

that the Student was diagnosed with ADHD, anxiety and depression in her
second year;

(ii)

she was not eating, and she had health and financial problems in her
second year;

(iii)

she lost an uncle from cancer;

(iv)

she was working 6 days a week;

(v)

she neglected her own needs for her family's;

(vi)

[at some point], she "dealt with another obstacle and having a better
support system … was able to get back into a positive headspace and
slowly showed that in [her] grades";

(vii)

being suspended for four years while she is supposed to be in her fourth
year will greatly hold her back in the progression of her future and her
family's life since they are dependent on her graduating; and

(viii) she would like a second chance to prove herself.
(e)

The Student acknowledged that she committed an offence but has sought and
obtained counselling and wants to work hard and succeed, with school being her
top priority at this time;

-5(f)

The Student acknowledged that the last year of being suspended has been
beneficial to her and that she wants to show that she has changed as a person and
has learned from her mistakes.

(g)

The Student has been on academic suspension (low GPA) for Winter 2020 (not
Summer 2020), Fall 2020 and Winter 2021 terms.

With the disciplinary

suspension from Fall 2022 to present, the Student feels that she has been out of
school for enough time.
11.

For the reasons below, we dismiss the Student's application to admit fresh evidence and
her appeal as to penalty. We confirm that the Order below for a four year suspension
from August 31, 2022 remains in effect.

LEGAL ANALYSIS – GROUNDS OF APPEAL
ISSUE 1:
12.

Introduction of Fresh Evidence

The Student, appeared at the appeal unrepresented as in the hearing below. However, the
Student had sufficient time and opportunity to obtain legal assistance from Downtown
Legal Services to assist with legal strategy.

13.

Although the Student did not bring a formal motion to introduce further or fresh
evidence, it is implicit in her Factum and Appeal Statement that she wished to put
further/fresh facts before this Panel.

14.

We have authority in exceptional circumstances to allow the introduction of further
evidence on appeal at our discretion.

However, such evidence is required to be

unavailable at the time of or was not adduced at the original hearing.
15.

The nature of the fresh evidence concerns the Student's factual circumstances leading up
to the offence relating to her mental health and other struggles. Firstly, the statements by
the Student in her Factum and Appeal Statement are unsworn, vague and without detail
as to dates and service providers. They are not substantiated by any medical evidence or
other corroborating proof. Secondly, this evidence was available at the time of the
original hearing as it related to the Student, herself. Finally, the information cannot be

-6tested on cross-examination by the University as it would have been at the original
hearing.
16.

In addition, the Student joined in the ASF and JSP which refer to the Student's advancing
of details about her personal circumstances [see paragraph 18 of the Decision] and that
matter was canvassed by the Tribunal at the time.

17.

The Panel, therefore, declines to exercise its discretion to admit the fresh statements in
the Student's Appeal Submission and Factum for the purposes of the appeal on penalty.

ISSUE 2:
18.

Resiling from a Joint Submission on Penalty

In this case, the Student's appeal of penalty is, in fact, a request by the Student to resile or
set aside the JSP.

19.

Although the Discipline Appeals Board has the jurisdiction to vary sanction, we decline
to exercise our discretion based on reasons below.

20.

The Student has demonstrated no basis to permit her to resile from the JSP. The Student
has not claimed that she signed the JSP under any duress or without understanding the
consequences. In particular, this Panel asked the Student to comment on paragraph 18 of
the Tribunal's Reasons:
18. The Student made submissions on penalty outlining her personal
circumstances. The Student initially made a plea for further leniency
from the Panel and was reminded that although she was free to resile
from the joint position on penalty doing so would entitle the Provost to
revisit their position on penalty which could result in a request for and
possible imposition of a higher penalty. The Student clarified that she
wished to maintain the joint position on penalty. The Panel finds that the
Student’s request for a more lenient penalty was simply the expression of
a student in a difficult situation and not a genuine attempt to resile from
the joint submissions.

21.

In response, the Student stated that she could not afford a lawyer but wanted to reach her
"end goal and not be suspended", confirming again that the Student not only understood
the consequences of the JSP but that she also wanted to ensure that the possibility of

-7expulsion was not in play. It is noted that the Student also expressly acknowledged in
paragraph 4 of the JSP that she was advised of her right to obtain the legal counsel.
22.

More importantly, we agree with counsel for the University that joint submissions on
penalty ought to be afforded significant deference at the Tribunal level for a number of
policy reasons: cooperation, consistency and certainty. JSPs and ASFs benefit the
administration of the Tribunal by encouraging cooperation by students which saves
resources and provides for a certainty of outcomes for the University where students are
prepared to admit their guilt.

23.

The Student's JSP was also consistent with the penalty granted to S.G. pursuant to his JSP
for the same offence, supporting its reasonableness.

24.

As at the Tribunal level with JSPs, the DAB ought to afford significant deference to the
Tribunal to approve the arrangements between the University and students to fashion the
terms of their JSP provided that the JSP is entered into voluntarily and with an
understanding of the consequences.

25.

This situation differs from an appeal on penalty where there has been no JSP, in which
case, considerations of whether the sanction meets the test of reasonableness or would
bring the administration of justice into disrepute are engaged on appeal.

26.

As an aside, the University submitted that should the Student be permitted to resile from
a JSP on appeal and, thereby, seek to vary the penalty, the DAB would be required to
remit the determination of penalty back to the Tribunal without the benefit of any JSP.
As we have found that there is no basis to set aside the JSP, we are not required to decide
this point.

-8CONCLUSION
27.

For the foregoing reasons, the appeal is dismissed and the Order of August 16, 2022 is
affirmed in its entirety.

Dated at Toronto, this 11th day of December, 2023.
Original signed by: ________________________
Roslyn M. Tsao
On behalf of the Discipline Appeals Board Panel

