Case 1500

   DATE:

   January 25, 2024

   PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v. H.S. ("the Student")

   HEARING DATE:

   October 24, 2023, via Zoom

   PANEL MEMBERS:

   F. Paul Morrison, Chair
   Professor Michael Evans, Faculty Panel Member
   Dylan Dingwell, Student Panel Member

   APPEARANCES:
   William Webb, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg
   Rothstein LLP

   NOT IN ATTENDANCE:

   The Student

   HEARING SECRETARY:

   Nadia Bruno, Special Projects Officer, Office of Appeals, Discipline
   and Faculty Grievances

   The Student was charged under section B.i.1(a) of the Code of Behaviour
   on Academic Matters, 2019 (‚Code‚) for knowingly altering or falsifying
   a document or evidence required by the University or making use of the
   falsified document, specifically a Verification of Student Illness or
   Injury Form (‚VOI‚) in support of the Student‚s request or
   accommodation or relief for a final exam in GGR112H5F (the ‚Course‚).
   In the alternative, the Student was charged with one count for
   knowingly engaging in a form of cheating, academic dishonesty or
   misconduct, fraud, or misrepresentation to obtain academic credit
   contrary to section B.i.3(b) of the Code.

   Neither the Student nor a legal representative of the Student appeared
   at the hearing. At the commencement of the hearing, counsel for the
   University (‚counsel‚) requested an Order that the hearing proceed in
   the absence of the Student. The Panel noted that the Student had
   previously acknowledged, in an Agreed Statement of Facts (‚ASF‚), that
   they had received a copy of the charges, waived reading of the charges,
   and pled guilty to all of the charges. The Panel was satisfied that the
   Student had received reasonable notice of the hearing, and was aware of
   the date on which it was to proceed.¬  Accordingly, the Panel ordered
   that the hearing proceed in the Student‚s absence.

   The hearing proceeded on the basis of the ASF in which the Student
   admitted to purchasing a purported Verification of Illness Form from a
   third-party and that the Student had not actually received any medical
   assessment or treatment on the day of the final exam or on any other
   date near the final exam in the Course. The Student further admitted to
   submitting the purported VOI in support of their request to defer the
   final exam in the Course. The Panel concluded that the evidence and the
   facts contained in the ASF supported a finding of guilt on the charge
   made under section B.i.1(a). The Panel accepted the guilty plea of the
   Student, and the University withdrew the alternative charge.

   In determining the appropriate sanction, the Panel considered the
   Agreed Statement of Facts on Penalty (‚ASFP‚) and the JSP submitted by
   the University and the Student. The Panel reviewed the ASFP, which
   detailed that the Student had committed one prior academic offence in a
   different course. Based on the ASFP, JSP, and a review of similar cases
   presented by counsel, the Panel accepted the JSP.

   The Panel imposed the following sanctions: a final grade of zero in the
   course; a three-year suspension; a four-year notation on the Student‚s
   transcript; and a report to the Provost for publication.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/31450
