Case 1109

   DATE: January 22, 2021

   PARTIES: University of Toronto v. J.A. (âthe Studentâ)

   HEARING DATES: November 26, 2020, via Zoom

   Panel Members:
   Ms. Erin Dann, Chair
   Professor Lynne Howarth, Faculty Panel Member
   Ms. Emily Hawes, Student Panel Member

   Appearances:
   Ms. Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg
   Rothstein LLP

   Not in Attendance:
   The Student

   In Attendance:
   Mr. Christopher Lang, Director,Â Office of the Appeals, Discipline and
   Faculty Grievances, University of Toronto

   TheÂ StudentÂ was charged underÂ s.Â B.i.1(d)Â of theâ¯Code of
   Behaviour on Academic Matters, 1995â¯(the âCodeâ) on the basis
   thatÂ sheÂ knowinglyÂ represented an idea or work of another as
   herÂ own in an assignment.Â In the alternative, theÂ StudentÂ was
   charged underÂ s.Â B.i.3(b)Â of theÂ CodeÂ on the basis that
   theÂ StudentÂ knowingly engaged in a form of cheating, academic
   dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or misrepresentationÂ in order
   toÂ obtain academic credit or other academic advantageÂ in connection
   withÂ an assignment.

   Neither the Student nor a legal representative of
   theÂ StudentÂ appeared at the hearing.Â The UniversityâsÂ Policy on
   Official Correspondence with StudentsÂ provides that students enrolled
   at the UniversityÂ are responsible for maintainingÂ current contact
   information in theÂ Repository of Student Information
   (âROSIâ)Â databaseÂ inclusive of a valid University-issued email
   account.Â Rule 9 of theÂ RulesÂ provides thatÂ service can
   beÂ effectedÂ on a student by various meansÂ includingÂ email to the
   studentâs email address in ROSI.Â The University provided evidence that
   theÂ StudentÂ had been served at herÂ ROSI-listed email address with
   theâ¯chargesâ¯and notice of hearing.Â TheÂ StudentÂ was subsequently
   provided an opportunity to provide submissions in relation to the
   request ofÂ theÂ Assistant Discipline CounselÂ for the hearing to
   proceed electronicallyÂ due to the COVID-19 pandemic. TheÂ StudentÂ did
   not respond to this request and the hearing was ordered to proceed
   electronically.Â The PanelÂ receivedÂ evidence thatÂ Assistant
   Discipline CounselÂ corresponded with theÂ StudentÂ via email which
   includedÂ invitations for discussion, efforts to arrange scheduling,
   disclosure of materials for the hearing and reminders of the
   hearing.Â The charges,Â notice,Â and other email correspondence to
   theÂ StudentÂ went unanswered.Â Â Relying onÂ RulesÂ 17Â and 9Â of
   theÂ RulesÂ andÂ ss.Â 6Â andÂ 7Â of theÂ SPPA,Â theÂ Panel ordered that
   the hearing proceed in theÂ StudentâsÂ absence as they found that
   reasonable noticeÂ of the hearingÂ had been provided to theÂ Student.

   Regarding the charge laid under s.Â B.i.1(d)Â of theÂ Code, theÂ Panel
   examined the evidence ofÂ the Professor who taughtÂ the course for
   which the assignment in question was submitted.Â The Professor
   indicated in hisÂ evidence thatÂ he used the âTurnitinâ software which
   flagsÂ any areas of potential plagiarism in written work. The
   âTurnitinâ softwareÂ generated a report that showed that a large
   portion of the assignment was copied verbatim from onlineÂ sources. It
   was the Professorâs evidence that he visited each of the online sources
   and compared the contentÂ of the assignment withÂ the online sources
   and determined that approximatelyÂ 80% of the assignmentÂ was copied
   from the online sources and these sources were not cited.Â On the
   evidence presented by the University and the Panelâs review of
   theÂ assignmentÂ in comparisonÂ to theÂ online sources,Â the Panel
   found thatÂ onÂ a balance of probabilitiesÂ theÂ StudentÂ was guilty of
   one count ofÂ knowingly representing the work of another person or
   persons as her own,Â contrary to section B.i.1.(d) of theÂ Code.Â Given
   the Panelâs finding, the University withdrew the charge
   underâ¯s.Â B.i.3(b).

   In determining sanction,â¯theÂ PanelÂ consideredÂ the principlesÂ and
   factors relevant to sanctionÂ discussed inÂ University of Toronto and
   Mr. C.Â (âMr. C. factorsâ)Â and determined thatÂ it was important to
   consider theÂ StudentâsÂ character, likelihood ofÂ repetition of the
   offence, the serious nature of the offence, the great detriment to the
   University and theÂ need to send a strong message to other students
   that such misconductÂ is a serious offence.Â As outlined by the
   Discipline Appeal Board,Â butÂ withoutÂ citing anyÂ particular
   decision, the Panel relied on theÂ general principleÂ that there should
   beÂ consistency in the approach ofÂ theÂ Tribunal to sanction so that
   students are treated fairly and equitably.Â Upon review of the relevant
   case law and the Mr. C. factors, the PanelÂ accepted the
   sanctionsÂ proposed by the University.Â Without the Studentâs
   participation,Â there was littleÂ evidence of mitigating circumstances
   or factorsÂ that would prevent the Panel from imposing aÂ sanction
   thatÂ is consistent with other plagiarism cases previously heard at the
   Tribunal.Â TheÂ PanelÂ imposedÂ the following sanctions:Â a final grade
   of zero in the course;Â a two-year suspension from
   theÂ University;Â aÂ three-yearÂ notation of the sanction on
   theÂ StudentâsÂ transcriptÂ ;Â andÂ aÂ publication by theÂ ProvostÂ of
   a notice of the decision and sanctionsâ¯imposedâ¯with
   theÂ StudentâsÂ name withheld.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/29593
