Report 374

DATE:

   June 19, 2014

PARTIES:

   Mr. D.H. (the Student) v. the Faculty of Arts and Science

Hearing Date(s):

   June 4, 2014

Committee Members:

   Professor Andrew Green (Chair)
   Professor Edward Iacobucci
   Ms. Alexandra Harris

Secretary:

   Mr. Christopher Lang, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances

Appearances:

For the Student Appellant:

   Mr. D.H., the Appellant (âthe Studentâ)

For the Faculty of Arts and Science:

   Professor Anne-Marie Brousseau, Associate Dean Undergraduate

   Request for late withdrawal without academic penalty for 14 courses
   taken by the Student between 1979 and 1986. In his petition, the
   Student indicated that both his lack of success in the courses and his
   inability to use the petition process in the 1980s stemmed from his
   anxiety and his unwillingness to admit that he had a problem or needed
   help. The Faculty denied the petition on the basis that it had been
   filed too late; the Faculty rules require a petition for late
   withdrawal to be made within six months of the end of the session. The
   Student then appealed to the Facultyâs Committee on Standing, which
   denied the petition for the same reasons. The Student then appealed to
   the Academic Appeals Board. The AAB denied the appeal, noting that it
   was unwilling to make selective modifications to the Studentâs record.

   The Student then appealed to the Academic Appeals Committee. The
   Student provided the Committee with two medical records from the
   previous year relating to his current anxiety treatments and successes,
   in addition to the undated records he had submitted in his previous
   petitions that purported to pertain directly to the time when he was
   taking the courses in question. The Committee stated that the Studentâs
   undated medical records he alleged to be from the time when he was
   taking the courses in question were not sufficient, and that the
   current medical records did not provide an adequate link between the
   Studentâs state of mind in the 1980s. The Committee emphasized that the
   extraordinary request of late withdrawal without academic penalty must
   be well-supported and rarely applied in fairness to other students and
   in order to maintain trust in the Universityâs transcripts as accurate
   representations of studentsâ records. The Committee found that it was
   not unreasonable for the AAB to find that graduate schools would take
   into account the Studentâs progress over time as part of its reasons
   for denying the Studentâs appeal. The Committee concluded that the
   Studentâs circumstances and concerns about being accepted to graduate
   programs did not warrant granting the remedy. The Committee did not
   consider the timeliness issue as it denied the appeal on its merits.
   Appeal dismissed.
   [1]View Report

References

   1. file:///media/12620
