UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
GOVERNING COUNCIL
Report #3 74 of the Academic Appeals Committee
June 19, 2014
To the Academic Board
University of Toronto
Your Committee reports that it held a hearing on Wednesday, June 4, 2014, at which the
following members were present:
Professor Andrew Green (Chair)
Professor Edward Iacobucci
Ms. Alexandra Harris
Secretary: Mr. Christopher Lang, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances
Secretary: Ms. Sinead Cutt, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances
Appearances:
For the Student Appellant:
Mr. D.H. (the Student)
For the Faculty of Arts and Science:

Professor Anne-Marie Brousseau, Associate Dean Undergraduate
The Appeal

This is an appeal from a decision of the Academic Appeals Board ("AAB") of the Faculty of
Arts and Science ("Faculty") dated February 8, 2013 dismissing an appeal of the Student from a
decision of the Faculty's Committee on Standing dated September 21, 2012. The Committee on
Standing had denied the Student's petition to be allowed late withdrawal without academic
penalty for 14 courses taken by the Student between 1979 and 1986.

The Facts

The Student transferred into the Faculty in 1979 after having difficulty in the Faculty of Applied
Science & Engineering. In 1979-80 he received an E or an F in four of seven courses taken and
was placed on academic probation. In his second year in the Faculty (1980-81), of the seven
courses taken, he received an E and an F in two courses and was granted late withdrawal without
academic penalty in three courses. He was suspended from the Faculty for the 1981-82 school

2

year because of the academic misconduct and for the 1982-83 school year because of his
academic record.
The Student returned to the Faculty in 1983-84 and took six courses. He petitioned for and was
granted late withdrawal without academic .penalty for two of these courses due to migraine
headaches. The Student also received other accommodation in this period. In 1984-85 he
received an F on all four courses he took. He was assessed a three year suspension from the
Faculty but the Faculty did not impose the suspension. The following year (1985-86) he took
five courses and failed all five. The Faculty then imposed a three year suspension. Following
the suspension, in 1989-90 he took and passed a course in economics.
In 2008, almost 20 years after his last course in the Faculty, the Student re-enrolled as a part-time
student in the Faculty in order to complete his degree. He has completed a number of courses
and the Student states he is now off academic probation. In 2012 the Student petitioned for late
withdrawal without academic penalty from 14 courses in which he received either an E or a F
during 1979-1986 (three from 1979-80, two from 1980-81, all four courses from 1984-85 and all
five courses from 1985-86). He stated that his academic difficulties were the result of a lack of
understanding of how to study along with anxiety or panic. He indicated that the delay in
applying for late withdrawal was not that he was not aware of the process but that he was in
denial that he had a problem. He stated he only sought help once from the University's
counseling services. In his petition, he noted that he wished to finish the program and perhaps
attend graduate school. In a decision dated May 18, 2012 the Petition Office of the Faculty
denied this first petition on the basis that the petition had been filed too late. The Faculty rules
currently in place require a petition for late withdrawal to be made within six months of the end
of the session.
The Student then appealed this decision to the Faculty's Committee on Standing. In this petition,
the Student stated that he did not request a late withdrawal in the 1980s because he was in denial.
He did not know or would not admit he had a problem and therefore did not or could not apply
for withdrawal. He stated that he was only recently able to recognize the problem and seek help.
He also noted that while he would graduate with or without the granting of late withdrawal, he
was concerned that applications for graduate schools or scholarships would be hindered by his
overall GPA. In a decision dated September 21, 2012, the Committee on Standing denied the
petition stating in part:
Your petition has been filed too late and have you presented compelling reasons or
appropriate documentation [sic]. The Faculty of Arts and Science rules and
regulations clearly state the deadlines for filing petitions. You have previously
received consideration in some courses listed above, in addition you clearly knew the
regulations on petitioning as you previously requested several accommodations.
Your Registrar's Office can provide you some guidance so your record will not be
damaging to your future academic plans.

3

In these initial petitions, the Student does not appear to have provided any medical
documentation concerning his difficulties during the 1970s and 1980s.
The Student appealed this decision to the AAB. In his appeal, he stated that he began seeking
professional help following 2008. He did not provide documentation of this current medical
help. He did provide two documents he stated relate to his seeking help in the 1980s: an
University Health Services appointment record which does not have either a date or the Student's
name; and a business card of a physician with the University of Toronto's Counseling &
Leaming Skills Service. The AAB denied the appeal in a decision of February 8, 2014. The
AAB stated in part that:
The Board was impressed with your progress since returning to university, but was
unwilling to make selective modifications to the record. Members who had
participated in the graduate-school admissions process considered that admission
decisions often did indeed take account of an applicant's progress over time, contrary
to your expressed fears, and the Board recommends that you certainly should request
an explanatory letter from your College Registrar.
The AAB did not make an explicit decision on the timeliness of the petition, noting only "the
Board concerned itself only briefly with the long-expired deadline (under any possible set of
rules) for your appeal".
The Student subsequently appealed to your Academic Appeals Committee. The Student asked
that he be granted late withdrawal without academic penalty for all fourteen courses identified in
the initial petition. He provided two medical records from the past year. First, he provided a
University of Toronto Verification of Student Illness or Injury Form dated February 10, 2014
signed by Dr. Cheng. This Form states that the Student had 20 appointments between May 2012
and March 2013 and was then referred to community psychiatry for "ongoing care". Under
additional comments, it states "chronic issues of anxiety, school performance relating to long
term difficulties in academic performance/success". Second, he provided a letter dated January
27, 2014 from Dr. Koutsoukos. Dr. Koutsoukos stated he has been seeing the Student for
"anxiety issues". He notes that the Student has made "great strides in trying to address his
anxiety difficulties, particularly as they pertain to examinations and school assignments" and that
the Student's "current academic performance, while balancing a full-time successful career as an
investment analyst, is a better representation of the patient's abilities" than his past record.
Neither of these documents was before the AAB.
Decision

There are two related issues arising in this appeal. First, is the Student too late to apply for late
withdrawal of courses he took 20 years ago? Second, if the Student can apply, should he be
granted late withdrawal? They are related in that the Student states that both his lack of success
in the courses and his inability to use the petition process in the 1980s stemmed from his anxiety
and his unwillingness to admit that he had a problem or needed help.

4

In regards to petitions, the Faculty's 2013-14 Calendar states that exceptions to rules and
regulations may be made "in the face of unpredictable, exceptional circumstances" but "students
must present compelling reasons and relevant documentation". In terms of documentation, the
Student provided only two undated records that he states pertain directly to the time when he was
taking the courses from which he wishes to withdraw (the appointment record that was not dated
and did not have the Student's name and the business card of the physician). In appealing the
AAB 's denial to your Committee, the Student provided documentation of his current treatment
for anxiety issues. The Student was very forthright in admitting that he had no contemporaneous
documentation and that the documents he could provide were only consistent with his claim but
not dispositive.
Your Committee recognizes the difficulty of obtaining documentation of events that occurred
over 20 years ago. These difficulties are exacerbated where, as in this case, the student states
that he did not seek help at the time because he did not recognize or at least admit he had a
problem. However, as has been noted in many other decisions, late withdrawal after receiving a
failing grade is an extraordinary request. In fairness to other students, the circumstances
grounding such a request must be rare and well supported, otherwise employers and other
universities could not rely on transcripts as an accurate representation of students' records. In
this case, the medical documentation from the time is essentially non-existent. The additional
documentation concerning the Student's care over the past couple of years while somewhat
helpful is not sufficient to ground the requested remedy. It does not provide an adequate link
between the Student's current condition and his state of mind in the 1980s.
Further, the Student wishes to withdraw from the courses in part because he is concerned about
the negative impact of the marks on his future academic opportunities. The Faculty stated that
graduate admission decisions would consider the whole of the Student's record and a Registrar's
letter would allow the Student to be considered for graduate school despite a low overall GPA.
Your Committee believes that it was not unreasonable for the AAB to find that graduate schools
would take into account the Student's progress over time and his current success in his course
work, particularly in conjunction with a letter from his College Registrar. In fact, the Student's
record can provide a positive story to any graduate school considering the fact that he has been
successful in his courses in recent years and that he was working while taking these courses.
In this case, your Committee therefore finds that the AAB decision to deny the appeal was not
unreasonable, even in light of the additional documentation provided by the Student to your
Committee that was not before the AAB. The documentation is not sufficient to support such an
extraordinary request. Moreover, as the Student has stated he will graduate with or without the
remedy and as your Committee believes that graduate schools will take into account his current
progress, your Committee finds it is not unreasonable to conclude that the circumstances do not
constitute compelling reasons to grant the remedy. As your Committee denies the appeal on the
merits, it is not necessary to consider the timeliness issue.

5

The Committee wishes to point out that it would have been preferable for the AAB to have had
before it the medical documentation that was provided only at the time of this appeal as well as
any further evidence supporting the Student's claim. To the extent that procedures are not in
place at the AAB to aid students in identifying relevant documentation and possibly that legal
assistance is potentially available, the Committee recommends such procedures be considered.
The appeal is dismissed.

