Report 424

DATE:

   November 10, 2022

PARTIES:

   O.R. ("the Student"). v. the Faculty of Applied Science and Engineering

HEARING DATE:

   August 12, 2022 via Zoom

COMMITTEE MEMBERS:

   Sara Faherty, Chair
   Professor Mark Lautens, Faculty Governor
   Susan Froom, Student Governor

SECRETARY:

   Krista Kennedy, Hearing Secretary, Office of Appeals, Discipline and
   Faculty Grievances

APPEARANCES:

FOR THE STUDENT APPELLANT:

   The Student

FOR THE FACULTY OF APPLIED SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING:

   Professor Thomas Coyle, Faculty of Applied Science and Engineering,
   Vice Dean, Undergraduate

   The Student appeals the decision of the Faculty of Applied Science and
   Engineeringâs Academic Appeals Board denying the Studentâs request to
   adjust his final grade in the course according to the appropriate
   calculations. The Student also adds that the appeal involves addressing
   several frustrations occurring during the time after the incorrect shut
   down of his exam and conversations attempting to remedy the incorrect
   shut down.

   The standard writing time for the exam was two hours, but the Student
   had an academic accommodation and was allotted 210 minutes. The Student
   was writing the online exam and due to a technical error, at the
   two-hour mark the exam shut down. There is no dispute that a technical
   error interrupted the Studentâs exam or that the Faculty is responsible
   for providing a remedy. The Student and the instructor emailed back and
   forth on the day of and after the exam. The Student also maintained
   contact with his accessibility services counsellor. Due to medical
   reasons, the Student missed the petition submission deadline. The
   Student was required to defer the December 2020 final exam for medical
   reasons and was scheduled to write the exam the following year. In Fall
   2021, the Student contacted the instructor with the exam option he
   preferred. In late December 2021, the instructor informed the Student
   he did not have the authority to apply the remedy of moving the weight
   of the October 2020 exam to the final exam to determine the final
   course mark.

   The Committee considered whether the Student was entitled to carry
   forward the remedy regarding his interrupted Fall 2020 midterm into the
   Fall 2021 term. The Committee and the Vice Dean support applying the
   Studentâs request that the weight of the interrupted midterm be
   transferred to the final course mark. The Committee considered the
   appropriate method for calculating the Studentâs term mark, finding
   that while there are different formulas that could be appropriate other
   than the Facultyâs standard process, the Student did not establish that
   in his case the method is inadequate or unfair, or that he is an
   outlier . The Committee notes that students are not entitled to choose
   the formula they prefer for the calculation of their marks, instead the
   Faculty has an interest in consistency and transparency with
   calculating marks. The Committee notes that there is a legitimate
   method to handling interrupted assessments and is consistent with how
   the Faculty deals with other students in similar cases. The Committee
   finds that the most appropriate remedy in this case is the one the
   Student agreed to before he wrote his final exam. The Committee also
   considered whether the errors made by the Faculty and adopted by the
   instructor burdened the Student and if so, what an appropriate remedy
   would be.

   The Committee agrees that several errors were made by members of the
   Faculty in handling this case. First, the instructor engaged in lengthy
   exchanges with the Student instead of referring him to the appropriate
   department contacts or instructing him to submit a petition. Second,
   the instructorâs December 14, 2021 email incorrectly interpreted the
   Facultyâs approval of a deferred exam due to the Studentâs December
   2020 illness and erroneously believed it precluded the consideration
   already granted that the October 2021 midterm weight would be shifted
   to the final exam. Third, the Undergraduate Assessment Committeeâs
   decision denied the Studentâs petition for special consideration
   without understanding the Studentâs request. A further inquiry would
   have been more appropriate. Finally, the April 18, 2022 Academic
   Appeals Board decision incorrectly denied the Studentâs request to
   adjust his mark, not understanding that he was asking for an additional
   remedy based on a different set of facts.

   The Committee finds that there were extensive errors on the part of the
   Faculty and miscommunication. The Student also made errors, and the
   Committee hopes the Faculty will improve its petition process.

   The appeal was accepted, and the Student is entitled to two separate
   academic accommodations. The Student is entitled to shift the weight of
   his interrupted midterm to the final exam and entitled to defer the
   exam to the 2021 winter.
   [1]View Report

References

   1. file:///media/30786
