Case 822

DATE:

   March 22, 2016

PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v C.L.

Hearing Date:

   January 21, 2016

Panel Members:

   Johanna Braden, Chair
   Michael Evans, Faculty Member
   Jenna Jacobson, Student Member

Appearances:

   Robert Centa, Assistant Discipline Counsel
   Lauren Pearce, Student-at-Law, Paliare Roland Barristers

In Attendance:

   Donald Dewees, Deanâs Designate
   Tracey Gameiro, Office of Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances
   Krista Osbourne, Office of Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances
   Student was charged under s. B.i.3(a) and, in the alternative, s.
   B.i.3(b) of the Code . The charges related to allegations that the
   Student knowingly submitted a forged, altered, and/or falsified
   document that she represented to be her official transcript from
   another university in support of her application for admission into the
   Faculty of Arts and Science and for on-admission transfer credit. The
   Student was not present at the hearing. The Student acknowledged in
   writing that she had received reasonable notice of the hearing, and
   requested that the Tribunal proceed in her absence.
   Student was found guilty with respect to the forged academic record
   charge. The University then withdrew the alternative charge of academic
   dishonesty not otherwise described. The Panel accepted the partiesâ
   Agreed Statement of Facts. The Student admitted to knowingly forging
   her transcript, whereby she changed the final grade in one course,
   added four courses that she did not complete, and excluded nine courses
   which she had either completed or which were in progress. The Panel
   noted that the document had been falsified in several significant ways
   such that the Student knew or must have known about the falsifications.
   The Student received 1.0 extra transfer credits based on the Forged
   Transcript. The extra transfer credit was the basis of the Studentâs
   admission to her Major program, for which she was not otherwise
   eligible.
   A complicating factor in this case was that the Student had already
   graduated from the University. Accordingly, sanctions that might
   otherwise be available (suspension and/or a recommendation of
   expulsion) were not relevant. Since the Student had graduated and could
   not be expelled, cancellation of the credits and a recommendation that
   her degree be cancelled and recalled was the most appropriate order.
   The Panel took into account that the Student admitted her misconduct
   and took some responsibility, but noted that but for the report of a
   third party, the Studentâs misconduct would never have come to light.
   The Panel also considered the nature of the offence committed to be a
   significant aggravating factor; the deliberate, careful and detailed
   falsification of the Studentâs transcript shows calculated dishonesty.
   The Panel also emphasized the serious risk to the integrity of the
   University given the Studentâs possession of a degree from the
   University which she obtained in part through false pretenses. The
   Panel imposed a cancellation of the forged 1.50 transfer credits; a
   permanent notation of the offence on the Studentâs academic record and
   transcript; that the case be reported to the Provost for publication;
   and a recommendation of degree recall.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12897
