THE UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
IN THE MATTER OF charges of academic dishonesty filed on November 6, 2015,

AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters, 1995,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Act, 1971, S.O. 1971 , c. 56 as am. S.O. 1978, c.
88

BETWEEN:
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
- and -

REASONS FOR DECISION

Hearing Date: January 21, 2016

Members of the Panel:
Ms. Johanna Braden, Barrister and Solicitor, Chair
Professor Michael Evans, Faculty Panel Member
Ms. Jenna Jacobson, Student Panel Member
Appearances:
Mr. Robert Genta, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland , Barristers
Ms. Lauren Pearce, Student-at-law, Paliare Roland, Barristers

In Attendance:
Professor Donald Dewees, Dean's Designate
Ms. Tracey Gameiro, (Observer, January 21, 2016)
Ms. Krista Osborne, Office of Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances

C
- ~.

Not In Attendance:
Ms.

Student

1.

The Trial Division of the University Tribunal was convened on January 21,

2016, to consider charges brought by the University of Toronto ("the University")
against Ms. C-

L■ ("the Student") under the University of Toronto Code of

Behaviour on Academic Matters, 1995 ("the Code").

Preliminary Issue: Proceeding in the Absence of the Student

2.

The Student was neither present nor represented. The University filed

evidence establishing that the Student had been served with the Notice of Hearing
dated December 18, 2015 and the Charges dated November 6, 2015, that the
Student had expressly acknowledged in writing that she had received reasonable
notice of the hearing, and that the Student specifically requested in writing that the
Tribunal proceed in her absence.

The Student further acknowledged that she

understood that, in her absence, the University Tribunal may find that she had
committed academic misconduct and impose one or more of the sanctions as set
out in the Code.

3.

In light of the Student's written acknowledgements, the Tribunal proceeded in

the Student's absence.
The Charges and Particulars
4.

The Charges and Particulars alleged against the Student are as follows:
1.

On or about April 4, 2013, you knowingly forged or in any other way

altered or falsified an academic record , and/or uttered, circulated or made use
of such forged, altered or falsified record, namely, a document which
purported to be your Transcript of Academic Record from the University of
British Columbia, contrary to Section B.l.3(a) of the Code.
2.

In the alternative, on or about April 4, 2013, you knowingly engaged in

a form

of cheating,

academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud

2

or

misrepresentation not otherwise described in order to obtain academic credit
or other academic advantage of any kind, contrary to Section B.l.3(b) of the
Code.
Particulars of charges

3.

On March 22, 2013, you completed an internal application for studies.

4.

On April 4, 2013, in support of your application, you submitted a

document that you represented to be your official transcript of academic
record from the University of British Columbia. You knew that this document
was forged, altered, and/or falsified.
5.

You were admitted into the Faculty of Arts & Science, and received

transfer credit, in part, on the basis of the forged, altered and/or falsified
transcript.
6.

You were required to submit evidence or documents to the University

to support your request. You had an obligation to provide the University with
accurate and truthful information. You had an obligation not to provide forged
or falsified documents in support of your requests.

5.

As to Charges 1 and 2, counsel for the University advised that the University

was seeking a finding with respect to only one of them. He further advised that if
the Tribunal were to find the Student guilty of Charge 1, the University would
withdraw Charge 2.
The Evidence

6.

The evidence was tendered by way of Agreed Statement of Facts and Joint

Book of Documents. The Agreed Statement of Facts is reprinted below, without the
documents referred to therein.

3

1.

This hearing arises out of charges of academic misconduct filed by the
Provost of the University of Toronto (the "Provost") under the Code of
Behaviour on Academic Matters ("Code"). For the purpose of this
hearing, the Provost and ~

LIi ("Ms. LIi")have prepared this

Agreed Statement of Facts ("ASF") and joint book of documents
("JBD"). The Provost and Ms.
(a)

LIii agree that:

each document contained in the JBD may be admitted into
evidence at the Tribunal for all purposes, including for the truth
of the document's contents, without further need to prove the
document; and

(b)

if a document indicates that it was sent or received by someone,
that is prima facie proof that the document was sent and
received as indicated.

2.

Ms.

'-a admits that she has received reasonable notice of the hearing.

The notice of hearing in this matter is included in the JBD at Tab 1.
3.

Ms. L■ admits that she received a copy of the charges filed by the
Provost. The charges are included in the JBD at Tab 2. Ms. LIi waives
the reading of the charges filed against her and pleads guilty to all
charges.

4.

Ms. L■'s academic record at the University of Toronto as of January
19, 2016, is included in the JBD at Tab 3.

A.

Admission to the University for Fa/12012

5.

Ms.

'-a applied for and received an offer of admission from the Faculty

of Arts and Science at University of Toronto for the Fall 2012 academic
session. In support of her application for admission, Ms. L■ provided
an authentic Transcript of Academic Record from the University of
British Columbia ("UBC"), which was dated May 14, 2012 ("2012

4

Transcript"). A copy of the 2012 Transcript is included in the JBD at
Tab 4.
6.

The University of Toronto will, in appropriate circumstances, grant
students credit for academic work completed at other institutions. Most
often, students will apply for such transfer credits when they first
receive an offer of admission from the University of Toronto. This is
known as on-admission transfer credit ("OATC"). Students who wish to
apply for OATC do so through the Transfer Credit Section of the Office
of the Faculty Registrar ("TCS").

7.

On June 12, 2012, Ms. ~ applied for OATC based on her studies at
UBC as set out in the 2012 Transcript. On June 22, 2012, the TCS
granted Ms. L■ 7.0 transfer credits. On August 16, 2012, the TCS
revised the transfer credit assessment and awarded Ms. L■ 7.50
transfer credits. A copy of the revised transfer credit assessment is
included in the JBD at Tab 5.

8.

Ms.

'-a did not enroll in any courses for Fall 2012. She did not request

to defer her studies.
B.

Academic year 2013-2014

9.

On or about March 22, 2013, Ms. L■ completed an Internal
Application for Full-Time Undergraduate

Degree

Studies. She

indicated that she wished to start taking course in the Summer 2013
term. A copy of the an Internal Application for Full-Time Undergraduate
Degree Studies is included in the JBD at Tab 6.
10.

In support of her request, Ms.

'-a wrote a letter indicating that in 2012

she had deferred her studies at the University of Toronto. Ms. La
admits that this statement was false and that she did not contact the
University in 2012 to request a deferral, nor was a deferral granted. A
copy of that letter is included in the JBD at Tab 7.

5

11.

In support of a request for further OATC, on April 4, 2013, Ms.

LIi

submitted a forged, altered and falsified UBC Transcript, which was
dated April 4, 2013 ("2013 Forged Transcript"). A copy of the 2013
Forged Transcript is included in the JBD at Tab 8.
12.

A true copy of Ms.

'-Ill's authentic UBC transcript, dated August 19,

2015, is included in the JBD at Tab 9 ("2015 Transcript").
13.

Ms.

'-Ill admits that she forged , altered and falsified the 2013 Forged

Transcript in ways including, but not limited to the following:
(a)

She changed her final grade in EOSC 118 from 44/F to 72/B;

(b)

She added 4 courses in the Summer Session of 2012, which
she did not complete; and

(c)

She excluded 9 courses in Winter Session 2012-2013, which
she had either completed or which were in progress.

14.

Ms.

'-Ill admits that she knowingly forged the 2013 Forged Transcript

and circulated it to the University as part of her application for OATC
knowing that it was forged and/or contained falsified information,
contrary to section B.l.3(a) of the Code.
C.

Transfer credits awarded and degree obtained

15.

The fact that the 2013 Forged Transcript was not authentic was not
discovered and on September 27, 2013, the University awarded Ms.

'-Ill 8.50 transfer credits towards a degree in the Faculty of Arts and
Science.
16.

Ms. ~ was only eligible to receive 7.50 transfer credits based on the
courses she actually completed at USC. She received 1.0 extra
transfer credits based on the 2013 Forged Transcript.

6

17.

In addition, Ms. ~ was permitted to gain admission into the Major in
Economics program for which she was not eligible. Ms. L■ would
have been required to complete ECO1 OOY for the program in the
following year.

18.

Ms. L■ admits that she intended the University to rely on the 2013
Forged Transcript in order for her to obtain an academic advantage,
namely, OATC and direct admission into the Major in Economics
program.

19.

In June 2015, Ms. L■ received an Honours Bachelor of Science
degree from the University of Toronto.

20.

But for the additional 1.0 transfer credits obtained in reliance on the
2013 Forged Transcript, and the credit for ECO100, Ms. LIi would not
have been eligible to graduate in June 2015 and remains ineligible to
graduate to this date.

D.

Forged Transcript is discovered

21 .

On July 15, 2015, the Office of Student Academic Integrity received an
anonymous

e-mail

message

from

hotmail.com, which accused Ms. ~

the

address

of submitting a forged

transcript to the University. A copy of that e-mail is included in the JBD
at Tab 10.
22.

That e-mail message prompted the investigation that led to the
discoveries described above.

E.

Acknowledgments

23.

On October 26, 2015, Ms. ~ met with Prof. Don Dewees, the Dean's
Designate for Academic Integrity in the Faculty of Arts and Science.
She admits that this meeting took place in a manner consistent with
7

the requirements of the Code. Ms. L■ made the admissions set out
above at that meeting.
24.

Ms. ~ acknowledges that:
(a)

the Provost advised her of her right to obtain legal counsel and
that she has obtained legal advice or has deliberately waived
the right to do so;

(b)

she is signing this ASF freely and voluntarily, knowing of the
potential consequences she faces; and

(c)

the Provost has made no representations regarding what
sanction or sanctions the Provost will seek at the hearing before
the University Tribunal.

Decision of the Tribunal on the Charges

7.

The onus is on the University to establish on the balance of probabilities,
using clear and convincing evidence, that one or more of the academic
offences charged has been committed by the Student.

8.

In this case, in light of the Student's admissions and the evidence contained
in the Agreed Statement of Facts and Joint Book of Documents, the Tribunal
found that the Student had committed an academic offence as set out in
Charge 1 in that:
(a)

On or about April 4, 2013, she knowingly forged or in any other way
altered or falsified an academic record, and/or uttered, circulated or
made use of such forged, altered or falsified record, namely, a
document which purported to be her Transcript of Academic Record
from the University of British Columbia, contrary to Section B.1.3(a) of
the Code.

8

9.

The Student admitted, and the evidence clearly established, that in support of

her application to the University, the Student submitted a document to the University
that she represented to be her official transcript of academic record from the
University of British Columbia.

That document had been falsified in several

significant ways, such that the Student knew or must have known about the
falsifications.
10.

In light of the Tribunal's finding on Charge 1, Charge 2 was withdrawn by the

University.
Submissions on Sanction

11.

Although the Student had admitted the charges against her, there was no

joint submission on sanction.

The Student had expressly waived her right to

participate in the hearing, and made no submissions with respect to the appropriate
sanction to be imposed.
12.

The University submitted that the Tribunal should make an order as follows.
(a)

that the 1.50 transfer credits awarded to the Student for courses
equivalent to ECO100Y1 and GLG1** be cancelled;

(b)

that a permanent notation of this offence be placed on the Student's
academic record and transcript;

(c)

that this case be reported to the Provost for publication of a notice of
the decision of the Tribunal and the sanction or sanction imposed,
with the Student's name withheld; and .

9

(d)

that the Tribunal recommend to the President that he recommend to
Governing Council that it cancel and recall the Honours Bachelor of
Science degree obtained by the Student in June of 2015.

13.

A complicating factor in this case was that the Student had already graduated

from the University.

Accordingly, sanctions that might otherwise be available

(suspension and/or a recommendation of expulsion) were not relevant.
14.

Counsel submitted that since the Student had graduated, the Tribunal should

focus its attention on the sanctions permitted by subsection C.ii(b)1.Q) of the Code.
That subsection permits the Tribunal to impose sanctions as follows.
C.ii(b)1 .0)

(i)

recommendation

to

the

Governing

Council

for

cancellation, recall or suspension of one or more degrees,
diplomas or certificates obtained by any graduate; or
(ii)

cancellation of academic standing or academic credits

obtained by any former student
who, while enrolled, committed any offence which if detected before the
granting of the degree, diploma, certificate, standing or credits would, in the
judgment of the Tribunal, have resulted in a conviction and the application of
a sanction sufficiently severe that the degree, diploma, certificate, standing,
credit or marks would not have been granted.
15.

Counsel for the University submitted that had the Student's dishonesty been

discovered prior to her graduation, the most likely outcome would have been the
cancellation of the University credits the Student was awarded on the basis of her
falsified transcript, and a recommendation of expulsion.

Since the Student has

graduated and cannot be expelled, cancellation of the credits and a recommendation
that her degree be cancelled and recalled is the most appropriate order.

10

16.

To support his submissions, Counsel provided the Tribunal with 19 other

cases from the Tribunal where students used forged or falsified documents to gain
an academic or other advantage. Only four of those cases resulted in a sanction
less than expulsion or degree revocation.
17.

Counsel for the University submitted that this case involved significant

aggravating factors. Her conduct was planned and deliberate, and the falsifications
were extensive and carefully constructed. Although the Student eventually admitted
her guilt, this was not a spontaneous admission. Rather, but for the report of a third
party, the Student's misconduct would never have come to light.
Decision of the Tribunal on Sanction

18.

The Tribunal considered the factors and principles and factors relevant to

sanction set out by this Tribunal in University of Toronto and Mr. C (Case No.
1976/77-3, November 5, 1976).
(a)

The character of the Student: while the Student did not attend the
hearing in person to give evidence, she did make admissions of
misconduct in writing. The Tribunal recognizes these admissions are
a sign the Student takes some responsibility for her misconduct.

(b)

The likelihood of a repetition of the offence: there was no evidence
led that would lead the Tribunal to conclude one way or another on
this factor.

(c)

The nature of the offence committed: this is a significant aggravating
factor.

The deliberate, careful and detailed falsification of the

Student's transcript - which she represented as an "official" one shows calculated dishonesty.

This was not an opportunistic or

spontaneous act. The Student engaged in a deliberate scheme to
obtain academic credit at the University for work she had not done.
This dishonesty permitted the Student to obtain entry to a course of

11

studies she otherwise would not have had access to. It eventually
permitted her to graduate with a University degree.
(d)

Any extenuating circumstances surrounding the commission of the
offence: as the Student waived her right to participate in this hearing
beyond making admissions of misconduct in writing, there was no
evidence of any extenuating circumstances that might have mitigated
the sanction. The Tribunal does recognize that this is the Student's
first academic offence.

(e)

The detriment to the University occasioned by the misconduct: the
Student was permitted entry to the University and given credit for
work she had not performed. The Student is now in possession of a
degree from the University which she obtained in part through false
pretences. The integrity of the University is at serious risk.

(f)

The need to deter others from committing similar offences: It is
disturbing that this Student was able to graduate from the University
on the strength of a falsified transcript, and that but for an anonymous
report, the offence would not have been discovered. The need for
general deterrence is significant.

19.

In addition to the factors from Mr. C., supra, the Tribunal also considered

other cases from this Tribunal involving similar circumstances.

Counsel for the

University prepared a very helpful chart summarizing 19 of the Tribunal's cases
involving students who falsified academic documents and intended them to be relied
upon in order to secure an academic or other advantage.

C
.
20.

The cases most relevant to the present one were University of Toronto and

J<I (Case 692, November 27, 2013), University of Toronto and Al ~

(Case 523, January 14, 2009) and University of Toronto and ~ ~
(Case 491 , November 5, 2008).

All three cases involved students who

misrepresented their academic credentials to the University for the purpose of

12

obtaining admission and transferred credits.
~

In two of those cases

<KIii:and

, the students participated in the Tribunal hearing, admitted their guilt,

expressed remorse and gave evidence of significant mitigating factors.

Those

students still received sanctions of recommended expulsion, due to the serious
nature of the underlying misconduct.
21 .

In the case before us, the Student's dishonesty allowed her to obtain

University credits, and eventually a University degree, to which she was not entitled.
Cancellation of the credits and cancellation and recall of her degree are the only
sanctions that make sense in the circumstances.
22.

Accordingly, the Tribunal made an order as follows:
(a)

the hearing may proceed in the absence of Ms. L.111;

(b)

Ms. ~ is found guilty of the academic offence of forging , altering, or
falsifying an academic record and uttering, circulating, or making use
of such an academic record, contrary to section B.l.3(a) of the Code
of Behaviour on Academic Matters;

(c)

1.50 transfer credits awarded to Ms. '-1111 for courses equivalent to
ECO100Y1 and GLG1** shall be cancelled;

(d)

a permanent notation of this offence shall be placed on Ms.

LIi's

academic record and transcript;
(e)

this case shall be reported to the Provost for publication of a notice of
the decision of the Tribunal and the sanction or sanction imposed,
with Ms. ~

23.

's name withheld.

Further, the Tribunal recommends to the President that he recommend to

Governing Council that it cancel and recall the Honours Bachelor of Science degree
obtained by Ms. L■ in June of 2015.

13

Dated at Toronto thisZ'Z. day of March, 2016

Ms. Johanna Braden, Chair

14

