Case 914

DATE:

   February 18, 2018

PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v. Q.L. (âthe Studentâ)

Hearing Date(s):

   November 24, 2017

Panel Members:

   Ms. Sandra Nishikawa, Barrister and Solicitor, Chair
   Professor Pascal Riendeau, Faculty Panel Member
   Ms. Sherice Robertson, Student Panel Member

Appearances:

   Ms. Tina Lie, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland, Barristers
   Ms. Nisha Panchal, Student Conduct and Academic Integrity Officer,
   Office of the Dean & Vice-Principal Academic, UTSC
   Ms. Margaret Roberts, Facilitated Study Group Coordinator, The Centre
   for Teaching and Learning, UTSC

In Attendance:

   Ms. Krista Osbourne, Administrative Clerk and Hearing Secretary, Office
   of Appeals,
   Discipline and Faculty Grievances
   Mr. Sean Lourim, Technology Assistant, Office of the Governing Council

Not in Attendance:

   The Student

   The Student was not present at the hearing. In determining the
   preliminary issue of whether the hearing could proceed in his absence,
   the Panel referred to sections 6 and 7 of the Statutory Powers
   Procedure Act (the âActâ) and Rule 17 of the University of Toronto
   Rules of Practice and Procedure (the âRulesâ), which provide that a
   hearing may proceed in the absence of a Student where reasonable notice
   of an oral hearing has been given to a party in accordance with the
   Act. Given that the University made numerous attempts to serve notice
   on the Student by email, courier, process server, and telephone; as
   well as the fact that Counsel had a telephone conversation with the
   Student, during which she specifically advised him of the hearing date,
   the Panel concluded that the Student was given reasonable notice of the
   hearing in compliance with the notice requirements of the Act and the
   Rules. Further, the University led evidence that the Studentâs
   University email account had been accessed, after the emails attaching
   the charges and the disclosure brief had been sent.

   The Student was charged with three charges of plagiarism contrary to s.
   B.i.1(d) of the Code , with alternative charges of unauthorized
   assistance contrary to s. B.i.1(b) of the Code ; and further
   alternative charges of academic misconduct not otherwise described
   contrary to s.B.i.3(b) of the Code . The charges related to course
   assignments and a research paper that the Student had submitted for
   course credit that contained passages that did not seem to reflect the
   Studentâs language abilities; as well as the Studentâs final exam which
   included significant portions that had been copied from the exam
   materials themselves. The Panel found the Student guilty of the first
   charge of plagiarism in submitting a research assignment that was not
   his own work contrary to s. B.i.1(d) of the Code .Â  Upon this finding
   of guilt, the University withdrew the alternative charges relating to
   the research assignment and did not proceed with the remaining charges.

   The Panel noted that this was not a typical plagiarism case, since the
   turnitin.com report assessed the research assignment at 0% similarity
   to other work so there was no original text to compare it with.
   Referring to the case University of Toronto v W.J. (Case No. 815,
   January 19, 2016), the Panel found that it all that was necessary to
   constitute plagiarism is that a student represent someone elseâs work
   as their own. And that in this case it was clear given the different
   quality of English contained in the research assignment compared to the
   Studentâs previous assignments, in-class work, and final exam that the
   Student submitted work that he did not write as his own.

   In determining the appropriate sanction, the Panel referred to the Mr.
   C. factors: the character of the person charged, the likelihood of
   repetition, the nature of the offence, the need to deter others from
   engaging in similar behaviour, the detriment to the University,
   protection of the public, as well as any extenuating circumstances. (
   University of Toronto v Mr. C. , Case No. 1976/77-3; November 5, 1976
   at p. 12.). The Panel emphasized that plagiarism is a serious offence,
   which strikes at the core of academic integrity ( University of Toronto
   v D.S. , Case No. 554, October 7, 2009 at para 39) and warrants a
   significant sanction to reflect the seriousness of misconduct.Â  In
   this case, the Student was provided with the opportunity to obtain
   assistance from his instructor, but instead continued to submit
   plagiarized work for course credit. It was the Studentâs first offence
   and took place during his first term at the University. The Studentâs
   failure to participate in the hearing deprived the Panel of being able
   to consider any mitigating or extenuating circumstances. The Panel
   ordered: (i) the Student receive a zero grade in the Course, (ii) the
   Student be suspended for three years, (iii) a notation of the
   suspension be placed on the Studentâs record for four years, and (iv)
   that the case be reported to the Provost with the Studentâs name
   withheld.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/13046
