Case 1442

   DATE:

   November 3, 2023

   PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v. X.Y. ("the Student")

   HEARING DATE:

   April 28, 2023, via Zoom

   PANEL MEMBERS:

   Dean F. Embry, Chair
   Professor Ian Crandall, Faculty Panel Member
   Brinda Batra, Student Panel Member

   APPEARANCES:
   Mr. William Webb, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland
   Rosenberg Rothstein LLP

   NOT IN ATTENDANCE:

   The Student

   HEARING SECRETARY:

   Carmelle Salomon-Labbe, Associate Director, Office of Appeals,
   Discipline and Faculty Grievances

   The Student was charged with respect to academic misconduct on a final
   assessment in a course. The Student was charged under s. B.i.1(d) of
   the Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters, 2019 (the ‚Code‚) for
   knowingly representing as her own an idea or expression of an idea or
   work of another in connection with a final assessment. In the
   alternative, the Student was charged under s.B.i.1(b) of the Code for
   knowingly obtaining and or providing unauthorized assistance in
   connection with a final assessment.

   The Student did not attend the hearing and was not represented by
   counsel. The Panel heard evidence that the University made concerted
   efforts to serve the Student with notice of the hearing to the
   Student‚s email address, as listed in ROSI. The Panel found that the
   Student was provided with reasonable notice and proper service as
   contemplated by rules 17 and 21 of the University Tribunal‚s Rules of
   Practice and Procedure (the ‚Rules‚). As such, the hearing proceeded in
   the absence of the students. The Panel further granted the University‚s
   motion to hear the merits of the proceedings against the Student
   alongside those of another student, enrolled in the same course,
   charged with the same academic misconduct, contrary to ss. B.i.1(d) and
   B.i.1(b) of the Code.

   The University provided the Panel with evidence that the Student‚s
   answers shared several similarities to answers posted to Chegg.com,
   including non-standard notation and identical mistakes. The Panel found
   that this evidence demonstrated, on a balance of probabilities, that
   the Student copied the answers found on Chegg.com, though it did not
   find that either student had posted the questions on Chegg.
   Accordingly, the Panel found the Student guilty of one count of using
   authorized assistance, contrary to B.i.1(b) of the Code in relation to
   the final assessment.

   In determining the appropriate sanction, the Panel considered several
   relevant sanctioning factors. First, the Panel considered the nature of
   the offence, and concluded that the use of unauthorized aids during
   test and assessments is a serious offence that strikes at the core of
   the academic process. The Panel also considered, as a minor aggravating
   factor, that the offence had a commercial aspect insofar as the Student
   had relied upon answers posted to Chegg.com ‚ a subscription-based
   website. The Student‚s absence from the hearing left the Panel with no
   evidence or mitigating factors to consider. Finally, the Panel
   considered the Student‚s prior history of academic misconduct and noted
   that the Student had not previously been charged with an academic
   offence. Given these factors, the Panel concluded that the sanctions
   proposed by the University were appropriate.

   The Panel imposed the following sanctions: a final grade of zero in the
   course; a suspension from the University for a period of three years; a
   notation of the sanction on the Student‚s academic record for a period
   of four years, and; a report to the Provost for publication.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/31372
