Case 651

DATE:

   April 10, 2012

PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v. O.O.

Hearing Date(s):

   April 10, 2012

Panel Members:

   Mr. William McDowell, Chair
   Prof. Annette Sanger, Faculty Member
   Mr. Shakir Rahim, Student Member

Appearances:

   Ms. Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel for the University
   Mr. O.O., the Student

In Attendance:

   Ms. Lucy Gaspini, Manager, Academic Integrity Affairs
   Mr. Jason Marin, Administrative Assistant, Appeals, Discipline and
   Faculty Grievances

   Student charged under s. B.i.1(d) of the Code . The charges related to
   allegations that the Student submitted an essay containing passages
   taken verbatim or nearly verbatim from internet sources. The parties
   submitted an Agreed Statement of Facts. The Student pleaded guilty to
   the charges, and the Panel found the Student guilty under s. B . i.1(d)
   . The parties also agreed on a proposed penalty: a grade assignment of
   zero in the course and a three-year suspension. As part of the
   resolution, the Student signed an Undertaking which required the
   Student to take workshops at the universityâs writing centre. Before
   the current offence, the Student had committed two similar plagiarism
   offences. In considering whether to accept the joint submission, the
   Panel acknowledged that a joint submission should not be rejected
   unless it is contrary to the public interest in that the proposed
   penalty would bring the administration of justice into disrepute. The
   Panel stated that it accepted the joint submission with reluctance. The
   reasons for reluctance were as follows. First, the Panel considered it
   unfortunate that the Undertaking was offered after the Studentâs third
   offence and not his first offence. Second, the Panel remained
   suspicious of some of the facts agreed by the parties. Because of the
   Universityâs half-way position in which it accepted reports submitted
   by the Student while stating that it did not accept the truth of all
   the facts submitted, the Panel was asked to accept the Studentâs
   âexquisite bad luck in relation to motor vehicle accidents, coupled
   with a poorly supported medical/psychiatric explanation.â The Panel
   stated that this way of proceeding runs the risk of confusing the
   Panel. Third, the Panel also stated that it agreed with the view
   regarding undertakings expressed in Y.K. (Case No. 631), that the
   studentâs academic should be addressed before, and not as a result of
   academic offences. Finally, the Panel stressed the harm that the
   offence of plagiarism brings to the university and stated that a
   penalty of expulsion would not have been out of line for the Student.
   As according to the joint submission, the Panel imposed a grade
   assignment of zero in the course; a three-year suspension; and a report
   be issued to the Provost. The Panel rejected the Studentâs motion for a
   ban on publication as the question of publication was settled in the
   joint submission; the Panel found it abhorrent that the Student said
   because his family donated to the university, there should be a ban on
   publication.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/13025
