Case 1278 - Appeal

   [1]Case 1278 - Tribunal

   DATE:

   March 11, 2024

   PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v. H.Z. ("the Student")

   HEARING DATE:

   January 12, 2024, via Zoom

   PANEL MEMBERS:

   Paul Michell, Chair
   Professor Aarthi Ashok, Faculty Panel Member
   Emily Hawes, Student Panel Member

   APPEARANCES:

   Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg
   Rothstein LLP
   William Webb, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg
   Rothstein LLP
   Calvin Zhang, Counsel for the Appellant, Starkman Lawyers

   IN ATTENDANCE:

   The Student

   HEARING SECRETARY:

   Christopher Lang, Director, Coordinator & Hearing Secretary, Office of
   Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances

   The Trial Division of the University Tribunal found the Student guilty
   of obtaining unauthorized assistance, contrary to section B.i.1(b) of
   the Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters , 2019. The Student appealed
   the Tribunalâs decision on liability and submitted that the Tribunal
   had erred by (i) improperly shifting the burden of proof to the
   Student, (ii) by analyzing the witnessesâ credibility and reliability,
   by (iii) applying uneven scrutiny by emphasizing the Studentâs
   motivation instead of evidence of the circumstances, and (iv) by
   admitting a Professorâs evidence as expert opinion evidence. While the
   Student also appealed sanction, they did not address the penalty
   imposed or set out any reason why the Tribunal had erred in imposing
   it.

   At the outset of the hearing, the Board heard submissions with respect
   to the applicable standard of review on appeal. The Panel accepted the
   Universityâs position that the Board lacks jurisdiction to hear appeals
   by an accused from a conviction at trial upon a question of fact alone,
   and that, in practice, the Board adheres to a level of deference to the
   Tribunal on the weighing of evidence and findings of credibility.

   With respect to the Studentâs first ground of appeal, namely that the
   Tribunal improperly shifted the burden of proof to the Student, the
   Board rejected the Studentâs submissions. The Board noted in particular
   that while the Provost bears the burden of proof, it may fulfil that
   burden in different ways, including through eliciting evidence on
   cross-examination of opposing witnesses that support the
   cross-examining partyâs position. The Board concluded that the
   Studentâs complaints regarding the Tribunalâs findings regarding the
   credibility of the Studentâs witnesses did not establish that the
   Tribunal improperly shifted the burden of proof.

   The Studentâs second ground of appeal asserted that the Tribunal had
   committed a legal error in the way in which it had evaluated the
   credibility and reliability of witnesses. The Board rejected this
   ground of appeal. The Board concluded that, in substance, the Student
   was challenging the Tribunalâs preference for the evidence of the
   Provostâs witnesses over the Student and their witnessâ testimony. The
   Board stated that it could not substitute its view for those of the
   Tribunal in assessing of credibility or the relative weight given to
   witness evidence, and that the Studentâs submissions on this point
   failed to disclose a legal error.

   The Board further rejected the Studentâs third ground of appeal, namely
   that the Tribunal applied an uneven level of scrutiny to the evidence
   called by the students and by the Provost. The Board found that there
   was nothing in the Tribunalâs reasons to suggest that it applied
   unequal scrutiny, and the mere fact that the Tribunal found the
   Studentâs witness evidence to not be credible did not suggest that it
   applied different standards to different witnesses.

   Lastly, the Panel rejected the Studentâs argument that the Tribunal
   erred in its treatment of the testimonial evidence of a Professor. The
   Board disagreed that the Professor had given opinion evidence,
   indicating that just because a witness has expertise in a subject does
   not make his or her evidence âopinion evidenceâ. The Board further
   found that if the Student was concerned about the admissibility of
   elements of the Professorâs evidence, they were obliged to object in a
   timely manner before the Tribunal decided the case on its merits.

   The appeal was dismissed.
   [2]View Case

References

   1. https://governingcouncil.utoronto.ca/case-summary/case-1278
   2. file:///media/31581
