Case 1194 and 1195

DATE:

   January 31, 2023

PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v. B.Z. and Y.C. ("the Students")

HEARING DATE:

   September 8, 2022, via Zoom

PANEL MEMBERS:

   Andrew Bernstein, Chair
   Professor Ian Crandall, Faculty Panel Member
   Yazan Zamel, Student Panel Member

APPEARANCES:

   Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg
   Rothstein LLP
   Chew Chang, Representative for B.Z., Chang Legal and Notary Public
   Student # 1 B.Z.
   Student # 2 Y.C.

HEARING SECRETARY:

   Carmelle Salomon-Labbe, Associate Director, Office of Appeals,
   Discipline and Faculty Grievances

   The University laid eight charges against Student 1 under the following
   sections of the Code in relation to a course: one count under section
   B.i.1(d), two counts under section B.i.1(b), two counts under section
   B.i.1(f), and three counts under section B.i.3(b). The University laid
   the following six charges against Student 2 with respect to the same
   course:Â one count under section B.i.1(b), one count under section
   B.i.1(d), two counts under section B.i.1(f), and two counts under
   section B.i.3(b).

   Both students entered into an agreed statement of facts (âASFâ) and
   attended the hearing, but they did not accept liability in relation to
   their respective assignment. They were enrolled in the same course,
   which required them to submit an assignment. Student 1 submitted their
   paper first, and on the following day, Student 2 submitted their paper,
   which was nearly identical to Student 1âs paper. Student 1 subsequently
   submitted an assignment on behalf of Student 2. The students submitted
   a letter of explanation to express remorse. But that letter contained
   lies, which, according to the Panel, demonstrated a lack of honesty.
   Based on the evidence, the Panel concluded that the papers had been
   purchased online, and that the students had lied to avoid detection.

   The Panel found Student 1 guilty of the following six charges: one
   count of plagiarism contrary to section B.i.1(d) and B.ii.1 of the
   Code, two counts of obtaining and/or providing unauthorized assistance
   contrary to sections B.i.1(b) and B.ii.1. of the Code, and three counts
   of academic dishonesty and misrepresentation contrary to sections
   B.i.3(b) and B.ii.1 of the Code. As for Student 2, the Panel found them
   guilty of the following four charges: one count of plagiarism contrary
   to section B.i.1(d) of the Code, one count of obtaining unauthorized
   assistance contrary to sections B.i.1(b) and B.ii.1 of the Code, and
   two counts of engaging in a form of cheating, academic dishonesty or
   misconduct, fraud or misrepresentation not otherwise described in order
   to obtain academic advantage of any kind contrary to sections B.i.3(b)
   and B.ii.1 of the Code.

   In determining the sanction, the Panel agreed that there were not
   sufficient aggravating factors to warrant recommending expulsion.
   However, it observed that the studentsâ record of ongoing dishonesty â
   even while purporting to apologize â made it wonder whether they could
   be trusted in an academic environment again.

   The Panel imposed the following sanctions on both students: a grade of
   zero in the course; a five-year suspension; a six-year notation on
   their transcripts;Â and a report to the Provost for publication.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/30892
