THE UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
TRIAL DIVISION
IN THE MATTER OF charges of academic dishonesty made on December 4 , 2012.
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic
Matters, 1995,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Act, 1971 , S.O.1971 , c. 56 as
amended S.O. 1978, c.88
BETWEEN:
UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
-AND-

REASONS FOR SANCTION
Hearing Date: December 17, 2013
Members of the Panel:
Paul B. Schabas, Barrister and Solicitor, Chair
Professor Pascal van Lieshout, University of Toronto, Department of Speech-Language
Pathalogy
Mr. Adam Found, Student Panel Member
Appearances:
Mr. Robert Genta, Assistant Discipline Counsel for the University, Paliare Roland
Barristers
Mr. Michael Alexander, Lawyer, for the Student
Mr. ~ ~ . the Student
In Attendance
Ms. Lucy Gaspini, Manager, Academic Integrity and Affairs, University of Toronto
Mississauga
Ms. Natalie Ramtahal, Coordinator, Appeals , Discipline and Faculty Grievances

Introduction
1)

In Reasons for Decision dated August 8, 2013, the Tribunal found the student
guilty of plagiarism. The Tribunal reconvened to hear submissions respecting
penalty on December 17, 2013.

2)

Neither party presented additional evidence, and the matter proceeded by way of
submissions only.

The Positions of the Parties
3)

Mr. Genta, for the University, drew our attention to our jurisdiction to impose a
range of sanctions set out in Section C.ii.(b) of the Code of Behaviour on Academic
Matters (the "Code"), and submitted in this case that the appropriate sanctions be
as follows:
1. Assign a final grade of zero in course GGR208;
2. Suspend the student for 3 years from the date of the order; and
3. Direct that a notation of these sanctions be recorded on the student's
academic record and transcript for 4 years.

4)

Mr. Genta noted that the penalty is within our discretion, that while there are helpful
previous decisions involving similar cases, there is no binding appellate authority
directing us as to a maximum or minimum sanction.

5)

The student, now represented by counsel, Mr. Alexander, submitted that an
appropriate penalty would be:
1. Assign a zero for the paper submitted and worth 20% of the course grade;
2. A 1 year suspension; and
2

3. A notation be recorded on the student's academic record and transcript
until he graduates, which would be expected in 2 years.
6)

Mr. Alexander also submitted that the student could do a year of community
service work within the University, and that the student was prepared to do this as
a way of demonstrating his remorse. However, other than saying (in response to a
question from the Chair) that this would be "full-time", Mr. Alexander presented no
proposed plan for such work to the Tribunal. In any event, as Mr. Genta pointed
out, the Tribunal has no power to either impose or oversee such a "sanction".
Whether the ability to impose community service work for academic offences
should exist is not for this Tribunal to decide.

7)

Accordingly, the issues framed by the parties for resolution by us were the
appropriate length of suspension, the consequences for the student's grade, and
the length of a notation on the student's records.

General Principles
8)

The determination of an appropriate penalty for academic misconduct will vary
from case to case, depending on a range of factors, and is within the discretion of
the Tribunal. As the Discipline Appeal Board stated in D.S. (Case No. 451;
August 24, 2007) at para. 45: ''Tribunals must fashion the appropriate sanction

based on the individual circumstances of each case. There is no matrix, formula, or
chart, in which a Tribunal can determine that one particular act, must receive one
particular sanction."

3

9)

This Tribunal, therefore, recognizes that there is no formula, or benchmark starting
point that it is bound to adopt and follow. In this regard, counsel for the University
took us to a number of decisions that suggested a 2-year suspension is "in the
middle" and akin to a starting point for a first offender, from which the penalty may
be adjusted upwards or downwards based on the facts of the case. We were
directed to some decisions that speak in terms a 2-year suspension as the
appropriate "threshold" penalty (M.H.H. [Case No. 521; January 12, 2009], para.
31; A.K [Case No. 509; November 9, 2007] para. 12; S.B. [Case No. 488;
November 14, 2007] at para. 33) for plagiarism, and it was variously described in
the submissions as a "presumption" or "minimum" penalty.

However, Mr. Genta

was also clear at the outset of his submissions that the extent of the penalty is
entirely within the discretion of the Tribunal. Mr. Alexander agreed with this,
emphasizing that we should not take 2 years as a starting point for our
deliberations as to do so would improperly fetter our discretion.
10) The Tribunal agrees that it is not bound by any presumption that a 2 year
suspension is a starting point from which to consider this matter. On the other
hand, as the Discipline Appeal Board also stated in D.S., at para. 46, "it is
important that students are treated fairly and equitably when receiving a sanction,
and that there is general consistency in the approach of Tribunals in imposing
them." This was particularly relevant in D.S., where the appeal panel found that the
sanction imposed was "materially inconsistent with the weight of other Tribunal and
appeal decisions." The appeal panel there observed, at para. 49, that "students

4

who are first time offenders committing one act of plagiarism, generally have
received sanctions in a range of one to two (1-2) years."
11) Accordingly, the Tribunal approaches the issue of an appropriate sanction without
fettering its discretion based on any "starting point" or "minimum" penalty in such
cases, and must fashion a sanction based on the individual circumstances of this
case. We must also, however, consider the range of sanctions imposed in cases
involving similar offences, in order to ensure that the student is being treated "fairly
and equitably" in relation to other students, and the cases both counsel referred us
to are helpful in this regard.
12) Fundamentally, then, our starting point must be a consideration of the relevant
factors and principles to be applied in determining the appropriate sanction. The
factors commonly referred to in these cases were initially set out in the case of Mr.
C. (Case No. 1976/77-3; November 5, 1976) case by John Sopinka Q.C. (later a
Justice of the Supreme Court of Canada) in the following passage, at page 12:
What then are the principles that this Tribunal should follow in
dealing with an appeal from sentence? First, in my opinion,
punishment is not intended to be retribution to get even, as it were,
with the student for what he has done. It must serve a useful function.
The classical components of enlightened punishment are reformation,
deterrence and protection of the public. In applying these criteria, a
tribunal should consider all of the following:
a) the character of the person charged;

5

b) the likelihood of a repetition of the offence;
c) the nature of the offence committed;
d) any extenuating circumstances surrounding the commission of
the offence;
e) the detriment to the University occasioned by the offence;
f) the need to deter others from committing a similar offence.

13) In addition, and while we are in no way bound by them, we are informed by the
Provost's Guidelines on Sanctions, Offences and Suggested Penalties For
Students (Appendix "C" to the Code). Paying regard to Mr. C., the Provost's
Guidelines, and the case law reviewed with us by both counsel, we address below

the factors we find particularly relevant in this case.
The Seriousness of the Offence
14) Plagiarism is a serious offence. It strikes at the heart of the integrity of academic
work, and cannot be tolerated by an academic institution. Students know this.
They are made aware of the Code when they enrol in the University, and must
comply with it. As the Preamble to the Code states:
The concern of the Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters
is with the responsibilities of all parties to the integrity of the
teaching and learning relationship. Honesty and fairness
must inform this relationship, whose basis remains one of
mutual respect for the aims of education and for those
ethical principles which must characterize the pursuit and
transmission of knowledge in the University.
6

***

This Code is concerned, then, with the responsibilities of
faculty members and students, not as they belong to
administrative or professional or social groups, but as they
co-operate in all phases of the teaching and learning
relationship.
Such co-operation is threatened when teacher or student
forsakes respect for the other- -and for others involved in
learning- -in favour of self-interest, when truth becomes a
hostage of expediency. On behalf of teacher and student
and in fulfillment of its own principles and ideals, the
University has a responsibility to ensure that academic
achievement is not obscured or undermined by cheating or
misrepresentation, that the evaluative process meets the
highest standards of fairness and honesty, and that
malevolent or even mischievous disruption is not allowed to
threaten the educational process.

15) Further, Section B of the Code begins with the following statement:
The University and its members have a responsibility to
ensure that a climate which might encourage, or conditions
which might enable, cheating, misrepresentation or
unfairness not be tolerated. To this end, all must
7

acknowledge that seeking credit or other advantages by
fraud or misrepresentation, or seeking to disadvantage
others by disruptive behaviour is unacceptable, as is any
dishonesty or unfairness in dealing with the work or record of
a student.
16) Throughout their studies, students are reminded by professors and instructors of
the importance of integrity and the prohibition on any form of academic cheating
and, as was the case here, are even given guidance on how not to plagiarize (see
our Reasons for Decision, para. 5).
17) The seriousness of the offence of plagiarism has, of course, been well-recognized,
and the need for a significant sanction in order to condemn and deter it is
necessary. It has been suggested that, due to the internet, plagiarism is
increasingly prevalent, although at the same time it may be more easily detected.
(See, e.g., S.B. at para 26.) Both elements certainly existed in this case - as we
saw a student effectively cut and paste large portions of articles, including
footnotes which gave it away, from the internet, and an instructor who was also
able to use the internet to identify the misconduct.
18) The seriousness of the offence means that, absent mitigating factors, the sanction
must reflect the harm caused and convey the seriousness of the misconduct to
others. As the Discipline Appeal Board stated in D.S. at para 39: "Plagiarism
strikes at the core of academic integrity, so important to a University. The sanction
must also act as a general deterrent." Similarly, in K. W.K.L. (Case No. 544;
September 1, 2009), at para 19, a panel of this Tribunal expressed concern that
8

·········-··™

the penalty for plagiarism must have a deterrent effect. And in M.M. (Case No.
543; January 28, 2010), the Tribunal stated at para. 9:

All the cases, as well, give voice to the detriment to the
University which is occasioned by the undermining of its
credibility and academic mission through offences such as
plagiarism, and the need for general deterrence which goes
beyond, for example, a zero in the course for the person in
question. The cases cite the need for a message to the
University community that penalties imposed by tribunal in
relation to such serious offences will not be a licence to
commit such offences.
19) In this case, the plagiarism was significant. With the exception of the opening
paragraph, virtually all of the student's paper was plagiarized, knowingly and
deliberately. This is not a case of forgotten quotations, or negligent note-taking,
but of deliberate academic misconduct. In this regard, it is similar to X.P.Z. (Case
No. 547; September 10, 2009), in which the plagiarized material "comprised

virtually all of the submitted paper." (para. 18)
Mitigating and Aggravating Factors

20) Mr. Centa submitted that this is a case with no mitigating factors. There was no
guilty plea or acknowledgement of wrongdoing, no apology and no expression of
insight or explanation as to why the student had committed the offence. Indeed,
the University's position is that there are significant aggravating factors present
9

that justify a harsher penalty than found in some of the other cases of first
offenders. These aggravating factors, Mr. Genta submitted, include the fact that
the plagiarism was deliberate (as we found at para. 35 of our Reasons), and the
student's conduct at the hearing - his attempt to mislead and justify his actions in
his own evidence, and the evidence of others, that he put before the Tribunal.
This, Mr. Genta submits, sheds light on the student's character and aggravates his
conduct. In addressing the character of the student specifically, there was little
evidence of this at the hearing, and none at the penalty phase; however, the
University submitted that the changing story at the hearing, and the evidence
elicited from Ms. Gui that the student knew to be incorrect, demonstrates that the
student is a person who is prepared to be dishonest.
21) Mr. Alexander, for the student, did not seek to excuse the conduct. Rather, in
addition to taking issue with the starting point of a 2 year threshold suspension
(which we have addressed above), he expressed concern that the Mr. C. factors,
which he submitted appeared to be drawn from criminal law, did not address
rehabilitation, which should be a factor. The willingness to do community service,
it was submitted, demonstrated that the student is sorry, and wishes to atone. Mr.
Alexander also submitted that there was a danger that putting too much emphasis
on deterrence in plagiarism cases could lead to disproportionate penalties. He
also argued that, as the student had the option of not taking the course for credit, it
had a negligible effect on his GPA and therefore there was little academic
advantage to plagiarizing. Mr. Alexander also urged us to consider the fact that
the student is on the verge of graduating, and that a suspension at this late stage

10

of his studies, as well as obtaining a zero on the course (which again should not be
presumptive penalty and Mr. Alexander suggested he only be assigned a zero for
the assignment), could have a drastic impact on him, as he will fall behind his
peers in their efforts to enter the workforce, and this will have significant economic
consequences. We were advised, in this regard, that the student aspires to
become an accountant.
22) Dealing with the student's submissions first, we agree that rehabilitation is
important. However, it is recognized by the fact that, for a first offence for
plagiarism a student is not usually given a "life sentence" of expulsion, but a
second chance. A suspension simply removes the student from the university
community which he or she has betrayed for a period of time, and then allows the
student, who hopefully has reflected on the misconduct and appreciates the need
to comply with the rules of academic integrity and honesty, to return and properly
complete his or her studies. While the offer of community service within the
University, made by counsel for the student, may be seen as an expression of
remorse and desire to make amends, it is not a sanction, or direction, we can
make. Further, the expression of remorse was made through counsel in an effort
to mitigate a deserved punishment. We found it of little consequence in weighing
mitigating and aggravating factors.
23) As to the attempt to minimize the seriousness of the offence because of the minor
impact on the student's GPA, we also found this to be without merit. Plagiarism is
a serious offence regardless of the impact on the particular student - it affects
everyone in the course, and the University at large. We agree that we are not
11

bound to impose a zero in the course, and do not fetter our discretion in
considering an academic penalty.
24) Regarding Mr. Alexander's submission that the student will fall behind his peers if
he receives a lengthy suspension, he took us to literature on the economic
consequences of graduating in recessionary times, and that one's first job may be
the most important in getting ahead. We found this argument unhelpful. When
students graduate may be an accident of birth, or of other choices people make,
such as taking a "gap year" or two, or returning to post-secondary education after
many years in the workforce. This can be both an advantage and a disadvantage.
No one can predict the future and when we will have good or bad economic times.
For all we know, if the student here is suspended for a period of time his
opportunities for a first job following graduation may be better than if he graduates
now. There is no basis to say, therefore, that a delay in graduating - during which
the student may seek other employment and obtain valuable experiences - is
scarring the student's chances for a first job in his chosen profession following
graduation. While a low grade on a transcript may require some explanation, and
may have some impact on the student's GPA, it is of more limited consequence,
and reflects the fact that the student did commit an act of misconduct that is
deserving of condemnation.
25) Turning to the University's submissions, we agree that there are no real mitigating
factors here, and that the student's conduct - both in the scope of the plagiarism
and his attempt to deny it at the hearing - has aggravated the matter and requires
condemnation by the University.
12

26) At the end of the day, we agree with both parties that a suspension is warranted
here. The conduct is serious and similar cases have resulted in suspensions. A
suspension here is necessary to properly reflect the seriousness of the offence and
serve as a deterrent to others who may be tempted to plagiarize. Counsel differ
over whether to impose a suspension of one year or three years. Of course, under
the Code, it is open to this Tribunal to impose a suspension of any length up to five
years, and we are not bound, or fettered, by prior cases. However, we agree that
the penalty should be consistent with the principles that have guided other panels,
and so we draw guidance from other cases. It is clear that many students who are
convicted of a first offence of plagiarism receive a suspension of two years.
However, there are some who receive lighter penalties where there are mitigating
factors (e.g., LO. [Case 557; November 3, 2009J, K.(L).X. [Case 597; May 31,

201 OJ- where the students were suspended for 18 months due to the relatively
minor acts), and some who receive longer suspensions when aggravating factors
are present (e.g., S. K. [Case 595; October 12, 2010J and M.WE.L. [Case 551;
January 7, 201 OJ - 3 years where the acts were deliberate and there appears to
have been some attempts to mislead or evade responsibility, either before the
Panel or in dealing with the Faculty).

Decision
27) In our view, having regard to all the circumstances of this offence, including its
deliberate and serious nature and the conduct of the student in attempting to deny
the plagiarism, and having regard to the need to treat students "fairly and
13

equitably" and to achieve a degree of consistency in imposing sanctions, we find
that the student should be suspended for a period of three years from the date of
this order.
28) We also find that assigning a grade of zero in the course is appropriate. In our
view, anything less would not properly reflect the seriousness of the student's
misconduct and be unfair to others who have properly completed the course.
Zeros in courses are imposed in less serious cases (e.g., LO. and K.(L).X.), in our
view properly.
29) Finally, with respect to a notation on the student's record and transcript, we find
that this should continue for three and a half years, or until the student graduates,
whichever occurs first. The student is simply one course short of completing his
degree. His suspension is properly lengthy, which reflects the seriousness of his
actions, but we see no need for the notation to continue following graduation,
which might inhibit the student's rehabilitation , and is all that would be achieved by
acceding to the University's position.

Dated at Toronto, this

~ of January, 2014.

Paul Schabas, Co-Chair

14

