Case 404

THE UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO

IN THE i'IIATTER OF the University of Toronto Act, 1971, S.O. 1971, c. 56 as amended S.O. 1978,
C. 88

AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic i'vfatters,
1995;

BETWEEN:

THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
- and MS. J.H.(L.) Y.

Members of the Panel:
• Mr. Raj Anand, Chair
• Professor Sarah King, Faculty Panel Member
• Ms. Melany Bleue, Student Panel Member

Appearances:
• Ms. Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel for the University
• Dr. Kristi Gourlay, Manager, Office of Student Academic Integrity
•
•

ivlr. Mike Hamilton, Representative for the Student
Ms. J.H.(L.) Y., the Student

Preliminary

[!]

The Trial Division of the University Tribunal was convened on July 25, 2007 to consider
charges under the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic }Jatters, 1995 (the
"Code") laid against the Student by letter dated January 15, 2007 from Professor Edith Hillan,
Vice-Provost, Academic.

Notice of Hearing and Charges

[2]

The Notice of Hearing was dated July 4, 2007.

Case 404

[3]

The charges are as follows:
I. On or about August 3, 2006, you knowingly represented as your own, an idea or expression
of an idea, and/or work of another in connection with a form of academic work, namely,
"Arts and Politics in Italy", a research paper that you submitted to fulfill the course
requirements of FAH339Hl, contrary to Section B.i.l(d) of the Code of Behaviour on
Academic 1'Jatters, 1995 (the Code).
2. In the alternative, on or about August 3, 2006, you knowingly engaged in a form of
cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or misrepresentation not otherwise
described in order to obtain academic credit or other academic advantage of any kind, in a
research paper entitled "Arts and Politics in Italy" submitted to fulfill course requirements
inFAH339Hl, contrary to SectionB.i.3(b) ofthe Code:

[4]

Particulars of the charges are as follows:
I. You were at all material times a student in FAH339Hl: Art and Politics in Italy 1480-1527,
taught by Professor Carson during the summer of 2006,

2. On or about August 3, 2006, you submitted a research paper to Professor Carson entitled
"Arts and Politics in Italy'', which paper had been purchased from an essay service called
masterpapers.com.
3. You did not write the paper which you submitted for credit entitled "Arts and Politics in
Italy".
4. The paper entitled "Arts and Politics in Italy'' which you submitted contained excerpts and
passages that were copied without attribution from a number of internet sources.

Agreed Statement of Facts

[5]

After reading the charges into evidence, the Student pleaded guilty to charge #1.
University withdrew charge #2.

(6]

The panel was provided with an Agreed Statement of Facts, signed by the Student and Counsel
for the University. In summary, the Student admitted that she did not write the research paper
entitled "Arts and Politics in Italy", but rather purchased the paper from a third party who, in
tum, had copied the paper in its entirety from online sources that were not referenced. The
Agreed Statement of Facts is attached at Appendix I.

[7]

Counsel for the University led the panel through the Agreed Statement of Facts, drawing its
attention to the course outline for FAH339Hl, especially to the section dealing with plagiarism,
which informed students that plagiarism is an offence under the Code, that penalties for such
misconduct range from a zero in a course to suspension or expulsion from the University, and

The

2

Case 404

then directed students to a University of Toronto website wherein more information about
writing and plagiarism could be found.
[8]

The panel sought information on how the offence had been detected. Counsel for the
University and counsel for the Student jointly submitted that the plagiarism was detected at the
time of marking. It was at the Dean's meeting that the Student admitted to having purchased
the plagiarized paper.

Decision of the Tribunal
[9]

Based on the Agreed Statement of Facts and the Student's guilty plea, the Tribunal accepted the
plea and made the finding of guilt.

Sanction and Reasons
[ I OJ

The University presented to the panel a Supplementary Agreed Statement of Facts and a Joint
Submission on Penalty. The Supplementary Agreed Statement of Facts, attached at Appendix
2, provided agreed facts pertinent to the issue of sanction, specifically that the Student had
. committed a prior plagiarism offence in MUS 11 OH taken in the 2002 Fall Session. At that
time, the Dean's designate for the Faculty of Arts and Science, Professor D.W, Smith, imposed
the following penalty:
a. A grade of zero for the plagiarized paper, worth 30% of the final grade
b. A further reduction of 30% for the final grade in the course
c. A notation on the Student's transcript for a period of two years, wbich read
"Censured for Academic Misconduct".

[ 11]

In the sanction letter to the Student, dated May 26, 2003, Professor Smith provided guidance on
how to avoid plagiarism in the future and warned that a second offence would be dealt with
more severely.

[12]

The Joint Submission on Penalty, attached at Appendix 3, submitted that the appropriate
penalty in the circumstance is as follows:
1. that the Student be suspended from attendance at the University of Toronto
for a period of three years, from June 1, 2007 to May 31, 201 O;
2. assignment of a grade of zero in F AH339 for the 2006 Summer term; and

J. notation be placed on the Student's transcript for a period of three years
from the date of the hearing to the effect that the Student was suspended
from the University for academic misconduct
4. That a report of the decision be made to the Provost for publication in the
University's newspaper with the Student's name withheld

3

Case 404

[13]

[ 14]

In reviewing the sanctions available to the panel, discipline counsel compared the severity of
the penalty proposed in the Joint Submission against the previous sanction imposed by the
- Dean for the 2002 plagiarism offence. Discipline counsel submitted that the relatively lenient
sanctions imposed by the Dean had not had the desired effect on the Student, in light of the fact
that she had committed a second offence. For this reason, the penalty for the second infraction
called for a more severe sanction, However, the cooperative attitude of the Student throughout
the judicial process, as evidenced by the joint submissions, suggested that the Student could yet
be rehabilitated and should, therefore, be given the opportunity to return to the University
co=unity.
The University placed a Book of Authorities before the panel so that it might have an
opportunity to review several decisions of other panels of the University Tribunal in similar

cases. In particular, the panel reviewed the criteria for sanction first proposed by the late and
former Mr. Justice Sopinka in the matter of the appeal of Mr. C. (November 5, 1976).
According to these guidelines, the Tribunal should consider the following six criteria when
deciding on an appropriate sanction:

a) the character of the person charged;
b) the lil:elihood of a repetition of the offence;
c) the nature of the offence committed;
d) any extenuating circumstances surrounding the commission of the offence;
e) the detriment to the University occasioned by the offence;
f)

the need to deter others from committing a similar offence,

[ 15]

In its submissions on penalty, the University reminded the panel that the Student was not new
to the University environment nor was she unfamiliar with disciplinary practices, In spite of
her knowledge and past experience, the Student had engaged in academic misconduct a second
time. Discipline counsel contrasted the repetitive nature of the Student's behaviour with her
willingness to cooperate with University officials on both occasions. Discipline counsel
acknowledged that it was difficult to assess the likelihood of a further repetition of misconduct,
but reasoned that a more severe sanction on this occasion would deter the Student from
committing ·future offences.

[16]

With respect to the nature of the offence, discipline counsel spoke of the endemic nature of
plagiarism and the difficulties associated with detecting purchased papers. Given the gravity of
these problems, counsel argued that they need to be addressed in a serious manner,

[I 7]

The University concluded its submissions on penalty by reminding the panel that academic
misconduct must be dealt with serionsly. There must be serious consequences for committing
offences, both to rehabilitate the Student and to prevent other members of the community from
even contemplating the possibility of cheating.

4

Case 404

[ 18]

The panel asked discipline counsel why expulsion had not been sought by the University, since
the Student had purchased the plagiarized paper. Ms. Hanner acknowledged that the Provost's
Guidelines, contained in Appendix C of the Code, do reco=end expulsion for purchased
papers, but that the principle of consistency must inform the Tribunal when it imposes
sanctions. Ms. Hanner noted that while some cases similar to this one did result in expulsion,
the majority did not. In this particular case, a three year suspension is on the lower end of the
sanction spectrum for a purchased essay, but not for plagiarism as a broad category. That is,
for plagiarism broadly speaking, the proposed sanction is actually at the higher end.

[19]

The panel questioned why the case was being prosecuted as both an instance of essay
purchasing and plagiarism, since, by purchasing the essay, it was clear that the Student had not
written the paper and, therefore, could not be said to have plagiarized. Discipline counsel
referred the panel to Section B.i. l.d of the Code, which states that to commit plagiarism is: "to
represent as one's own any idea or expression of an idea or work of another ... ". Ms. Hanner
argued that it is the representational act that is crucial to the co=ission of plagiarism,
regardless of whether the paper that is submitte_d for credit is the result of cutting and pasting
sources or purchasing the final product

[20]

The panel asked discipline counsel how she had come to learn of the first offence, given that
the notation on the Stndent's academic record had expired prior to the commission of the
second offence. Ms. Harmer responded that files are maintained for stndents who have been
sanctioned at the decanal level and that no promise is made to expunge the file once the
notation sanction expires.

[21]

Following the submissions of discipline counsel, Mr. Hamilton was invited to provide closing
comments on behalf of the Student. Mr. Hamilton stressed the amount of care that had gone ·
into the agreed statements presented to the panel. While acknowledging that the Tribunal is not
bound by the Joint Statement on Penalty, he reminded the panel of the deference criminal
courts show to such statements and provided the panel with a copy of R v. Cerasuolo, which
states:
"This court has repeatedly held that trial judges should not reject joint submissions
unless the joint submission is contrary to the public interest and the sentence would
bring the administration of justice into disrepute . . . This is a high threshold_ and is
intended to foster confidence in an accused, who has given up his right to a trial, that
the joint submission he obtained in return for a plea of guilty will be respected by the
sentencing judge."

[22]

In response to these submissions, the Chair commented that the 'bringing of justice into
disrepute' is a rather drastic criterion and that in the context of this Tribunal it may be more
appropriate to judge Joint Submissions on Penalty in terms of an 'acceptable range'. Counsel
for the Student conceded that the Tribunal typically employs the 'acceptable range' criterion in
determining the appropriateness of a proposed sanction.

[23]

In acknowledging that it is impossible for the parties, when negotiating agreements, to
anticipate all the questions that may arise for the panel, the Chair questioned what would
prevent the parties from submitting character evidence along with the Joint Statement on
Penalty. In response, counsel for the defence informed the panel that he had prepared a booklet
containing an. up-to-date transcript as well as letters attesting to the Student's good character.

5

Case 404

Since discipline counsel had had an opportunity to review these documents prior to the hearing
and did not then find them objectionable, no objection was raised to having them entered into
evidence.
[24]

The letters, .one from the Student's sister and the other from a friend of the Student, described
some life difficulties that the Student had been experiencing at the time the offence was
committed. The transcript revealed academic improvement following this time of stress.
Counsel for the Student argued that these documents were evidence of the impact of stress on
the Student's behaviour and concluded that the probability ofreoffending is quite low.

[25]

Following the parties' submissions on penalty, the panel recessed to deliberate.
The panel
then accepted the Joint Submission on Penalty as falling within an acceptable range in the
present circumstances. The panel therefore imposed the following sanctions:
1. that the Student be suspended from attendance at the University of Toronto
for a period of three years, from June 1, 2007 to May 31, 201 O;
2. assignment of a grade of zero in FAH339 for the 2006 Summer term; and
3. notation be placed on the Student's transcript for _a period of three years
from the date of the hearing to the effect to the effect that the Student was
suspended from the University for academic misconduct
4. That a report of the decision be made to the Provost for publication in the
University's newspaper with the Student's name withheld

DATED at Toronto this ./ 5

day of May, 2009
Raj Anand, Tribunal Co-Chair

6

APPENDIX 1

-I
I
I
I
I

•
•
•
•
•
•II
'II
I
II
II

UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
and
J_H_Y_

AGREED STATEMENT OF FACTS

1.

The University of Toronto admitted J■

Ha Y - to its Bachelor of

Arts and Science program at the St. George campus in the Fall of
2002.

A copy of Ms. y••s academic record as of November 28,

2006 is attached to the Agreed Statement of Facts at Tab A.
2.

In the Summer of 2006, Ms. Y - was enrolled in three half courses,
including FAH339 -- Art and Politics in Italy 1480-1527 ("Art and
Politics").

The University has alleged that Ms. Y • committed an

academic offence in Art and Politics .
3,

Art and Politics, a third year course offered by the Department of Fine
Art and taught by Professor Rebekah Carson, examined the interaction
between art and politics in Italy during the period 1480 to 1527. A copy
of the course outline for Art and Politics is attached to this Agreed
Statement of Facts at Tab B.

4.

Students were required to submit a research paper worth 35% of the
final mark in Art and Politics.

I
I
I

•I

2

5.

and Politics in Italy"'.

A copy of the paper Ms. YIII submitted is

attached to this Agreed Statement of facts at Tab C .
6.

Ms.

v•

did not write Art and Politics in Italy. Instead, she purchased

the paper from a third party. In addition, the paper itself was copied in
its entirety from online sources that were not referenced or otherwise

I

•I
•
•
•
•II
•
•
•
•
•

On or about August 3, 2006, Ms. Y - submitted a paper entitled "Art

acknowledged. The relevant pages from
the websites are attached to
, ...
this Agreed Statement of Facts at Tab D.
7.

Attached to this Agreed St(ltement of Facts at Tab E is a copy of Art
and Politics in Italy, which has been highlighted in yellow. The words

that are highlighted were taken verbatim from the websites .
8.

Ms. Y • admits that she did no meaningful academic work in respect
of Art and Politics in Italy.

Specifically, Ms. YIII admits that on or

about August 3, 2006, she knowingly represented as her own, an idea,
an expression of an idea, and the work of another in Art and Politics in
Italy which she submitted to fulfill the course requirements of Art and

Politics in Italy 1480-1527, contrary to s. B.1.1 (d) of the Code .
9.

Ms. Y - admits that she is guilty of charge #1 contained in the
Charges filed by the University on January 15, 2007 ("Charges"), a
copy of which is attached to this Agreed Statement of Facts at Tab F.

10.

When she appears before the University Tribunal, Ms. Y - will plead
guilty to charge #1 of the Charges .

662574-1

I

•I

3

11.

to obtain independent legal advice before signing this Agreed
Statement of Facts and that she has either done so or deliberately

I

waived that right.

•I
•I

Signed in Toronto on ~ \'\ ~ t:; , 2007

II

•II
•
•
'•
II
•
•
•

Ms. Y • acknowledges that the University of Toronto has advised her

Signed in Toronto on
)

662574-1

.

··•

0 ~ 2-s:;-20 7, .
Lily Harmer
Assistant Dis ipline Counsel,
University of Toronto

APPENDIX2

UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
and

J■ H-19111·

II
ll
II
II
ll
ll
II
II
II
IJ
ii
di
di
d
d

SUPPLEMENTARY AGREED STATEMENT OF FACTS
1.

Ms.

v•
v•

committed a prior plagiarism offence under the Code of

Behaviour on Academic Matters in 2002.

2.

Ms.

enrolled in MUS11 OH - Introduction to Music and Culture -

in the Fall 2002 session. She submitted an essay worth 30% of the
final course grade.
3,

On May 22, 2003, Ms.

v•

admitted that she had committed the

academic offence of plagiarism in her essay. Ms.

v•

admitted that,

except for one passage, the essay had been plagiarized in its entirety
from several internet sources, without acknowledgment.

4.

On May 26, 2003, Professor D.W. Smith, Dean's Designate for
Academic Behaviour at the University of Toronto, wrote to Ms.

v•

and imposed the following penalty:
a. a grade of zero for the paper;
b. a further reduction of 30% for her final grade for the course;
c. a notation on her transcript for a two year period to read "Censured
for Academic Misconduct".

2

A copy of Professor Smith's letter is attached to this Agreed Statement
of Facts at Tab A.

5.

Ms. Y - acknowledges that the University of Toronto has advised her
to obtain independent legal advice before signing this Agreed
Statement of Facts and that she has either done so or deliberately
waived that right.

Signed in Toronto on "J"v \ ~ d-~ , 2007

Sigoed io Tomato oo

..Jclli R ~ tt~,
Lily armer
Assistant Discipline Counsel,
University of Toronto

662578-1

o-

APPENDIX3

UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO

and
J_H_Y_

JOINT SUBMISSION ON PENALTY

1. The University of Toronto and J■ H- Y . submit to the Tribunal that
the appropriate penalty in all of the circumstances is:
a. Ms. Y • be suspended from attendance at the University of
Toronto for a period of three 'ye~r§, from June 1, 2007 to and
including May 31, 201 0;
b. assignment of a grade of zero in FAH339 for the 2006 Summer
term; and
c. notation on Ms. Y•'s transcript for a period of three years from
the date of this hearing to the effect that she was sanctioned for
academic misconduct.
2. The University of Toronto and Ms. Y • submit that the Tribunal should
report this case to the Provost who may publish a notice of the decision of
the Tribunal and the sanction or sanctions imposed with Ms. v••s name
withheld.

3. Ms. Y • acknowledges that the University of Toronto has advised her to
retain independent legal counsel before signing this Joint Submission on
I

Penalty and that she has either dorie so or deliberately waived that right.
Signed in Toronto on ~\.~ d-~

Signed in Toronto on

, 2007

, 2007.

Lily Harmer
Assistant Discipline Counsel,
University of Toronto

