Case 404

DATE:

   May 15, 2009

PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v. Ms. J.H.(L.) Y.

Hearing Date(s):

   July 25, 2007

Panel Members:

   Raj Anand, Chair
   Professor Sarah King, Faculty Panel Member
   Ms. Melany Bleue, Student Panel Member

Appearances:

   Ms. Lily Harmer,Assitant Discipline Counsel for the University
   Dr. Kristi Goulay, Manager, Office of Student Academic Integrity
   Mr. Mike Hamilton, Representative for the Student
   Ms. J.L.Y., the Student

   Student charged under s. B.i.1(d), and alternatively, s. B.i.3(b) of
   the Code. The charges related to allegations that the Student submitted
   a plagiarized paper purchased on the internet. The matter proceeded on
   an Agreed Statement of Facts and Joint Submission on Penalty. The
   Student pleaded guilty to the charge under s. B.i.1(d). The Panel
   accepted the Studentâs guilty plea and made the finding of guilt. The
   Student had committed a prior plagiarism offence. The University
   contrasted the repetitive nature of the Studentâs behaviour with her
   willingness to cooperate with University officials. The Panel
   questioned why the University had not sought expulsion for the offence.
   The University recognized that the Code recommends expulsion for
   purchased papers but that the principal of consistency must inform the
   Panel when it imposes sanctions and that the majority of similar cases
   did not result in expulsion. The Panel questioned why the case was
   prosecuted as both an instance of essay purchasing and plagiarism,
   since the Student had not written the paper and, therefore, could not
   have plagiarized. The University argued that as per s. B.i.1(d) of the
   Code, it was the representational act that was crucial to the
   commission of plagiarism. The Panel found that the files for students
   who had been sanctioned at the decanal level were not expunged once the
   notation sanction had expired. The Panel considered the sentencing
   principle enunciated in R. v. Cerasuolo and found that in the context
   of the Tribunal it was more appropriate to judge Joint Submissions on
   Penalty in terms of an âacceptable rangeâ criterion. The Panel
   considered character evidence which revealed that the Student had
   experienced life difficulties at the time that the offence was
   committed and that academic improvement had occurred following the time
   of stress. The Panel found that the Joint Submission on Penalty fell
   within an acceptable range of sanction. The Panel imposed a three-year
   suspension; a grade of zero in the course; a notation on the Studentâs
   transcript for three years; and that a report be issued to the Provost.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/13004
