Case #788

   DATE: February 25, 2015
   PARTIES: University of Toronto v H.M.
   Hearing Date(s): February 18, 2015
   Panel Members:
   Roslyn Tsao, Chair
   Michael Saini, Faculty Member
   Alice Zhu, Student Member
   Appearances:
   Robert Centa, Assistant Discipline Counsel
   Chester Scoville, Course Instructor
   In Attendance:
   Lucy Gaspini, Manager, Academic Integrity & Affairs, UTM
   Christopher Lang, Director, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances
   Trial Division ‚ s. B.i.1(d) and B.i.3(b) of the Code ‚ student does
   not appear ‚ plagiarism ‚ no past misconduct ‚ grade of zero in course;
   two-year suspension; notation on transcript until graduation; report to
   Provost for publication
   The Student was charged with plagiarism contrary to s. B.i.1(d) and, in
   the alternative, one charge s. B.i.3(b) of the Code. The Student did
   not attend the hearing and there was brief adjournment. The Panel was
   satisfied that the Student had reasonable notice of the hearing and had
   been emailed in accordance with the Rules of Practice and Procedure of
   the University Tribunal, and the hearing proceeded.
   The University called the course instructor as a witness. He testified
   that at the start of his course he conducted an ‚Academic Integrity
   Workshop‚ involving a lecture on academic misconduct and a short quiz
   identifying instances of plagiarism. The Student scored 90% on this
   quiz. Students were required to submit an essay in hard copy and to
   Turnintin.com, a plagiarism detection program. The Student‚s essay
   contained passages identical or nearly identical to unsourced material
   and the Panel had no trouble identifying significant plagiarism.
   The Panel found the Student guilty of the first charge and the
   University withdrew the alternative charge.
   The University sought a penalty of a grade of zero in the course, a
   two-year suspension, and a notation in the Student‚s academic record
   until graduation. The Student has no prior record of academic
   misconduct and had not registered at the University since the Winter
   2014 term.
   The Panel assigned a grade of zero in the course, imposed a two-year
   suspension, ordered a notation on the Student‚s transcript for two
   years, and ordered that the case be reported to the Provost for
   publication.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12871
