Case 924

DATE:

   June 20, 2018

PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v. X.L. (âthe Studentâ)

Hearing Date(s):

   May 14, 2018

Panel Members:

   Mr. Paul Michell, Chair
   Professor Pascal van Lieshout, Faculty Panel Member
   Ms. Alexis Giannelia, Student Panel Member

Appearances:

   Ms. Tina Lie, Assistant Discipline Counsel for the University, Paliare
   Roland Barristers
   Ms. Hailey Bruckner, Articling Student, Paliare Roland Barristers

In Attendance:

   Ms. Tracey Gameiro, Associate Director, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty
   Grievances
   Dr. Kristi Gourlay, Manager & Academic Integrity Officer, Office of
   Student Academic Integrity, Faculty of Arts and Science
   Professor Ryan Balot, Department of Political Science, Witness for the
   University
   Mr. Zhichao Tong, Teaching Assistant, Witness for the University
   Mr. Sean Lourim, Technology Assistant, Office of the Governing Council

Not in Attendance:

   The Student

   The Student was charged with two charges of forging or falsifying a
   document or evidence required by the University contrary to s.B.i.1(a)
   of the Code , or in the alternative two charges of academic dishonesty
   contrary to s. B.i.3(b) of the Code . The charges related to an essay
   that the Student had submitted for course credit. After receiving her
   mark from the teaching assistant, she resubmitted a modified version of
   the essay for remarking by the course instructor, claiming it was the
   first essay.Â  In support of her application to have her paper
   re-graded, she provided the University with a falsified Turnitin
   report, which reported that the essay had been submitted prior to when
   she received feedback from the teaching assistant (and with a different
   word count) than what the University Turnitin records indicated.

   The Student did not attend the hearing.Â  The Panel found that adequate
   notice of the hearing had been provided to the Student based on
   evidence that the Student had been represented by counsel from Downtown
   Legal Services (DLS) at a number of case conferences, but ultimately,
   they were unable to represent her because they had difficulty obtaining
   instructions from her. Upon the withdrawal of the Studentâs counsel,
   counsel for the University sent emails to the Student at the two email
   addresses and attempted to contact the Student at the phone number that
   DLS had provided (and at the phone number listed for the Student in
   ROSI). On the basis of evidence from the teaching assistant and the
   course instructor, as well as an administrator who testified that the
   Turnitin report provided to the University had been falsified, the
   Panel found that the Student was guilty to the two charges of forging
   or falsifying a document contrary to s.B.i.1(a) of the Code .Â  The
   University withdrew the alternative charges.

   The University requested: (1) that the Student's degree be suspended
   for a period of three years; (2) that the sanction be recorded for a
   period of four years on the Student's academic record and transcript;
   and (3) that the case be reported to the Provost with the Studentâs
   name withheld.Â  The Panel applied the Mr. C. [Case No. 1976/77-3;
   November 5, 1976] factors, noting that the nature of the offences were
   serious, that the re-grading process that provides students with the
   opportunity to have an assignment reviewed only functions if an
   assignment is the same as the one originally submitted ( N.B . [Case
   No. 538; August 14, 2009], submitting a substantially altered version
   of the original document undermines this process ( L.Y. [Case No. 883;
   July 11, 2017] at para. 19) and the academic integrity of the
   University ( F.M. [Case No. 522; May 5, 2009] at para. 42) and corrodes
   the trust between a teaching assistant and the students. The Panel
   referred to in J.Z. [Case No. 928; June 5, 2017], which addresses the
   principles for forging an academic record that are equally applicable
   to forging a Turnitin receipt â that the offence is serious, that
   forgery is difficult to detect, and that forgery is only rarely a
   product of inadvertence, rather it is the product of planning and
   knowing participation.Â  Though it was the Studentâs first offence, the
   Student did not attend the hearing so there was no evidence of any
   other extenuating circumstances.

   Absent mitigating circumstances, the Panel concluded that the sanction
   proposed by the University was reasonable, and in line with cases that
   had imposed a three-year suspension and a four-year transcript notation
   where the student committed multiple offences ( B.D. , [Case No. 845;
   July 26, 2017]) or had a prior academic offence ( Z.M . [Case No. 632;
   November 10, 2011]. The Panel ordered that the Student: (1) receive a
   grade of zero in the court, be suspended from the University for three
   years, have a transcript notation for four years, and that the decision
   be reported to the Provost with the Studentâs name withheld.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12969
