Report #398

   DATE: July 10, 2018
   PARTIES: Ms. M. M. (the âStudentâ) v. School of Graduate Studies
   (âSGSâ)
   Hearing Date(s):Â  Â May 30, 2018
   Committee Members:
   Mr. John Monahan, Chair
   Ms. Susan Froom, Student Governor
   Professor Ernest Lam, Faculty Governor
   Hearing Secretary:
   Christopher Lang, Director, Office of the Appeals, Discipline Faculty
   Grievances
   Appearances:
   For the Student:
   Mr. Eric Sherkin, Counsel, Levine Sherkin Boussidan Barristers
   Ms. M.M., the Student
   For the SGS:
   Mr. Robert A. Centa, Counsel, Paliare Roland
   Ms. Emily Home, Counsel, Paliare Roland
   Prof. Charmaine Williams, Acting Vice-Dean, Students, SGS
   Dr. Natasha Crowcroft, Instructor, Laboratory Medicine and
   Pathobiology, Dalla Lana School
   of Public Health
   Dr. Nancy Baxter, Associate Dean, Academic Affairs, Dalla Lana School
   of Public Health
   The Student appeals a decision of the Graduate Academic Appeals Board
   (the âGAABâ) dismissing the Studentâs appeal concerning a grade she had
   received on an assignment completed as part of the graduate program in
   the Dalla Lana School of Public Health (âSchoolâ).Â  The Student had
   submitted an assignment late and had been advised that it would have 10
   marks deducted from it.Â  The Student requested that the marks that had
   been deducted for lateness be returned to the assignment because of a
   delay in holding the weekly tutorial. She also requested that the
   assignment be re-read because of bias on behalf of one of her tutors,
   or in the alternative, because the Schoolâs policies had not been
   applied to her fairly.
   The Committee dismissed the allegations of bias because the Student had
   failed to provide the Committee with any compelling evidence to show
   any personal or professional bias on the part of the tutor that may
   have caused her to mark the Studentâs assignment differently. The
   Committee focussed exclusively on whether the School had treated the
   Student fairly in the application of the Schoolâs policies, practices,
   or processes with respect to the marking of the assignment, and
   ultimately her course grade. The Committee found that the School had
   already applied its processes fairly in having all papers on the lower
   end of the grading scale of the class re-read by a second marker, and
   then awarding the Student the higher of the two grades.Â  Further, the
   professor had already agreed not to apply the deduction for lateness to
   the Studentâs assignment, which changed the mark on the assignment but
   not the overall grade for the course. Ultimately, there was an issue
   with arithmetic.Â  The Committee did not find any reason to impugn the
   fairness of the procedures used to arrive at the grades ultimately
   assigned to the Student. Appeal dismissed.
   [1]View Report

References

   1. file:///media/12641
