Case No.: 1262
UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
IN THE MATTER OF charges of academic dishonesty filed on September 20, 2021
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters,
1995
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Act, 1971, S.O. 1971, c. 56 as amended
S.O. 1978, c. 88
B E T W E E N:
UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
and
G

L

REASONS FOR DECISION
Hearing Date: January 11, 2022, via Zoom
Members of the Panel:
Ms. Alexandra Clark, Chair
Professor Richard Day, Faculty Panel Member
Ms. Alena Zelinka, Student Panel Member
Appearances:
Mr. Robert Centa, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg Rothstein LLP
Mr. William Webb, Co-Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg Rothstein LLP
Hearing Secretary:
Ms. Carmelle Salomon-Labbé, Associate Director, Office of Appeals, Discipline and Faculty
Grievances
Not in Attendance:
Ms. G
L

2
A.

Charges

1.

On January 11, 2022, this panel of the University Tribunal held a hearing to consider the

charges brought by the University of Toronto (the “University”) against G

L

(the

“Student”) under the Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters, 1995 (the “Code”).
2.

Those charges were set out in a letter to the Student dated September 20, 2021, as

follows:

3.

1.

On or about June 8, 2020, you knowingly used or possessed an unauthorized aid or
obtained unauthorized assistance during assignment #8 in MAT135H1F (20205) (the
“Course”), contrary to section B.I.1(b) of the Code.

2.

On or about June 8, 2020, you knowingly represented as your own an idea or
expression of an idea, and/or the work of another in assignment #8 in the Course
contrary to section B.I.1(d) of the Code.

3.

In the alternative to each of the above charges, on or about June 8, 2020, you
knowingly engaged in a form of cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud
or misrepresentation not otherwise described in the Code in order to obtain academic
credit or other academic advantage of any kind in connection with in assignment #8
in the Course, contrary to section B.I.3(b) of the Code.

The conduct in question occurred in a course in the Faculty of Arts and Science at the

University of Toronto.
4.

The Student did not attend the hearing. She was not represented by counsel. The

Tribunal called the hearing to order at the scheduled 5:15 p.m. start time. As the Student was not
present, we waited for 30 minutes. The Student did not appear by 5:45 p.m. when we began the
hearing, nor did she join at any time before the hearing concluded over two hours later.
B.

Notice and Hearing in the Student’s Absence

5.

At the outset of the hearing, Assistant Discipline Counsel asked the Tribunal to find that

the Student had been provided with proper notice of the hearing, and that the hearing should
proceed in the Student’s absence.

3
6.

The Provost led evidence that there had been an initial hearing in this matter on

December 9, 2021 before a differently constituted panel (the “Initial Hearing”). That panel
expressly found that the Student had been properly served with notice of the Initial Hearing, but
decided to grant a short adjournment in order to give her one final chance to address the
allegations. The panel’s endorsement reads:
[1] Provost’s counsel has properly served the Student with materials. The Student has
received proper notice of today’s proceedings, but has not appeared. There is perhaps a
record justifying proceeding in the Student’s absence.
[2] It is disappointing that the Student has not attended despite receiving notice. It is in
the Student’s interest to engage in this process. Her non-attendance is disrespectful to the
Tribunal and all of the people who work hard to ensure a fair process for the Student.
[3] However, the Panel is uncomfortable proceeding in the Student’s absence given that
we know virtually nothing about her personal circumstances. That, combined, with the
Student’s limited engagement with Mr. Centa on December 6, 2021, gives the Panel
sufficient pause about proceeding in the Student’s absence.
[4] Provost’s counsel, in the finest traditions of that office, has agreed that there should
be an adjournment to give the Student a final opportunity to respond to these allegations
or attempt to resolve this matter.
[5] Accordingly, the Panel grants a short adjournment, with a date to be set on the earliest
date available to the parties.
[6] Additionally, the Panel directs Provost’s counsel to communicate the following to the
Student:
a)

That although an adjournment was granted today, this will likely be the
Student’s final chance to respond to these allegations. If the student fails
to attend at the next hearing date without reasonable excuse, the matter is
likely to proceed in her absence;

b)

That the Student be given contact information for potential pro bono
counsel, including contact information for Downtown Legal Services;

c)

That the Student be asked if there are any dates in 2022 when she is not
available, but she should also be advised that if she does not respond with
her unavailable dates within 7 days, a date for the hearing will be selected
without regard to her schedule.

[7] The matter is adjourned. This Panel is not seized of this matter.

4
7.

In compliance with these directions, on December 10, 2021, Ms. Krista Kennedy, a

Hearing Secretary with the Tribunal, sent the Student a copy of the panel’s direction set out
above together with an information brochure concerning pro bono legal assistance. This
information was sent to the University email account provided by the Student and registered in
the University of Toronto Repository of Student Information (the “ROSI Account”).
8.

On the same date Mr. Centa, the Assistant Discipline Counsel with carriage of this matter

on behalf of the Provost, sent an email to the Student at the ROSI Account. His message
informed her of the outcome of the hearing on December 9 and asked for her availability in the
months of January and February for a further hearing date. The message also asked the Student
to contact him at the earliest opportunity to discuss the contents of his message and next steps.
9.

The Provost also led evidence that, in response to this message and beginning on

December 13, 2021, there were exchanges between the Student and Mr. Centa. Mr. Centa
summarized these exchanges in a message sent to the Student on January 3, 2022:
You responded to me on December 13, 2021. I responded immediately and asked you to call me.
You responded and said that you were at work. You asked if I was available after 5. I responded
immediately saying that I was available any time between 5:00 and 11:00 pm. I invited you to call
me on my mobile or said that I could send you a Zoom link. You responded saying that you were
not in the country and could not call me on my mobile. You stated that you were free at 4:00 pm
Toronto time. I sent you a Zoom link for 4:00 Toronto time. You did not join the Zoom call.
I wrote to you at 7:00 pm on December 13. I asked you to commit to a time that you will be
available. You did not respond to this message. I wrote to you again on December 15 and 22,
2021. You did not respond to these messages.

10.

The University’s Policy on Official Correspondence with Students requires students

enrolled at the University to maintain a current and valid postal address and an address for a
University-issued email account, to update their records when this information changes, and to
monitor and retrieve their mail and email on a frequent and consistent basis.

5
11.

The Provost led evidence demonstrating that the Student had been provided with notice

of and a copy of all of the required documents relating to the Initial Hearing via the ROSI
Account, and that she had responded to Mr. Centa using the ROSI Account on December 6,
2021. The notice for the Initial Hearing contained information concerning the time, place and
purpose of the Initial Hearing together with an explanation that if she chose not to appear, the
Initial Hearing could nevertheless proceed to deal with the charges against her.
12.

In addition, as described in paragraphs 7 through 9 above, the Student responded to the

more recent emails sent to her on December 10, 2021 via the ROSI Account. These
communications from the Hearing Secretary and from Assistant Discipline Counsel contained
the required information concerning the revised hearing date and time, and repeated the warning
concerning the consequences of non-attendance at the hearing.
13.

In light of this evidence, it is reasonable to conclude that the Student is fully aware of

timing, subject matter of and evidence to be tendered against her in these proceedings, together
with the consequences of non-attendance at the hearing. She appears to have chosen, for
whatever reason, not to further participate in the proceedings.
14.

The panel therefore found that the University had provided the Student with reasonable

notice of the hearing and of the charges made against her in accordance with rules 9, 13 and 14
of the Tribunal’s Rules of Practice and Procedure (the “Rules”) and section 6 of the Statutory
Powers Procedure Act (the “SPPA”). We ordered that the hearing should proceed in the
Student’s absence, as permitted by rule 17 of the Rules and section 7 of the SPPA.

6
C.

Affidavit Evidence

15.

The Provost sought to enter two affidavits into evidence dealing with the substance of the

charges against the Student: an affidavit of Payman Eskandari, affirmed November 4, 2021 (the
“Eskandari Affidavit”), and an affidavit of Obianuju Umenyi, affirmed December 1, 2021 (the
“Umenyi Affidavit”). On reviewing these two affidavits, the panel concluded that this was an
appropriate case in which to admit evidence by way of affidavit, as permitted by rule 61 of the
Rules. In the Student’s absence, the affiants were not subjected to cross-examination.
16.

The panel reviewed evidence showing that the Provost had provided the Student with a

copy of the Eskandari Affidavit on November 15, 2021, and a copy of the Umenyi Affidavit on
December 1, 2021.
D.

Liability

17.

In the summer term of 2020, Payman Eskandari and Ali Cheragi (together, the

“Instructors”) co-taught a Calculus course in the Department of Mathematics, MAT135H1F (the
“Course”). The Student was enrolled in this course, as was another student, JC (“Mr. C”).
18.

The Course required students to complete 10 assignments, and the two lowest marks were

to be discarded with the remaining 8 assignments each being weighted at 12.5% of the final
grade. All students in the course were required to submit their assignments electronically using
the Crowdmark platform, and all assignments were to be completed and submitted without
supervision due to the COVID-19 pandemic.
19.

Assignment 8 in the Course was provided to the students on June 1, 2020, and was to be

returned by June 8, 2020 (the “Assignment”). On June 4, 2020, the Instructors provided a

7
specific reminder to the students enrolled in the Course of the requirement to complete the
Assignment independently and without external assistance. The reminder read:
It has been brought to our attention that there might have been cases of academic misconduct on
our assignments. Note that our assignments are open book; this means you are allowed to use the
official course material (i.e. your own lecture and tutorial notes, notes posted by instructors and
TAs, and the textbook) while you work on the assignments. Also the use of a basic calculator is
allowed. Unless otherwise indicated, other than those aids listed above, no aid (online or offline)
is allowed.
While, in principle, you may study together (which is difficult to do during this time) and discuss
the course contents (i.e. the topics/theory/techniques/tools you learn in the course), assignments
must be done independently. In particular, sharing solutions (in part or full) or ideas of solutions
with each other in any way is not allowed. Needless to say, posting/finding solutions (in full or
part) in social media groups (e.g. Facebook, Whatsapp, etc.) is not allowed. The solutions you
submit for your assignments must be the result of your work only and no one else's. This is to
assure fairness, so that students who work hard are not at a disadvantage.
If we become aware of academic misconduct, we will have no choice but to report those
involved/responsible (including those who facilitate cheating for others) to the University.
Consequences for violation of the Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters are very serious. On
the low end, possible sanctions can be things like 0 on the assignment, 0 on the course, and
notation on student's academic record for a certain period of time. On the more severe end, they
can result in student's expulsion from the University.
Since each of our assignments is worth more than 10% of the final course grade, the cases will
likely go to at least the level of the Dean of the Faculty of Arts and Science. Please don't put us in
a situation that we feel obliged to start a procedure that is unpleasant for everyone involved (and
may result in serious consequences for the student). If it is not clear to you what may constitute
academic misconduct in the course, before you commit it, ask the instructors. Saying "I didn't
know that was a violation" is not a legitimate excuse.

20.

Both the Student and Mr. C submitted their answers to the Assignment on June 8, 2020.

The Instructors noted that their answers to Question 5 of the Assignment were “virtually
identical”. Specifically, as set out in the Eskandari Affidavit:
Both students used the same words and mathematical expressions in their answers; the only
difference is that [the Student] used the word “that”, whereas [Mr. C] appears to have used the
word “test”. While questions in introductory mathematics courses often have standard solutions,
it is extremely unlikely that the presentation of any two solutions (i.e. the words and
mathematical expressions) would be almost identical in general and for Question 5 in particular.
No other student submitted an answer to Question 5 that had the same degree of similarity as
between [the Student]’s and [Mr. C]’s answers. Given the number and degree of similarities
between the two answers, it was highly unlikely that these similarities were coincidental.

8
21.

The Eskandari Affidavit attaches copies of both the Student’s and Mr. C’s answers to

Question 5 of the Assignment. These copies bear out the similarity of these two answers as
described above. In particular, it is notable that both answers contain an explanatory sentence as
well as mathematical notations and a small graph. The sentence reads “by horizontal find that
the function graph is one-to-one so f is invertible on its domain”. We agree with Mr. Eskandari’s
observation that, in Mr. C’s handwriting, it is unclear whether the word that he has written is
“that” or “test”.
22.

Mr. Eskandari goes on to state that he met with the Student via Zoom on July 3, 2020 to

discuss his concern that she had committed academic misconduct in providing her answers to the
Assignment. The contents of this meeting were, quite properly, not placed in evidence before us.
23.

The Provost also provided the evidence of Obianuju Umenyi, an Academic Integrity

Specialist with the Office of Student Academic Integrity in the Faculty of Arts and Science. In
her affidavit, Ms. Umenyi explains that she had been assigned to investigate allegations that a
number of students had committed academic offences in providing their answers to the
Assignment, including both the Student and Mr. C.
24.

On March 2, 2021 there was a Zoom meeting, attended by Ms. Umenyi, between Mr. C

and Professor Nicholas Rule, the Dean’s Designate. In that meeting, Mr. C admitted that he had
viewed the answer to Question 5 of the Assignment on a website called Chegg.com, and that he
had paid for a Chegg.com account to access the answer. Mr. C also acknowledged that he had
collaborated with another student in the Course in preparing his answers to the Assignment but
claimed not to remember the identity of the student that he had collaborated with.

9
25.

The Umenyi Affidavit attaches digital images of the answers that Mr. C provided to the

Assignment. It also attaches information obtained from the administrators of the Chegg.com
website, which show that a question identical to Question 5 of the Assignment had been posted
to the website, and that a solution to that question had also been posted on the website (the
“Chegg Solution”). Significantly, the answer that Mr. C provided to Question 5 of the
Assignment was identical to the Chegg Solution, which included the phrase: “by horizontal find
that the function graph is one-to-one so f is invertible on its domain”.
26.

Indeed, Mr. C’s answers appears to be a digital image of the Chegg Solution as printed on

plain paper or viewed on a computer screen. This answer contrasted with Mr. C’s answers to the
remaining questions of the Assignment, all of which were apparently written on graph paper in a
spiral 3 hole notebook. Even without his admission to the Dean’s Designate, it seems clear that
Mr. C copied his answer to Question 5 of the Assignment directly from the Chegg.com website.
27.

The Umenyi Affidavit goes on to explain that, in addition to the information provided

above concerning Mr. C, the University requested that the website administrators for Chegg.com
provide any evidence of the use of their website involving the Student’s name or the email
address associated with the ROSI Account. No information was received from the website
administrators in response to this request.
28.

Mr. Centa submitted that this response demonstrates only that the Student did not access

the website using her own name or the ROSI Account, but it does not eliminate the possibility
that she had accessed the Chegg Solution under another name or using a different email address.
We agree that this is a reasonable conclusion that can be drawn from this evidence.

10
29.

The panel deliberated to consider all of the evidence summarized above. We concluded

that the Student had either copied her answer to Question 5 of the Assignment directly from the
Chegg Solution, or she had obtained and copied her answer from Mr. C’s answer (which was, on
his own admission, a copy of the Chegg Solution).
30.

In our view, the Provost has established on a balance of probabilities that the Student

obtained unauthorized assistance with Question 5 of the Assignment, and also knowingly
represented the work of another as her own work. We have reached these conclusions without
receiving any evidence that definitively establishes whether the Student obtained her answer
directly from the website or indirectly from Mr. C.
31.

On this issue, Assistant Discipline Counsel pointed to two decisions of this Tribunal,

namely the case of the University of Toronto and S.K (Case 595, October 12, 2010) and the case
of the University of Toronto and Ms. B (Case No. 2003/04-1, April 7, 2004). In his submission,
these two cases demonstrate that the Provost is not required to definitively prove the method by
which a student has committed the offences of unauthorized assistance or plagiarism, as long as
the required elements of these offences are made out.
32.

We found the case of Ms. B particularly helpful on this point. In that case, the accused

student was found to have used unauthorized assistance and to have committed plagiarism in an
examination by using content copied word for word from a website. The evidence before the
Tribunal in that case did not establish whether the content had been brought into the exam room
through study notes, or whether the student had found a means of accessing the website directly
during the exam. In considering this scenario, the Tribunal wrote:
We are therefore left with the evidence of the website and the notes and the examination. The
examination was copied from one or both of the other two. We don’t know how Ms. B. accessed

11
the website or the notes during the period of the test. We do know that she did so as there is no
other explanation for how the material was reproduced. We find that the University has provided
clear and convincing evidence that Ms. B. violated the Code. We find her guilty of the offences
set out in B.I.1(b) and (d) of the Code.

33.

In this case, we found that the evidence of the message that the Instructors sent to all of

the students in the Course on June 4, 2020, in which they made it clear that the students were to
prepare their answers to the Assignment independently, significantly diminishes the likelihood
that the Student’s actions in obtaining assistance with her answer to Question 5 and passing the
answer that she obtained off as her own were inadvertent. Like the Tribunal in the case of Ms.
B, this Panel is persuaded that the answer provided by the Student to Question 5 of the
Assignment reflects both unauthorized assistance and plagiarism, and for that reason we entered
a conviction on both Charge 1 and Charge 2.
34.

Before we leave the question of liability, we note that there is one piece of evidence that

we determined that we should expressly exclude from our consideration of the Student’s guilt.
Specifically, one of the exhibits to the Eskandari Affidavit contains a printout of an email
exchange between the Student and Mr. Eskandari that took place beginning on June 15, 2020.
35.

In the initiating message of that exchange, Mr. Eskandari communicated to the Student

that he believed that he had “strong evidence” that she had cheated in providing her responses to
the Assignment, and asked her to meet with him to discuss the matter. Subsequent exchanges
show attempts to schedule the requested meeting, concluding with Mr. Eskandari asking the
Student whether she admitted having committed an academic offence in submitting her answer
to Question 5 of the Assignment. In response to this question the Student appears to make
certain admissions and provides certain potentially mitigating information.

12
36.

In reviewing this exchange, we were concerned that its contents, and particularly the

Student’s final response to Mr. Eskandari, might constitute a student’s statement made to an
instructor in the course of an initial meeting to discuss a potential academic offence. Paragraph 2
of section C.i.(a) of the Code expressly requires that:
Where an instructor has reasonable grounds to believe that an academic offence has been
committed by a student, the instructor shall so inform the student immediately after learning of
the act or conduct complained of, giving reasons, and invite the student to discuss the matter.
Nothing the student says in such a discussion may be used or receivable in evidence against the
student.

37.

In considering this email exchange, we decided that it did contain a student’s statement

within the meaning of this provision. Given the state of the COVID-19 pandemic at the time, the
Assignment was administered online and students were likely not easily able to meet with the
Instructors in person. Communications that might normally have occurred in face-to-face
meetings were therefore shifted, in whole or in part, into other forms of online communication,
including into email messages.
38.

In our view, this provision of the Code is intended to afford a zone of privacy to initial

meetings between students and instructors where concerns are outlined by the instructor and the
student provides an initial response to those concerns. This zone of privacy is, we believe,
provided by the Code in order to encourage student candour as well as the early and informal
resolution of academic integrity concerns. On the facts of this case, and in particular in light of
Mr. Eskandari’s pointed question to the Student regarding whether she had committed an
academic offence in providing her answer to Question 5 of the Assignment, we find that this
email exchange formed part of the required initial dialogue, which later continued in the meeting
held over Zoom on July 3, 2020.

13
39.

For that reason, we have expressly excluded the contents of this email exchange from our

consideration of the Student’s guilt. In our view, the Provost’s remaining evidence establishes,
to the required standard of proof, that the Student is guilty of both Charge 1 and Charge 2.
40.

In light of our findings on the first and second charges, the Provost withdrew the third

charge.
E.

Sanction

41.

The Provost sought an order imposing the following sanctions on the Student:
(a)

a final grade of zero in MAT135H1F (20205);

(b)

a suspension from the University for two years from the date of the order; and

(c)

a notation of the sanction on her academic record and transcript for three years
from the date of the order.

42.

Assistant Discipline Counsel submitted a book of authorities, including a chart

summarizing the sanctions imposed in the cases submitted. We found that these authorities
provided a helpful summary of the range of sanctions that are normally imposed by the Tribunal
in cases involving unauthorized assistance and plagiarism.
43.

We are conscious that the Tribunal, in determining the appropriate sanction in a given

case, should generally consider the factors set out in the decision of the University of Toronto v.
Mr. C. (Case No. 1976/77-3, November 5, 1976) , namely (a) the character of the person
charged; (b) the likelihood of a repetition of the offence; (c) the nature of the offence committed;
(d) any extenuating circumstances surrounding the commission of the offence; (e) the detriment
to the University occasioned by the offence; and (f) the need to deter others from committing a
similar offence.

14
44.

As we discussed earlier in these reasons, however, the Student did not attend the hearing

or seek to tender any evidence in the discipline process. There was thus no evidence before us of
the Student’s character, any possible explanation for the offences or any mitigating
circumstances that might exist. There was no evidence before us as to whether the Student had
any prior record of academic offences, and so we proceeded on the assumption that these were
the Student’s first offences.
45.

Cases such as the University of Toronto and G.Z (Case No. 1004, February 26, 2020),

the University of Toronto and Y.Y (Case No. 851, March 1, 2017 (Sanction)) and the University
of Toronto and Q.J. L (Case No. 914, February 18, 2018) show that for students with no prior
offences, a conviction for unauthorized assistance and/or plagiarism invariably results in a mark
of 0 in the affected course. The cases tendered by Assistant Discipline Counsel likewise show
that a suspension of 2 to 3 years, and a notation for 3 to 4 years are generally imposed in addition
to the mark of 0. We were therefore satisfied that the sanctions proposed by the Provost were
proportional to those that have been awarded in similar cases.
46.

We were not provided with the details of the sanctions that Mr. C received for these same

offences. Assistant Discipline Counsel submitted that Mr. C’s case had been dealt with entirely
through the more informal procedures set out in section C.i.(a) of the Code, referred to as the
“Divisional Procedures”. The Code expressly provides that offences that are addressed under the
Divisional Procedures are subject to distinct and generally less severe sanctions as set out in
section C.i.(b) of the Code, titled “Divisional Sanctions”. We accepted this submission and
based our decision on sanction purely on the Tribunal precedents that were provided to us.

15
47.

We did, however, modify one aspect of the requested sanctions as we were concerned

that, given the timing of this hearing, a full two-year suspension would prohibit the Student from
enrolling in courses for both the first and the second term of the 2023-2024 academic year. That
aspect of the sanction therefore had the potential to have a harsher effect than we intended,
particularly given that the Initial Hearing was held in December of 2021. We decided that the
Student’s suspension should end on December 31, 2023.
48.

At the conclusion of the hearing, and for the reasons outlined above, we signed an order

imposing the following sanctions on the Student:
a)

a final grade of zero in MAT135H1F (20205);

b)

a suspension from the University from the date of the order to December 31,
2023;

c)

a notation of the sanction on her academic record and transcript for three years
from the date of the order; and

d)

that the case be reported to the Provost for publication of a notice of the
decision of the Tribunal and the sanctions imposed, with the name of the
Student withheld.

Dated at Toronto, this 22nd day of February, 2022.
Original signed by:
____________________________________
Ms. Alexandra Clark, Chair
On behalf of the Panel

