Case 1262

   [1]Case 1262 - Appeal

   DATE:

   February 22, 2022

   PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v. G.L. ("the Student")

   HEARING DATE:

   January 11, 2022, via Zoom

   PANEL MEMBERS:

   Ms. Alexandra Clark, Chair
   Professor Richard Day, Faculty Panel Member
   Ms. Alena Zelinka, Student Panel Member

   APPEARANCES:

   Mr. Robert Centa, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland
   Rosenberg Rothstein LLP
   Mr. William Webb, Co-Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg Rothstein LLP

   NOT IN ATTENDANCE:

   The Student

   HEARING SECRETARY:

   Ms. Carmelle Salomon-Labbe, Associate Director, Office of Appeals,
   Discipline and Faculty Grievances

   The‚ØStudent‚Øwas charged under s. B.i.1(b)‚Øof the‚ØCode of Behaviour
   on Academic Matters, 1995‚Ø(the ‚Code‚) on the basis that she knowingly
   used or possessed an authorized aid or obtained unauthorized assistance
   in connection with an assignment. The Student was also charged under s.
   B.i.1(d) of the Code on the basis that she knowingly represented as her
   own an idea or expression of an idea, and/or the work of another in
   assignment. In the alternative of each of the forgoing charges,
   the‚ØStudent‚Øwas charged under s.‚ØB.i.3(b) of the‚ØCode‚Øon the basis
   that she‚Øknowingly engaged in a form of cheating, academic dishonesty
   or misconduct, fraud or misrepresentation‚Øin order to‚Øobtain academic
   credit or other academic advantage‚Øin connection with an assignment.

   The Panel waited 30 minutes to allow the Student to appear for the
   hearing. Neither the Student nor a legal representative of
   the‚ØStudent‚Øappeared. Assistant Discipline Counsel requested that the
   Panel proceed with the hearing in the absence of the Student. The Panel
   received evidence that this matter had come before a different Panel at
   an earlier date (‚Initial Hearing‚). The Panel of the Initial Hearing
   found that the Student had been properly served with the notice of the
   Initial Hearing but decided to grant a short adjournment to give the
   Student one final opportunity to address the allegations. The
   University provided evidence that subsequent to the Initial Hearing,
   Assistant Discipline Counsel was in contact with the Student via email
   who agreed to a Zoom meeting with Assistant Discipline Counsel which
   she failed to attend. The Student failed to respond to any further
   communication. The Panel noted that the University‚s Policy on Official
   Correspondence with Students require students to maintain a current and
   valid postal address and an address for a University-issued email
   account. Furthermore, students are required to update their records
   when this information changed, and to monitor and retrieve their mail
   and email on a frequent and consistent basis. The Panel noted the
   Student responded to emails that contained the required information
   concerning the revised hearing date and time. Based on the foregoing,
   the Panel found that the Student had received reasonable notice of the
   hearing and the charges in accordance with rules 9, 13, and 14 of the
   Tribunal‚s Rules of Practice and Procedure (‚Rules‚) and s. 6 of the
   Statutory Powers and Procedures Act (‚SPPA‚). The Panel ordered that
   the hearing proceed in the absence of the Student in accordance with
   rule 17 of the Rules and s. 7 of the SPPA.

   Regarding the charges under ss. B.i.1(b) and B.i.1(d) of the Code, the
   Panel admitted affidavit evidence in accordance with rule 61 of the
   Rules. The Panel noted that the affidavit of one of the Professors that
   taught the course for which the assignment in question was submitted
   attached copies of the Student‚s assignment and the assignment of
   another student in the course (the ‚Other Student‚). The Professor‚s
   affidavit outlined that both students used the same words and
   mathematical expressions in their answer. Furthermore, the Professor
   outlined that it would be extremely unlikely that the presentation of
   two solutions would be almost identical and given the number and degree
   of similarities, it was highly unlikely that the similarities were
   coincidental. The Panel also considered the affidavit of an Academic
   Integrity Specialist with the Office of Student Academic Integrity in
   the Faculty of Arts and Science (‚AIS‚). The Panel noted that the AIS‚
   affidavit outlined that she had been assigned to investigate
   allegations that a number of students has committed academic offences
   with respect to this assignment, including the Student and the Other
   Student. The AIS attended a Dean‚s meeting for the Other Student where
   he admitted that he had viewed the answer given on the assignment on
   Chegg.com. He further admitted that he collaborated with another
   student in the course in preparing his answers but claimed to not
   remember the identity of that student. Based on the foregoing evidence,
   the Panel concluded that the Student had either copied her answer on
   the assignment from Chegg.com, or she obtained and copied her answer
   from the Other Student. The Panel found that the University established
   on a balance of probabilities that the Student obtained unauthorized
   assistance with the assignment, and also knowingly represented the work
   of another as her own. The Panel entered a conviction on the first and
   second charge. The University withdrew the charge made in the
   alternative.

   In determining sanction,‚Øthe‚ØPanel received various authorities
   dealing with similar offences involving unauthorized assistance and
   plagiarism. The Panel considered the factors set out in the University
   of Toronto v. Mr. C (Case No. 1976/77-3, November 5, 1976). The Panel
   noted that there was no evidence of the Student‚s character, any
   possible explanation for the offences or any mitigating circumstances;
   there was also no evidence of any prior record of academic offence, so
   the Panel proceeded on the assumption that these were the Student‚s
   first offences. The Panel noted that the authorities outline that a
   suspension of two to three years, a notation for three to four years,
   and a mark of zero in the course are generally imposed in similar
   cases. Based on the foregoing, the Panel was satisfied that the
   sanctions proposed by the University were proportional to those that
   have been awarded in similar cases and based its decision on sanction
   purely on the Tribunal precedents. The Panel reduced the duration of
   the suspension because a full two-year suspension would prohibit the
   Student from enrolling in courses in the 2023-2024 academic year and
   this would have imposed a harsher penalty than the Panel intended. The
   Panel imposed the following sanctions: final grade of zero in the
   course; a 23-month suspension; a three-year notation on transcript; and
   a report to the Provost for publication.

   NOTE: This case was appealed. The Discipline Appeals Board dismissed
   the Appeal.
   [2]View Case

References

   1. https://governingcouncil.utoronto.ca/case-summary/case-1262-appeal
   2. file:///media/30268
