THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
TRIAL DIVISION
IN THE MATTER OF charges of academic misconduct made on May 17, 20 13,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic
Matters, 1995,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Act, 1971 , S.O. 1971, c. 56 as amended
S.0. 1978, C. 88
BETWEEN:
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
-AND -

REASONS FOR DECISION

Hearing Dates: September 13, 2013

Members of the Panel:
Mr. John A. Keefe, Baffister and Solicitor, Chair
Professor Wayne Enright, Department of Computer Science, Faculty Panel Member
Ms. Saneea Tanvir, Student Panel Member
Appearances:
Ms. Tina Lie, Assistant Discipline Counsel for the University, Paliare Roland Barristers
Mr. Jeff Marshman, Legal Case Worker for the Student, Downtown Legal Services
M s . ~ ~' the Student

In Attendance:
Dr. Kristi Gourlay, Manager of Office of Academic Integrity, Faculty of Arts and Science
Mr. Christopher Lang, Director, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances
Ms. Sinead Cutt, Administrative Assistant, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances

1.

A hearing was held on September 13, 2013, by the Trial Division of the University

Tribunal to consider twelve charges under the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on
Academic Matters , 1995 (the "Code") laid against Ms. ~

~ (the "Student") by

letter dated May 17, 2013, from Professor Jay Pratt, Acting Vice-Provost, Faculty and Academic
Life.
2.

The Student, ~

~ attended the hearing with a legal representative from

Downtown Legal Services. The hearing proceeded on the basis of an Agreed Statement of Facts
and a Joint Submission on Penalty.
Charges

3.

The Notice of Hearing is dated August 21, 2013. There are twelve charges in total. They

are summarized below. The charges relate to four separate emails sent by the Student to four
separate professors, each dated April 9, 2013. It is alleged that the emails and their attachments
contained false or falsified information. Specifically, they each contained the same statement
that the Student had been granted conditional acceptance to the Pharmacology and Toxicology
Graduate Program at the University of Toronto and each attached what purported to be the
Student's academic record that on its face purported to be a formal University record which was
falsified, fo rged and contained a false record of the Students academic performance.
4.

The background leading to these emails is that the Student was applying to the Master of

Science program in Pharmacology (the "Graduate Program") with the Department of
Pharmacology and Toxicology at the University of Toronto (the "Department"). It was a
requirement of the Graduate Program that the Student complete a thesis. In order to meet this
requirement, each student was required to have graduate supervisor. The graduate supervisor's
role is to take primary responsibility for assisting the student to complete the research and thesis
requirements of the Graduate Program. The statement contained in the emails that the Student
had been given conditional acceptance to the Graduate Program was false. At the time the letters
were written, the Department had not accepted the Student into the Graduate Program. The
Student had been advised that her application would be placed "on hold" pending receipt of her
fi nal grades for the winter 20 13 term. The University record which was attached to the emails
was falsified and contained false information. It was a forged document in that it purported to be

-3-

an official University of Toronto transcript setting out the Student's results. In fact, it was not
an official transcript and the course grades were not consistent with the Students performance in
these courses.
5.

By the fall of 2012 term, the Student had accumulated 15.5 credits and had a cumulative

GPA of 1.90. The transcripts submitted by the Student to the Professors showed a cumulative
GPA of 3.88. The grades shown on the transcripts showed very high marks in the A and A+
category, whereas, in fact, her actual marks were much lower.
6.

The Student sent the identical email to four different professors requesting that they act as

her graduate supervisor.
7.

The Student was charged with three separate charges relating to each of the four emails,

thereby making the total number of charges twelve.
8.

In the Agreed Statement of Facts, the Student indicated that she was willing to plead

guilty to charges 1, 2, 4, 5, 7, 8, 10 and 11. Counts 1, 4, 7 and 10 relate to the false information
contained in the emails. These charges were laid under s. B.i. l.(a) of the Code which provides
that it shall be an offence for a student knowingly:
(a)

to forge or in any other way alter or falsify any document or
evidence required by the University, or to utter, circulate or make
use of any such forged, altered or falsified document, whether the
record be in print or electronic form;

9.

Charges 2, 5, 8, and 11 relate to the false academic record attached to the four emails

addressed to the professors.

Those charges were laid under S. B.i.3.(a) of the Code which

provides that it shall be an offence for a faculty member and student knowingly:
(a)

to forge or in any other way alter or falsify any academic record,
or to utter, circulate or make use of any such forged, altered or
falsified record, whether the record be in print or electronic form;

-4-

10.

Counts 3, 6, 9 and 12 relate to the four emails and false academic records and allege a

form of general misconduct, fraud and misrepresentation, contrary to s. B.i. 3.(b) of the Code,
which provides that it shall be an offence for a faculty member and student alike knowingly:
(a)

to engage in any form of cheating, academic dishonesty or
misconduct, fraud or misrepresentation not herein otherwise
described, in order to obtain academic credit or other academic
advantage of any kind;

11.

After reviewing the background facts and the Agreed Statement of Facts, the panel

expressed its concern with respect to whether the emails (which relate to charges 1, 4, 7 and 10)
could properly be characterized as documents that are forged, altered or falsified. We noted that
the documents themselves are not forged, altered or falsified. The information contained in the
documents is false, fraudulent and a misrepresentation, but the documents themselves are not
falsified.
12.

After some discussion and deliberation, the University and the Student agreed to amend

the Agreed Statement of Facts, so that the Student would plead guilty to charges 3, 6, 9 and 12
under s. B.1.3.(b) of the Code, in relation to the emails instead of charges 1, 4, 7 and 10. She
would also plead guilty to counts 2, 5, 8 and 11, under s. B.i.3.(a) in relation to the academic
histories. The University and the Student both consented to these changes. The Tribunal was
assured that these changes would have no bearing on the proposed disposition in the Joint
Submission on Penalty.
13.

After reviewing the emails, the attachments to them and the Agreed Statement of Facts,

the Tribunal deliberated and advised that it was prepared to accept a guilty plea to charges 3, 6, 9
and 12 relating to the emails and counts 2, 5, 8, and 11, relating to the academic histories.
this basis, the University agreed to withdraw charges 1, 4, 7, and 10.

On

-5-

Sanction

14.

The parties then submitted a Joint Submission on Penalty. The University and Student

jointly submitted that, in the circumstances of this case, it would be appropriate for the
University to impose the following sanction:
(a)

a five-year suspension from the University of Toronto;

(b)

a notation of the sanction on the Student's academic record and transcript for a
period of seven year;

(c)

that the case shall be reported to the Provost for publication of a notice of the
decision of the Tribunal and a sanction imposed in the University of Toronto
newspapers, with the name of the student withheld.

15.

The Student acknowledged that she had signed the Joint Submission on Penalty freely

and voluntarily, knowing of the potential consequences.
16.

The Joint Submission on Penalty was signed by the Student, on August 26, 2013 and by

the University Assistant Discipline Counsel, on August 29, 2013.
17.

After considering the submissions of the University, and the Student, the Tribunal

deliberated and concluded that it was prepared to accept the Joint Submission on Penalty.
Sanction and Reasons:

18.

In accepting the sanction set out in the Joint Submission on Penalty, the Tribunal

considered submissions of University counsel and the legal representative of the Student as well
as the cases referred to by both parties.

The Tribunal noted that there is a high threshold for

rejecting a joint submission on penalty. The Tribunal was referred to case law in the courts and
other decisions of the Tribunal. The Tribunal accepts that rejecting a joint submission on penalty
would be limited to cases where the Tribunal concluded that to accept the joint submission
would bring the administration of justice into disrepute.

The Tribunal concluded that in this

case, it was appropriate to accept the Joint Submission on Penalty.

-619.

The Tribunal concluded that the penalty agreed to by the parties in the Joint Submission

on Penalty achieves the appropriate balancing of all the relevant sentencing principles, the most
important of which, we will set out below.
20.

The Student was in her final year of her academic career at the University. In fact, she

only has one credit remaining in order to graduate. At the earliest possible opportunity, the
Student acknowledged her wrongdoing. She cooperated throughout. She attended the hearing.
She pleaded guilty. At the hearing, she expressed her genuine remorse for what she had done and
her understanding of the mistake she had made.
2 1.

With respect to the offence itself, this is a first offence. The Student had no prior record

of academic misconduct. The Student was currently enrolled at George Brown College in a
related health care field. The Tribunal recognized that, based on the agreed sanction, she will not
be able to complete her academic work and to graduate for at least five years, which is a
significant penalty in the circumstances.
22.

The offence of forging an academic transcript is viewed by the University as at the most

serious end of the range of sanctions. In the absence of some of the mitigating factors referred to
above, the sanction could very well have been expulsion. Forging or falsifying an academic
history is among the most serious offences a student can commit. The University's reputation
and credibility depends on the reliability of its official records.

This type of offence is

detrimental to the University and it is important that others are deterred from engaging in similar
conduct. The Tribunal also noted that considerable planning and deliberation went into the
falsification of the academic records in this case.

The alteration of the marks was not

insignificant. It was widespread and there was a considerable disparity between the results set
out in the falsified academic records and to her actual results.
23.

The falsification of records of transcripts strikes at the heart of the honesty and integrity

which is at the core of the academic experience and evaluation. In the Decision of University
Tribunal in the matter of~~~ (Case #508; October 14, 2008), a Judicial Board
established by the Governing Council stated as follows at paragraph 18:
"As to the nature of the offence and the detriment to the University, we note that
the integrity of the University as an educational institution and as a degree-

-7-

granting body is fundamental to the academic relationship. Many important third
parties, including potential employers, members of the public and other
institutions of higher education rely on records of transcripts and of degrees as
correctly representing the academic achievements of those to whom they are
awarded. Falsification of records of transcripts and of degrees strikes at the heart
of the honesty and integrity which is at the core of the academic experience and
evaluation. It undermines not only the credibility of the University but also the
credibility of other students who have legitimately achieved the marks and
degrees recorded in such records. It is important that when confronted by such
falsificati on, the University treat, and be seen to treat, such conduct very serious."
24.

Similarly, in the University of Toronto vs. ~

I9, (Case #637; May 2007), at

paragraph 53 the Tribunal stated:
"What can be said overall is that this Tribunal and its predecessors have, by and
large, treated the falsification of an academic record as a most serious offence,
striking directly at the core values of the University, and demonstrating a
fundamental failure to act with the integrity and the necessary shared values of
honesty and standards which members of the University community must display
and adhere to. Expulsion from the University or recall of the degree has more
often than not been the penalty imposed for falsified repo1ting. One sees in the
cases some emphasis on the deception of third parties as particularly offensive
conduct and of course this is present in this case.

Acts of falsification and

deception like these are intentional and purposeful and, as here, there is no room
for any suggestion of mere negligence or even recklessness as mitigating
features."
25.

University Counsel provided us with a cha1t setting out the range of penalties imposed for

forgery in other cases coming before the Tribunal. It is clear from a review of this chart that, in
many cases, including those involving first offenders, expulsion is quite common.

-8-

26.

Overall, we believe that the imposition of a five year suspension as agreed to in the Joint

Submission on Penalty in this case, is appropriate in these circumstances.

It is the highest

possible penalty short of expulsion.
27.

Accordingly, the Tribunal concluded that the agreed sanctions in the Joint Submission on

Penalty were appropriate and we agreed to accept them.
28.

Prior to finalizing the disposition of the penalty phase at the hearing, the Tribunal noted

that the Joint Submission on Penalty contemplated a five year suspension commencing on the
day the tribunal made its Order. The Tribunal noted that if the suspension took effect from the
day of the hearing, the Student would, in fact, be suspended for more than five years because the
Tribunal was sitting on September 13, 2013, which is after the commencement of the 2013-2014
winter term.

Accordingly, the Tribunal, with the consent of the University and the Student,

amended the Joint Submission on Penalty to provide that the suspension and the notation of the
sanction would commence on August 26, 2013, which is the date of the Student's signature on
the Joint Submission on Penalty.
Conclusion

29.

Accordingly, the Panel imposes the following sanctions:
(i)

a five year suspension from the University of Toronto to commence on,
August 26, 2013;

(ii)

a notation of the sanction be recorded on her academic record and
transcript for a period of seven years to commence on August 26, 2013;
and

(iii)

this case be reported to the Provost for publication of a notice of decision
of the Tribunal and the sanctions imposed in the University of Toronto
newspapers, with the name of the student withheld.

-9day of October, 2013.

