Case 746

DATE:

   January 14, 2015

PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v Y.W.

Hearing Date(s):

   December 12, 2014

Panel Members:

   Bernard Fishbein, Chair
   Michael Saini, Faculty Member
   Susan Mazzatto, Student Member

Appearances:

   Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel

In Attendance:

   Raymond Grinnell, Senior Lecturer
   Nikki Alber, Graduate Student,
   Wayne Dowler, Deanâs Designate, UTS
   Natalie Ramtahal, Coordinator, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty
   Grievances

Not in Attendance:

   The Student
   Student charged with an offence under s. B.i.1(b) , and in the
   alternative, an offense under s. B.i.3(b) of the Code . The Student did
   not attend the hearing but the Panel was satisfied that the Student had
   reasonable notice of the hearing and had been served several affidavits
   in accordance with the Rules of Practice and Procedure of the
   University Tribunal. The Panel proceeded in accordance with the
   University Tribunal Rules of Practice and Procedure.
   The charges related to possession of both a calculator with
   unauthorized functions, and notes during an exam. An invigilator
   testified that there was written and spoken instruction that certain
   calculators with special functions would not be permitted for use on
   the exam. She further checked every studentâs calculator and found that
   the Student had an illegal calculator with notes and formulas attached
   to the back and case of the calculator. The Student denied that the
   notes were for the course, had the calculator confiscated, and was
   permitted to write the exam.
   The instructor for the course testified that certain calculators were
   illegal as they defeated the purpose of the exam. He reviewed the
   confiscated calculatorâs functions and demonstrated that it was one of
   the types that was banned form the exam. He also testified that the
   notes were blatantly for the course.
   The University submitted that the Student had blatantly violated s.
   B.i.1(b) of the Code , knowingly using an illegal calculator and notes,
   and further had not participated in the proceedings. The University
   sought a penalty including a grade of zero in the course, a two year
   suspension from the date from the hearing, a notation on the Studentâs
   transcript for three years from the date of the hearing, and that the
   case be reported for publication.
   The Panel unanimously ruled that the Student had violated s. B.i.1(b)
   of the Code and the University withdrew the alternative charge.
   Although it was a first offense, the Panel found no mitigating
   circumstances and that a two year suspension was the ordinary sanction
   in similar circumstances.
   The Panel imposed the sanctions sought by the University but noted that
   a lesser sanction may have been imposed as the exam rules did not call
   for confiscation of calculators, but only that they be turned off.
   However, because of the extensive notes on the calculator, the Panel
   agreed with the Universityâs proposed sanctions.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12865
