Case No.: 867
THE UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO

IN THE MATTER OF charges of academic dishonesty made on May 16, 2016.
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters,

1995,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto, Act, 1971, S.O. 1971, c. 56 as amended

S.0. 1978, C. 88.

BETWEEN:
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
-and-

-LIii
REASONS FOR DECISION

Date of Hearing: October 17, 2016
Members of the Panel:
Mr. Michael Hines, Barrister and Solicitor, Chair
Professor Ernest Lam, Faculty Panel Member
Ms. Ashley Ramnaraine, Student Panel Member
Appearances:
Ms. Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Barristers
Ms. Lucy Gaspini, Manager, Academic Integrity and Affairs, University of Toronto, Mississauga
Ms. Laura Ferlito, Assistant Registrar, Academic Standards and Petitions, University of Toronto,
Mississauga
In Attendance:
Ms. Tracey Gameiro, Associate Director, Office of the Appeals, Discipline and Faculty
Grievances
Not in Attendance:
Mr.
(the "Student")

21111 LI

-2-

Charges and Hearing

This panel of the University Tribunal held a hearing on October 17, 2016 to consider the
charges brought by the University of Toronto against •
("the Student") under the
Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters, 1995,

t.11

Procedural Issues

1.

The Student was charged with the Offences set out in Appendix A, attached.
Essentially, they relate to the alleged falsification of academic transcripts and
other academic credentials purportedly issued by the University concerning· the
Student. These were allegedly used by the Student in an attempt to gain
admission to an educational institution in another country.

2.

The Student did not appear at the hearing. The University requested an Order
that the Hearing proceed in his absence, relying on the Affidavit of Virginia
Fletcher, a law clerk employed by the law firm of Paliare Roland Rosenberg
Rothstein LLP. This Affidavit satisfied the panel that all reasonable efforts had
been made to locate the Student and bring to his attention the fact that he was
facing prosecution in this Hearing. Accordingly, the Tribunal granted the
requested Order. That Order is hereby confirmed.

Evidence and Findings

3.

The University then led its evidence through the testimony of Laura Ferlito,
Acting Assistant Registrar, Academic Standards and Petitions in the Office of the
Registrar at the University's Mississauga Campus. The. following facts were
established to the Tribunal's satisfaction:
(a)

The Student was enrolled at the University of Toronto Mississauga and
was registered in courses from Fall 2009 through Winter 2012.

(b)

In order to obtain academic qualification accreditation by an educational
institution in a foreign country, the Student created, altered, falsified and
. circulated a degree certificate purporting to admit him to the University of
Toronto degree of Bachelor of Business Administration on June 1, 2012,
and provided that falsified document to that institution.

(c)

He further provided to the institution, for the same purpose, a document
entitled "Transcript of Consolidated Academic Record" which he
represented to be an official transcript of his academic record. He knew or
ought to have known that this document falsely represented his academic
record in that it:

-3-

4.

{i)

indicated that he had graduated from the University with an
Honours Bachelor of Business Administration degree in 2012,· when
he had not;

(ii)

misrepresented the grades that he earned in courses that he had
completed;

{iii)

misrepresented his sessional grade.point averages;

(iv)

misrepresented his cumulative grade point averages;

(v)

listed courses in which he was never enrolled;

(vi)

listed grades for courses he had not taken;

(vii)

indicated he had been enrolled in the 2008 Fall and 2009 Winter
terms when he was not;

(viii)

misrepresented his academic status in the 2011 Winter term when
he was on academic probation and the 2012 Winter term when he
was suspended for one year.

Based upon these findings, the Tribunal entered a finding of guilty on Counts 1
and 2 of the Charges as set out in Appendix A.

Penalty
5.

The University submitted that the offences as proven demonstrate the most
serious lack of academic and· personal integrity. They threaten the reputation of
the University and the students who pursue their degrees honestly and diligently.
The University sought a penalty that would include a recommendation from the
Tribunal that the Student be expelled from the University.

6.

The Tribunal is in full agreement with the University in terms of the gravity of the
offences and the need to impose the most severe penalty available to it.
Accordingly, we hereby order that:
(a)

The Student shall immediately be suspended from the University for a
period of up to five years;

(b)

The Tribunal recommends to the President of the University that he
recommend to the Governing Council that the Student be expelled from
the University;

(c)

A permanent notation be placed on the Student's academic record and
transcript; and

-4-

(d)

This case shall be reported to the Provost for publication of a notice of the
decision of the Tribunal and the sanctions imposed, with the name of the
student withheld.

Dated at Toronto this 1.

Michael Hines, Chair

'!'/(day of January, 2017.

APPENDIX A

UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO

2111111 LIIII
CHARGES

Note: Wherever in the Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters, 1995 ("Code") an offence
is described as depending on "knowing", the offence shall likewise be deemed to have
been committed if the person ought reasonably to have known.
1.

In or about April and/or May, 2015, you knowingly forged, or in any other way

altered or falsified an academic record, and/or uttered, circulated or made use of such
forged, altered or falsified record, namely, a degree certificate purporting to admit you to
the University of Toronto degree of Bachelor of Business Administration on June 1, 2012,
contrary to Section B.l.3(a) of the Code.
2.

In or about April and/or May, 2015, you knowingly forged, or in any other way

altered or falsified an academic record, and/or uttered, circulated or made use of such
forged, altered or falsified record, namely a document entitled "Transcript of Consolidated
Academic Record" that purported to be the official transcript of your academic record from
the University of Toronto, contrary to Section B.1.3(a) of the Code.
3.

In the alternative, in or about April and/or May, 2015, you knowingly engaged in a

form of cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or misrepresentation not
otherwise described in the Code in order to obtain academic credit or other academic
advantage of any kind in connection with the following documents, contrary to section
B.l.3(b) of the Code:
(a)

a degree certificate purporting to admit you to the University of Toronto
degree of Bachelor of Business Administration on June 1, 2012; and

(b)

a document entitled "Transcript of Consolidated Academic Record" that
purported to be the official transcript of your academic record from the
University of Toronto.

2

Particulars
1.

You were a student at the University of Toronto Mississauga and you were

registered in courses from Fall 2009 through Winter 2012.
2.

In order to obtain academic qualification accreditation by the Ministry of Education

in China you created, altered, falsified and/or circulated a degree certificate purporting to
admit you to the University of Toronto degree of Bachelor of Business Administration on
June 1, 2012, which you provided to the Chinese Service Center for Scholarly Exchange
(CSCSE) as representing an authentic degree certificate in your name from the University
of Toronto.
3.

You further provided to the CSCSE, for the same purpose, a document entitled

'Transcript of Consolidated Academic Record" which you represented to be an official
transcript of your academic record. You knew that this document falsely represented your
academic record in every way, including that it:
(a)

indicated that you had graduated from the University with an Honours
Bachelor of Business Administration degree in 2012, when you had not;

(b)

misrepresented all of the grades that you earned in courses that you had
completed;

(c)

misrepresented your sessional grade point averages;

(d)

misrepresented your cumulative grade point averages;

{e)

listed numerous courses in which you were never enrolled;

(f)

listed grades for courses you had not taken;

(g)

indicated you had bee·n en'rolled in the 2008 Fall and 2009 Winter terms
when you were not;

3
(h)

misrepresented your academic status in the 2011 Winter term when you
were on· academic probation and the 2012 Winter term when you were
suspended for one year.

