Case #867

   DATE: January 24, 2017
   PARTIES: University of Toronto v. Z.L. ("the Student")

   Hearing Date(s): October 17, 2016

   Panel Members:
   Mr. Michael Hines, Barrister and Solicitor, Chair
   Professor Ernest Lam, Faculty Panel Member
   Ms. Ashley Ramnaraine, Student Panel Member

   Appearances:
   Ms. Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland
   Barristers

   In Attendance:
   Ms. Tracey Gameiro, Associate Director, Office of the Appeals,
   Discipline and Faculty Grievances
   Ms. Lucy Gaspini, Manager, Academic Integrity and Affairs, University
   of Toronto, Mississauga
   Ms. Laura Ferlito, Assistant Registrar, Academic Standards and
   Petitions, University of Toronto, Mississauga

   Trial Division - s. B.i.3(a) of Code - forging an academic record -
   student forged transcript and degree certificate - student did not
   appear at hearing - proceeding in student's absence - finding of guilt
   - Tribunal imposed most serious penalty available to it in light of
   gravity of offence - expulsion, five year suspension, permanent
   notation

   The Student was charged with forging both a degree certificate and a
   transcript under s. B.i.3(a) of the Code, and in the alternative of
   academic dishonesty under s. B.i.3(b) of the Code. The Student had not
   completed a degree, but knowingly forged a degree certificate stating
   otherwise and a transcript with many false courses and marks. The
   Student used these forgeries to apply for qualification accreditation
   in another country.
   The Student did not appear at the hearing. The University was able to
   prove, through affidavit evidence, that all reasonable efforts had been
   made to locate the student and alert them of the proceedings. Thus the
   Tribunal proceeded in the Student's absence. The Student was found
   guilty of the forgeries on the basis of the University's evidence.

   The University sought and obtained the most serious penalties available
   to it. The Tribunal considered that the offence not only demonstrated a
   serious lack of personal integrity, but undermined the reputation of
   the University. The Student was suspended for five years, recommended
   to be expelled, and had a permanent notation placed on their
   transcript.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12928
