Case #952

   DATE: April 19, 2018
   PARTIES: University of Toronto v. Y.X. (âthe Studentâ)
   Hearing Date(s):Â  Â April 4, 2018
   Panel Members:
   Mr. Paul Michell, Chair
   Professor Bruno Magliocchetti, Faculty Panel Member
   Mr. David Kleinman, Student Panel Member
   Appearances:
   Ms. Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Banisters
   In Attendance:
   Ms. Tracey Gameiro, Associate Director, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty
   Grievances
   Ms. Nisha Panchal, Student Conduct & Academic Integrity Officer, Office
   of the Dean & Vice Principal Academic, University of Toronto
   Scarborough
   Mr. Sean Lourim, Technology Assistant, Office of the Governing Council
   Not in Attendance
   The Student
   Trial Division - s. B.i.3(a) â forged or falsifying documents â
   falsified transcript and academic record used in an application for
   admission and transfer credit âÂ  hearing not attended âÂ  reasonable
   notice provided â recommendation of expulsion, five-year suspension
   pending expulsion, transfer credits revoked, permanent notation on
   transcript, report to the Provost with the Studentâs name withheld.
   The Student was charged with two charges of falsifying or forging an
   academic record contrary to s. B.i.3(a) of the Code, or in the
   alternative, two charges of academic dishonesty not otherwise described
   contrary to s.B.i.3(b) of the Code .Â  The charge related to a forged
   academic record and transcript that the Student submitted in her
   application to UTSC, and then later relied on to obtain 9.5 transfer
   credits at UTSC.
   The Student did not attend the hearing. The Panel found that, even
   though they were in no position to determine if the Student had actual
   notice of the hearing or the charges against her, the Student had
   nonetheless been provided with reasonable notice of the hearing in
   accordance with Rules 9, 13 and 14 of the Rules of Practice and
   Procedure and section 6 of the Statutory Powers Procedure Act .Â  The
   Panel found that the University was entitled to rely on its policy in
   communicating with Students, and that the Universityâs attempts to
   contact the Student by email, courier, phone and social media had
   exceeded what was required of it. The Panel found that if Students
   failed to provide accurate and up-to-date contact information in ROSI,
   or to monitor and retrieve their mail and email on a frequent and
   consistent basis they run the risk that important steps may be taken in
   their absence.
   The Panel considered affidavit evidence from the University
   administrator who had asked SFU to authenticate the Studentâs
   transcript. The affidavit contained SFUâs emailed response to her
   request, that the transcripts lacked a number of the hallmarks of
   authenticity and that the Student had never been enrolled at SFU. Based
   on this evidence, the Panel found the Student to be guilty of forging
   an academic record contrary to s.B.i.3(a) of the Code. Upon the Panelâs
   finding of guilt, the University withdrew the alternative charges of
   academic dishonesty not otherwise described contrary to s.B.i.3(b) of
   the Code .
   The University requested the penalty that: (1) the Panel recommend that
   the Student be expelled; (2) a suspension of up to five years pending
   the decision on expulsion; (3) the 9.5 transfer credits assessed and
   granted as if earned by the Student from SFU be cancelled and removed
   from the Student's academic record; (4) a notation be placed on the
   Studentâs transcript corresponding to the suspension and, once granted,
   a permanent notation as to the expulsion; and (5) the decision be
   published with the Studentâs name withheld. In determining the
   appropriateness of the proposed penalty, the Panel referred to the case
   University of Toronto v. J.Z . [Case No. 928, June 5, 2017] and
   University of Toronto v. M.M. [Case No. 496; April 30, 2009] which
   spoke to the seriousness of the offence of forgery and the harm done to
   the reputation of the University and to the prospective student whose
   spot were taken by the Studentâs dishonesty. The Panel noted that
   because the Student had not participated in the discipline process, it
   had no evidence of any mitigating circumstances. The Panel ordered: (1)
   that the Student be expelled; (2) a suspension of up to five years
   pending the decision on expulsion; (3) the 9.5 transfer credits
   assessed and granted as if earned by the Student from SFU be cancelled
   and removed from the Student's academic record; (4) a notation be
   placed on the Studentâs transcript corresponding to the suspension and,
   once granted, a permanent notation as to the expulsion; and (5) the
   decision be published with the Studentâs name withheld.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12966
