Case #855

   DATE: March 10, 2017
   PARTIES: University of Toronto v. Y.K. ("the Student")

   Hearing Date(s) : December 15, 2016

   Panel Members:
   Ms. Sara Zborovski, Barrister and Solicitor, Chair
   Professor Ato Quayson, Faculty Panel Member
   Mr. Eric Bryce, Student Panel Member

   Appearances:
   Ms. Tina Lie, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland, Barristers
   Ms. Kristi Gourlay, Manager & Academic Integrity Officer, Office of
   Student Academic Integrity
   Professor Clare Wiseman, Dalla Lana School of Public Health, University
   of Toronto

   In Attendance:
   The Student
   Mr. Christopher Lang, Director, Office of the Appeals, Discipline and
   Faculty Grievances

   Trial Division - s. B.i.1(a) of Code - forgery - student altered dates
   on a medical note - student forged another medical note - guilty plea -
   zero on course, expulsion, suspension for five years or until expulsion

   The Student was charged with two counts of forgery under s. B.i.1(a) of
   the Code, and in the alternative with academic dishonesty under s.
   B.i.3(b) of the Code. The Student missed a mid-term worth 25%, and
   submitted a Verification of Illness or Injury form (VII) purporting to
   be signed by a doctor with altered dates to obtain accommodation. Later
   in the same course, the student did not hand in a term paper worth 30%
   when due, and submitted an fabricated VII to obtain an extension.

   The Student pled guilty to the forgeries. The University had affidavit
   evidence from the doctors that the VIIs claimed as their authors
   showing the VIIs to be false. The Tribunal did not register convictions
   on the dishonesty charges.

   The University sought and obtained a zero in the course, a
   recommendation that the student be expelled, and a suspension of the
   student for up to five years or until the Governing Council made its
   decision on expulsion with a corresponding notation on the student's
   transcript. The student had two previous academic convictions for
   plagiarism. This type of forgery is one of the most serious offences,
   and the student's conduct in this case was premeditated and egregious.
   There were no mitigating circumstances.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12933
