Report 292

DATE:

   October 29, 2004

PARTIES:

   Mr. L. (the Student) v. Woodsworth College

Hearing Date(s):

   October 7, 2004

Committee Members:

   Professor Emeritus R. Scane (Chair)
   Professor M. Beattie
   Professor C. Beghtol
   Dr. G. Halbert
   Mr. S. Neata

Secretary:

   Mr. P. Holmes, Judicial Affairs Officer

Appearances:

For the Student:

   Mr. L. (the Student)
   Mr. L. (the Student‚s father)

For Woodsworth College:

   Ms Y. Ali
   Ms S. Isbister
   Principal M. O‚Neill-Karch

   Appeal from a grade of ‚fail‚ in the practicum for the Certificate
   Program in Teaching English as a Second Language. The Student claimed
   that there were flaws in the training and ‚feedback‚ processes of the
   practicum, which adversely affected his performance, and deprived him
   of an opportunity to correct the faults identified. The Student claimed
   that the teacher trainer had rushed him through the programme and did
   not permit him to develop and use his own materials in his teaching.
   The Student also claimed that the teacher trainer did not give him
   current appraisals and that the Academic Coordinator had never visited
   his classroom. With respect to the training process, the Committee
   found that the time frame of the teaching period of the practicum was
   limited by the contract with the School Board and the teacher trainer‚s
   own plans for the class, and that the development of lesson plans was
   not an objective of the practicum. The Committee found no basis for
   finding that the position of the Student was significantly different
   from that of other students in similar placements. With respect to
   ‚feedback‚, the Committee found that the Faculty did not require
   teacher trainers to submit interim reports. The Committee recommended
   that teacher trainers be required to submit an interim report to the
   Faculty, with a copy being given to the student. The Committee found
   that while it was not feasible for the Academic Coordinator to visit
   every student‚s classroom, a written interim report on each student
   would allow the Academic Coordinator to attend classes of the
   relatively few students who appeared to be in trouble. The Committee
   stated that it was unclear as to the weight, if any, of the four hours
   of instruction outside the teacher trainers‚ classrooms, but that if
   the instruction was to be evaluated in determining the final result of
   the practicum, the weight must be determined and published in advance.
   The Committee found that it was not probable that the Student would
   have passed the practicum had the noted procedural matters not existed.
   Appeal dismissed. The Faculty had advised the Committee that the
   Student could retake the practicum, while retaining credit for the
   other courses taken in the program. The Committee recommended that if
   the Student repeats the practicum, the course fees should be waived.
   [1]View Report

References

   1. file:///media/12555
