Case #477

   DATE: May 24, 2006
   PARTIES: University of Toronto v. The Student
   Hearing Date(s): May 18, 2006
   Panel Members:
   Rodica David, Chair
   Professor William Weiss, Faculty Panel Member
   Ms Coralie D‚Souza, Student Panel Member
   Appearances:
   Mr. Robert Centa for the University of Toronto
   Professor Scott Graham
   Ms. Lucy Gaspini
   The Student, by arrangement, did not appear
   Trial Division - s. B.i.1(d), s. B.ii.1(a)(ii), s. B.ii.1(a)(iv), and
   s. B.i.1(b) of Code ‚ plagiarism ‚ assignments copied from assignments
   by another student ‚ Agreed Statement of Facts ‚ hearing not attended ‚
   sworn affidavit provided - guilty plea to charges under s. B.i.1(b), s.
   B.ii.1(a)(ii) and s. B.i.1(d) of Code ‚ Joint Submission on Penalty
   accepted ‚ case of Mr. C criteria addressed and met by sanction - no
   character evidence except admission of guilt and acknowledgement of
   misconduct - grade assignment of zero for course; two-year suspension;
   two-year notation on transcript; and report to Provost
   Student charged with two offences under s. B.i.1(d), six offences under
   s. B.ii.1(a)(ii), six offences under s. B.ii.1(a)(iv), two offences
   under s. B.i.1(b), and alternatively, two offences under s. B.i.3(b) of
   the Code. The charges related to allegations that the Student submitted
   two assignments that very closely resembled assignments handed in by
   another student in the course. The Student did not attend the hearing
   and submitted a sworn affidavit agreeing with the University to the
   facts of the case and agreeing to plead guilty to two offences under s.
   B.i.1(b), two offences under s. B.ii.1(a)(ii) and one offence under s.
   B.i.1(d) of the Code. The Panel considered the agreed set of facts and
   accepted the Student‚s guilty plea. The parties submitted a Joint
   Submission on Penalty. The Panel considered the Joint Submission on
   Penalty, the Student‚s sworn affidavit and previous Tribunal decisions
   and accepted the jointly submitted sanction. The Panel found that all
   the criteria advanced in the case of Mr. C were addressed and met by
   the sanction contemplated by the Joint Submission on Penalty. There was
   no evidence before the Panel, except for the Student‚s admission and
   acknowledgment of misconduct, which spoke to the Student‚s character.
   The sanction reflected the seriousness of the offences. There were no
   extenuating circumstances. The sanction spoke to the detriment to the
   University occasioned by the offences and addressed the University‚s
   interest in deterrence. The Panel imposed a grade of zero in the
   course; a two-year suspension; a two-year notation on the Student‚s
   academic record and transcript; and that a report be issued to the
   Provost.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/28434
