THE UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
IN THE MATTER OF charges of academic dishonesty made in January
28, 2005,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code r>(
Behaviour on Academic Matters. 1995.
AND IN THE MATTER 01<' the University of'Toronto Act, 1971, S.O.
1971, c. 56 as amended S.O. 1978, c. 88

BETWEEN:
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
- andThe Student
Members of the panel:
•
•
•

Rodica David Q.C.. Chair
Professor William Weiss, Faculty Panel Member
Ms Coralie D'Souza. Student Panel Member

Appearances:
•
•
•

Mr. Robert Centa for the University of Toronto
Professor Scott Graham
Ms Lucy Gaspini

•

The Student, by arrangement, did not appear

NOTICE OF HEARING AND CHARGES

I I]

The Trial Division of the University Tribunal was convened on May 18, 2006 to consider
charges under the University of Toronto Code of' Behaviour 011 Academic Matters. 1995
(the "Code"). The Notice of Hearing is dated May 3, 2006. The charges are as follows:
1.

36700

Contrary to Section B.I.l(d) of the Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters (the
"Code). on or about February 13, 2004, you knowingly represented as your own.
an idea or expression of an idea. and/or work of another in connection with a form
of academic work. namely. your assignment entitled "Assignment 2: G!Sney
World: Vector Analysis". which you submitted to fnlfill the course requirements
ofGGR 261.

2

.16700

2.

Contrary to B.11.l(a)(ii) of the Code. on or about February 13, 2004, you
knowingly did or omitted to do something for the purpose of aiding or assisting
Unnamed to commit an offence under section B.l.l(d) of the Code with respect to
his assignment entitled "Assignment #2. Gisney World: Vector Analysis", which
he submitted to fulfill the course requirements of GGR 261.

3.

Contrary to B.11. 1(a)(iv) of the Code, on or about February 13, 2004, you
knowingly abetted. counseled, procured or conspired with Unnamed to commit an
offence under section B.l.l(d) of the Code with respect to his assignment entitled
"Assignment #2. Gisney World: Vector Analysis". which he submitted to fulfill
the course requirements of GGR 261.

4.

Contrary to Section B.L 1.(b) of the Code. on or about February 13, 2004, you
knowingly obtained unauthorized assistance in connection with a form of
academic work. namely, your assignment entitled "Assignment 2: G!Sney World:
Vector Analysis'·. that you submitted to fulfill the course requirements of GGR
261.

5.

Contrary to B.11.1 (a)(ii) of the Code. on or about February 13, 2004, you
knowingly did or omitted to do something for the purpose of aiding or assisting
Unnamed to commit an offence under section B.Ll(b) of the Code with respect to
his assignment entitled "Assignment #2. Gisney World: Vector Analysis", which
he submitted to fulfill the course requirements of GGR 261.

6.

Contrary to B.ll.l(a)(iv) of the Code. on or about February 13, 2004, you
knowingly abetted. counseled, procured or conspired with Unnamed to commit an
offence under section B.Ll(b) of the Code with respect to his assignment entitled
"Assignment #2. Gisney World: Vector Analysis". which he submitted to fulfill
the course requirements of GGR 261.

7.

In the alternative. contrary to Section B.l.3(b) of the Code, on or about February
I 3, 2004. you knowingly engaged in a form of cheating, academic dishonesty or
misconduct, fraud or misrepresentation in order to obtain academic credit or other
academic advantage of any kind in a report entitled "Assignment 2: G!Sney
World: Vector Analysis", which you submitted to fulfill course requirements in
GGR 261.

8.

Contrary to B.11.l(a)(ii) of the Code, on or about February 13, 2004, you
knowingly did or omitted to do something for the purpose of aiding or assisting
Unnamed to commit an offence under section B. L3(b) of the Code with respect to
his assignment entitled "Assignment #2. Gisney World: Vector Analysis", which
he submitled to fulfill the course requirements of GGR 261.

9.

Contrary to B.11.1 (a)(iv) of the Code. on or about February 13, 2004, you
knowingly abetted. counseled, procured or conspired with Unnamed to commit an
offence under section B.l.3(b) of the Code with respect to his assignment entitled
"Assignment #2. Gisney World: Vector Analysis" which he submitted to fulfill
the course requirements of GGR 26 I.

3

:1,6700

JO.

Contrary to Section B.l.l(d) of the Code. on or about April 6. 2004, you
knowingly represented as your own, an idea or expression of an idea, and/or work
of another in connection with a form of academic work, namely, your assignment
entitled "Municipality of GlSney World Site Suitability Analysis Design for the
Optimal Sites for a Pollution Monitoring Station: Raster and Vector Model
Report", which you submitted to fulfill the course requirements of GGR 261.

I I.

Contrary to B.Il.J(a)(ii) of the Code, on or about April 5. 2004, you knowingly
did or omitted to do something for the purpose of aiding or assisting Unnamed to
commit an offence under section B.l.l(d) of the Code with respect to his
assignment entitled "Spatial Analysis Proposal: Locating a Pollution Monitoring
Station". which he submitted to fulfill the course requirements of GGR 261.

12.

Contrary to B.ll.l (a)(iv) of the Code, on or about April 5, 2004, you knowingly
abetted. counseled, procured or conspired with Unnamed to commit an offence
under section B .l.l ( d) of the Code with respect to his assignment entitled "Spatial
Analysis Proposal: Locating a Pollution Monitoring Station", which he submitted
to fulfill the course requirements of GGR 261.

13.

Contrary to Section B.1.1.(b) of the Code, on or about April 6, 2004, you
knowing! y obtained unauthorized assistance in connection with a form of
academic work. namely, your assignment entitled "Municipality of GlSney World
Site Suitability Analysis Design for the Optimal Sites for a Pollution Monitoring
Station: Raster and Vector Model Report'·. that you submitted to fulfill the course
requirements of GGR 261.

14.

Contrary to B.Il.J (a)(ii) of the Code, on or about April 5. 2004. you knowingly
did or omitted to do something for the purpose of aiding or assisting Unnamed to
commit an offence under section B.I.l(b) of the Code with respect to his
assignment entitled "Spatial Analysis Proposal: Locating a Pollution Monitoring
Station··. which he submitted to fulfill the course requirements of GGR 261.

15.

Contrary to B.Il.l(a)(iv) of the Code, on or ahout April 5, 2004, you knowingly
abetted. counseled, procured or conspired with Unnamed to commit an offence
under section B.l.l(b) of the Code with respect to his assignment entitled "Spatial
Analysis Proposal: Locating a Pollution Monitoring Station". which he submitted
to fulfill the course requirements of GGR 261.

16.

ln the alternative. contrary to Section B.l.3(b) of the Code. on or about April 6,
2004, you knowingly engaged in a form of cheating. academic dishonesty or
misconduct. fraud or misrepresentation in order to obtain academic credit or other
academic advantage of any kind in a report entitled "Municipality of G!Sney
World Site Suitability Analysis Design for the Optimal Sites for a Pollution
Monitoring Station: Raster and Vector Model Report". which vou submitted to
fulfill course requirements in GGR 261.

17.

Contrary to B.11.l(a)(ii) of the Code. on or about April 5, 2004. you knowingly
did or omitted to do something for the purpose of aiding or assisting Unnamed to

4

commit an offence under section B.I.3(b) of the Code with respect to his
assignment entitled "Spatial Analysis Proposal: Locating a Pollution Monitoring
Station". which he submitted to fulfill the course requirements of GGR 261.
18.

Contrary to B.IL l(a)(iv) of the Code, on or about April 5, 2004, you knowingly
abetted. counseled, procured or conspired with Unnamed to commit an offence
under section B.l.3(b) of the Code with respect to his assignment entitled "Spatial
Analysis Proposal: Locating a Pollution Monitoring Station" which he submitted
to fulfill the course requirements of GGR 261.

19.

Pursuant to Section B of the Code. you are deemed to have committed the offence
knowingly if you ought reasonably to have known that you
a. represented as your own. an idea or expression of an idea. and/ or work of another
in connection with a form of academic work:
b. used or possessed an unauthorized aid or aids or obtained unauthorized assistance
in any academic examination or term test:
c. engaged in any form of cheating. academic dishonesty or misconduct. fraud or
misrepresentation in order to obtain academic credit:
d. did or omitted to do anything for the purpose of aiding or assisting another
member to commit the offence; or
e. abetted. counseled, procured or conspired with another member to commit or be a
party to an offence.

121

Particulars of the charges are as follows:
l.

You were. at all material times. a student in GGR261S by Professor Csillag the
fall of Winter of 2004.

2.

On or about February 13. 2004. you submitted "Assignment 2: G!Sney World:
Vector Analysis" to fulfill the requirements of GGR261S. Your assignment very
closely resembled the assignment handed in by Unnamed. another student in
GGR261S.

3.

On or about April 6. 2004. you submitted "Municipality of G!Sney World Site
Suitability Analysis Design for the Optimal Sites for a Pollution Monitoring
Station: Raster and Vector Model Report." This assignment very closely
resembled the assignment handed in by Unnamed. another student in GGR261S.

THE HEARING

131

.16700

At the outset of the hearing the Tribunal was advised that the Student was not expected to
appear before the panel. Instead. the Student submitted a sworn affidavit agreeing with
the University to the facts of the case. In the affidavit. the Student agreed to plead guilty
to Charges## 4. 5. 10. 13 and 14. The University withdrew the remaining charges .

5

14]

After reviewing the agreed set of facts set out in the Student's affidavit. the panel
unanimously agreed after deliberation to accept the Student's guilty pleas.

15]

The remainder of the hearing considered the appropriate penalty in the circumstances.

16]

The Tribunal was advised that The Student and the University entered into a Joint
Submission on Penalty. A copy of the Joint Submission on Penalty is attached hereto.

171

The University and the Student jointly submitted that the appropriate penalty was:
1.

2.

That the Student:
( 1)

receive a grade of zero in the course GGR 261:

(2)

he suspended from the University for a period of two years from May 18,
2006 to May 17, 2008; and

(3)

have her academic record and transcript bear a notation of these academic
offences from May 18, 2006 to May 17. 2008.

The University of Toronto and the Student submit that the University should
publish these offences with the Student's name withheld.

18]

Mr. Ccnta for the University presented brief submissions on penalty and presented the
panel with a Book of Authorities. arguing for the appropriateness of the penalty.

I9]

The panel thanked the participants for their submissions and broke to deliberate.

CONCLUSION AND REASONS
I !OJ

ln view of the Joint Submission on Penalty and the Student's sworn affidavit the panel
unanimously accepts the Joint Submission and imposes the jointly submitted sanction
noted above.

I 11 j

The panel notes that. in considering the appropriate sanction, they accept the principle
that a joint submission on penalty cannot be taken lightly and must carry a great deal of
weight.

I 121

Furthermore. the panel has had an oppo11Lmity to review several decisions of other panels
of the University Tribunal and. in panicular. the criteria for sanction first proposed by the
late and former Mr. Justice Sopinka in the matter of the appeal of Mr. C. (November 5,
1976). According to these guidelines, the Tribunal should consider the following six
criteria when deciding on an appropriate sanction:

.16700

( 1)

the character of the person charged:

(2)

the likelihood of a repetition of the offence:

(3)

the nature of the offence committed:

6

(4)

any extenuating circumstances surrounding the commission of the offence;

(5)

the detriment to the university occasioned by the offence;

(6)

the need to deter others from committing a similar offence.

113)

In the present case. with respect to the Student's character. the panel has no evidence
before it except for the student's admissions and acknowledgement of misconduct. This
acknowledgement speaks to some degree of the Student's character.

114)

With respect to the likelihood of repetition. the panel considers the jointly submitted
sanction sufficiently severe that it is their hope that the Student will not offend again.

115 J

The panel considers the offences in question to be serious offences and the sanction it has
imposed reflects this.

116)

There were no extenuating circumstances before the panel.

I 17]

Clearly, in the panel's view. it is not in any way in the interest of the University to
tolerate the offences considered in this hearing. The sanction outlined above and
imposed by the panel speaks to the detriment to the University occasioned by the
offences.

118 I

Similarly. noting in particular the Tribunal's order that the University should publish a
notice of the Tribunal's decision and of the sanctions imposed in this matter with the
student's name withheld. the panel believes that the sanction it has imposed addresses the
University's interest in deterring other students from committing similar offences.

[ 19]

In the panel's view. all of the criteria advanced by the late and former Mr. Justice
Sopinka are addressed and met by the sanction contemplated by the Joint Submission and
imposed by panel.

DATED at Toronto. May 24. 2006

~6700

_______________ . Chair

