Case 1490

   DATE:

   March 19, 2024

   PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v. P.D. ("the Student")

   HEARING DATE:

   December 8 and 11, 2023, via Zoom

   PANEL MEMBERS:

   Alexi Wood, Chair
   Professor Marvin Zuker, Faculty Panel Member
   Cameron Miranda-Radbord, Student Panel Member

   APPEARANCES:
   Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg
   Rothstein LLP
   Ryan Shah, Co-Counsel,Â Paliare Roland Rosenberg Rothstein LLP

   NOT IN ATTENDANCE:

   The Student

   HEARING SECRETARY:

   Samanthe Huang, Coordinator & Hearing Secretary, Office of Appeals,
   Discipline and Faculty Grievances

   The Student was charged under section B.i.1(f) of the Code of Behaviour
   on Academic Matters, 2019 (the âCodeâ) for knowingly submitting
   academic work containing purported statements of fact or references to
   sources that had been concocted, in connection with a thesis submitted
   by the Student. In the alternative, the Student was charged with one
   count under section B.i.3(b) of the Code for knowingly engaging in a
   form of cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or
   misrepresentation not otherwise described in the Code.

   The Student was registered in the PhD candidate at the School of
   Graduate Studies at the Rotman School of Management. As part of the
   Research / Thesis course, the Student submitted a thesis containing
   five studies and two essays, and which purported to use participants in
   the studies. The Student submitted three research papers, co-authored
   by the Studentâs PhD supervisor, for publication in several journals.
   Editors of two of these journals expressed concern regarding the
   credibility and reliability of the data to the PhD supervisor. The
   University subsequently appointed an Allegation Administrator to
   conduct a preliminary inquiry into whether the Student committed
   research misconduct, and further established an Investigating Committee
   (the âCommitteeâ) to investigate whether the data used and report in
   one of the Research Papers had been manipulated. The Committee
   considered the Studentâs thesis as part of its review. The Committee
   ultimately concluded that the Student committed two acts of research
   misconduct, namely, fraud in the fabrication or manipulation of
   published data to support a hypothesis and destruction of research data
   to avoid detection of wrongdoing.

   As a threshold matter, the Panel first considered whether it had
   jurisdiction to hear the case, given that the Student had received her
   degree from the University in June 2017. The Panel concluded that,
   pursuant to section B(i)(4), the Code applies to former students who
   have committed an offence while they were active students. Accordingly,
   the Panel determined they had jurisdiction to hear the matter and
   proceeded to do so. However, the Panel held that the Policy on Official
   Correspondence with Students did not apply to former students.

   The Student was neither present nor represented at the hearing. The
   Panel found that the Student had reasonable notice of the hearing and
   the charges pursuant to the Statutory Powers Procedure Act (âSPPAâ) and
   the University Tribunalâs Rules of Practice and Procedure (the
   âRulesâ). Accordingly, the hearing proceeded in the Studentâs absence.
   The Panel noted that section 6 of the SPPA requires reasonable notice
   of the hearing to be provided to the parties, and that section 7 of the
   SPPA and rule 21 of the Rules allowed the Tribunal to proceed in the
   absence of the Student where notice has been given. The Panel heard
   evidence that notice of the charges had been sent to the Student at two
   separate email addresses, and further attempted to notify the Student
   by cell phone and by mail.

   The Panel heard further evidence that counsel for the University made
   further attempts to contact the Student by email and telephone, and had
   attempted to initiate contact with the Student and their spouse on
   Facebook. Counsel was able to contact an individual, listed as next of
   kin in the Studentâs ROSI account, who identified himself as the
   Studentâs father, and requested that the Student check their email.
   None of the communications were answered by the Student. The Panel was
   satisfied that the University complied with the Rules and demonstrated
   that it took reasonable steps to notify the Student of the charges and
   the hearing, and determined that it would proceed to hear the case in
   the Studentâs absence.

   At the hearing, the Panel heard the evidence of an expert in analysis
   and quantitative research methods (the âExpertâ). The Expert testified
   that the data was not collected in the manner described in the
   thesis.Â  The Panel also heard testimony from the PhD supervisor,
   detailing how, after discussions with the editors of one of the
   journals which had published the one of the Studentâs Research Papers,
   he became so concerned at the underlying data that he agreed to retract
   the paper. The Panel found that the University had met its burden to
   establish on a balance of probabilities that it was more likely than
   not that the Student fabricated the data for her thesis and one of the
   research papers. Accordingly, the Panel found the Student guilty of the
   offence of knowingly submitting academic work containing purported
   statements of fact or references to sources that had been concocted,
   contrary to section B.i.1(f) of the Code.

   In determining the appropriate sanction, the Panel considered the
   sanctioning factors outlined in University of Toronto and Mr. C (Case
   No. 1975/77-3) and heard submissions from the University. The
   University submitted that all of the evidence that was available
   reflected negatively on the Studentâs character, and in particular the
   Studentâs deliberate effort to cover-up the offence, and suggested that
   there was a likelihood that the Student would re-offend.

   The Panel found that it had no evidence of any extenuating
   circumstances, and that second hand comments relating to the Studentâs
   mental health issues, referenced in the materials, were to be given
   little weight since they were not made under oath and could not be
   verified. The Panel noted that the offence in question was one of the
   most serious offences, which had the potential to jeopardize the
   integrity of the University and its degrees and risked enormous
   detriment to the University.Â  Based on the Universityâs submissions
   and the precedent case law, the Panel imposed the following sanction: a
   final grade of zero in the course, a recommendation to the Governing
   Council that it cancel and recall the Studentâs Doctor of Philosophy
   degree; a permanent notation on the Studentâs academic record and
   transcript; and a report to the Provost for publication.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/31579
