Report #357

   DATE: September 29, 2011
   PARTIES: University of Toronto v C.O.
   Hearing Date(s): June 21, 2011
   Committee Members:
   Sara Faherty, Chair
   Ellen Hodnett, Faculty Member
   Kent Kuran, Student Member
   Secretary:
   Christopher Lang, Director, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances
   Robert Hares, Law Student Observer, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty
   Grievances

   Appearances:
   For the Student: C.O. (student)
   For UTSC, John Scherk, Vice Dean
   For UTSC, the Professor, via audio-video internet connection
   For UTSC, Sari Springer, counsel

   UTSC â re-read of term work â appeal dismissed â Student failed to
   present substantive arguments â reliance on conclusory statements and
   unsubstantiated allegations â several arguments had no bearing on the
   merits of the appeal

   Appeal of decision of UTSC Academic Appeals Board denying Studentâs
   petition for re-read of term assignment. Student submitted a five-page
   research proposal and literature review followed by a 12-page research
   paper intended to fulfill the earlier, shorter research proposal.
   Student received a C grade on the proposal and a B+ grade on the full
   research paper. Student received a C grade in the course. Student
   asserted that her proposal was undervalued, that the course was subject
   to a strictly enforced quota system on marks, that the proposal was
   returned late, that the her final mark was deliberately recorded
   improperly, that various communications among UTSC administrators and
   faculty about the Student violated her privacy, that it was improper
   for her to be required to pay $13.00 for a clerical check on the
   improperly recorded mark, and that UTSCâs processes are slow and poorly
   explained or administered.

   The Committee unanimously dismissed the Studentâs appeal, concluding
   that the Appeals Board of UTSC was justified in denying her request for
   a re-read. The Committee concluded that the Student did not present the
   kinds of substantive arguments the UTSC requires before granting a
   petition for a re-read. The Student relied on conclusory statements
   instead of discussion about the merits of her work. There was no
   evidence to support the Studentâs contention that the professor was
   subject to a strictly enforced quota system on marks. Further, her
   arguments about late returns, rounding errors, user fees, and
   administrative delays do not have any bearing on the academic merit of
   the work she produced. The Committee noted that the Student seemed
   convinced that these apparently unrelated arguments served as evidence
   of a concerted effort on the part of the division to single her out and
   under-value her academic work. The Committee saw no evidence of any
   such effort, nor was there any indication that her personal information
   was ever improperly disclosed. The UTSC was found to have appropriately
   applied its policy on granting re-reads of term work.
   [1]View Report

References

   1. file:///media/12601
