THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
GOVERNING COUNCIL
Report #357 of the Academic Appeals Committee
September 29, 2011

To the Academic Board
University of Toronto
Your Committee reports that it held a hearing on Tuesday, 21 June 2011, at which the following
members were present:
Assistant Dean Sara Faherty, Chair
Professor Ellen Hodnett, Faculty Panel Member
Mr, Kent Kuran, Student Panel Member
Secretary: Mr. Christopher Lang, Director, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances
Mr. Robe11 Hares, Law Sh1dent Observer, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances

Appearances:
For the Student-Appellant:
The Student
For the University of Toronto, Scarbo1·ough Campus ("UTSC"):
Vice Dean Professor John Scherk;
Professor for POLB80H3, formerly Assistant Professor in Political Science, UTSC, via audiovideo internet connection;
Ms, Sari Springer, Cassels Brock (Counsel for UTSC)

I.

The Appeal

The Student is appealing the decision of the UTSC Academic Appeals Board dated 22 October,
2009, which denied her petition for a re-read of one of her term assignments in POLB80H3,
Introduction to International Relations. The request for a re-read had first been denied by
UTSC's Subcommittee on Standing, in an e-mail dated September 28, 2009.

II.

Facts

The Student took this class in the summer of 2009, There were two written submissions handed
in during the te1m for this course: first, a 5-page research proposal and literature review
1

[hereinafter, "proposal"] for which the Student received a C grade, and second, a 12-page
research essay [hereinafter, "research paper"] for which the Student received a grade of B+. The
Professor for POLB80H3 (hereinafter "the Professor") and the Student agree that the two
assignments were related, in that the final research paper was meant to fulfill the earlier, shorter
research proposal.
The Student received a mark of 65, or C, in the course, She requested a re-read of her proposal
on September 8, 2009. Her original request listed several grounds for her appeal, including her
belief that the work warranted a better mark than it received, a complaint that the proposal was
not returned to her in a timely manner, and her belief that the Professor was unable to give the
submission a higher mark due to a strictly enforced distribution system.
The Student was informed that her request had been denied by the Subcommittee on Standing in
an e-mail dated September 28, 2009. The e-mail summarised the decision, saying, "The
Subcommittee on Standing found no justifiable grounds to have the proposal re-read. Moreover,
you had the opportunity to pick up the corrected proposal in several classes but you were not
present lo take advantage of the opp01tunity."
The Student appealed this denial to the Divisional Appeals Board in a document dated
September 28, 2009. Again, she asse1ted that she had not received her term work in a timely
manner, and that the mark was below the actual value of the essay. She also expressed
frnstration with the length of time it took for her to trigger the correct process for her earlier
appeal.
The Student was informed that her request for a re-read was denied in a letter dated October 22,
2009. The reasons given for the denial were first, "although you may have received a copy of
your [proposal] after the deadline of the return oftenn work, there is no evidence that this was
the fault of the instructor," and second, "there were instifficient circumstances and details
provided concerning yam paper to warrant a re-read."

III.

The Student's Grounds for Appeal

In her Febrnary 18, 2010 statement supp01ting the appeal of the Divisional Appeal Board's
decision to this body, the Academic Appeals Committee of the Governing Council, the Student
listed several grounds for her appeal. She asserts, either in her original appeal or in
documentation submitted later, the following seven claims:

I.

The proposal was under-valued;

2.

The course was subject to a strictly enforced quota system on marks;

3.

The proposal was retumcd to the Student late;

4.

The Student's final mark was improperly recorded;

2

5.

UTSC violated the Student's privacy;

6.

The Student was required to pay $13 for a clerical check; and,

7.

UTSC's processes are slow and poorly explained or administered.

Each of these grounds will be discussed below in greater detail. Because there are so many
different arguments, and some are very factually complex, each sub-section below details the
Student's arguments (A) and UTSC's response thereto (B),
1.

The Proposal was Under-valued

A,
The Sl\1dent takes the position that her proposal was under-evaluated. She received a 65,
or a C, on that written submission, and she believes that she should have received an 87, or an A,
on the assignment. In her original request for a re-read, dated September 8, 2009, the Student
defends her proposal, writing, "I included all the requirements and since this is only a two page
document, all thirteen citations as impossible to be included since we were told not to do more
than two page prior to bibliography and reference pages. Since this is a mere documentation or
our main essay we had to include each area paragraph on the topic ofchoice."

In her handwritten appeal dated September 28, 2009, she asserts that "the mark was below the
w01th of the essay."
In additional documentation, submitted with her appeal to this Committee, the Student asse1ts
that "Eventhough the main essay is a development from the proposal and received a 77, or B+ on
the main essay" (page 28/46 of Student's faxed appeal, received Febrnmy 18, 2010). Later in
the same document she argues, "I will submit that my [proposal] was under evaluated and is
evidence by the mark I received on the [research paper] which is a B+ or 77%. How is this
possible? As I understand it the mark for both would be in the area of each other" (page 28/46 of
Student's faxed appeul, received February 18,2010). In another statement supporting this
appeal, the Sl\1dent asserted that "I received a B+ on the [research paper] but only a C on the
[proposal] when all of the components were submitied in accordance with the ANNEX supplied
by the professor and on top of that the essay is only a build up from the summary which I spent
three weeks editing and receiving critique from the Writing Centre." (pages 5-6 of Student's
faxed appeal, received Febrnary 18, 2010).
Finally, the Student submitted a nearly identical proposal written by a student who took the same
course from the Professor during the summer of 2008. The Sh1dent argues that "the comparable
proposal shows the work are in the same level if not mine being more to the requirement. The
other sh1dent received an A on hers despite she did not submit a reference page for which she did
not receive a mark. My work in the same level and I received a C with no explanation or time to
review with the professor" (page 28/46 of Student's faxed appeal, received February 18, 2010).
B,
UTSC rejects the Student's arguments. The Subco1nmittee on Standing indicated that
there were no justifiable grounds for a re-read, and the Subcommittee on Academic Appeals
concurred, writing that there were insufficient circumstances and details to warrant a re-read.
3

The Division takes the position that the Student's arguments are not substantive, scholarly
delences of her written submission. It points to the standard set forth in the UTSC Academic
Calendar, to which the Student was repeatedly referred. The section on Petitions reads, in
pertinent part, that petitions for re-reads "will be granted only if you articulate clear grounds for
reconsideration, addressing the substance of an answer in relation to the mark given it or
otherwise identifying the nature of the alleged misevaluation" [and] "show that the alleged
misevaluation is of a substantial nature: in an objective answer, that a correct response has been
counted as incorrect, or in a subjective or essay answer, that the response has been underevaluated substantially." NB, the calendar does not use the word "and" between these two
requirements, but since the second one presumes the first one, this Committee concludes UTSC
requires that both elements should be met. Section D-4
The Division disputes the Student's assertion that because the research paper built on the earlier
proposal, they should receive similar marks. It submitted that the Professor's written instructions
for each assignment, which make it clear that there were different requirements and expectations
for each of the two separate submissions. The Professor testified that there is often variance
between a student's mark on her proposal and his or her mark on the research paper. He said that
he explains this to his students during class.
The Division also rejects the Student's arguments about the nearly identical proposal, and notes
that the papers are so similar that they indicate serious academic misconduct on the part of
Student. The Professor defended the mark the Student's paper as being justified by the merits of
the paper. He is not the person who evaluated the 2008 paper, but he speculated that the
difference between the two marks might be explained by the fact that the papers were evaluated
by two different graders.

2.

The Course Was Subject to a Strictly Enforced Quota System on Marks

A.

The Student asserts, in her original request for a re-read, that "even though I eamed an A
he give me a C because he had already given out all the As and Bs that the University allows.
We are aware that the university restrict (sic) how many As should be given out and how many
Bs and so on." However, the Student offered no evidence of this system.
Professor and Vice Dean John Scherk, who represented UTSC at this hearing, denied that
there was any such system in place. The Professor denied knowledge of any such system, and
testified that he had been free to give any grade he believed the submission waffanted. He
testified that he marked the proposal exclusively on the merits.

B,

3.

The Proposal Was Retumecl to the Student Late

A.
The Student claims that the proposal was not returned to her in a timely manner. She
says that she never received it by e-mail, and that while she attended every single class, she
never heard any one ask students to collect their proposals. She supports this claim with several
e-mails showing that she asked the TAs for the class about having her paper returned.

4

B.
UTSC asserts that reasonable efforts were made to return the paper to the Student. The
Professor testified that he sent the proposal back to the Student via e-mail. He noted that there
was a partial e-mail address written by hand across the bottom of the coversheet to the proposal:
"O
@utsc ... ". The Professor said that he believed he had used that e-mail address to
return the paper. The Student replied that she did not recognise that e-mail address, and that it
had never been hers.
In any event, there was a second system for returning the proposals. Even if the e-mail system
failed, the Professor said that he brought the papers with him to class severai times, in order to
reti1rn them to the students. Even when there were only a few Jett uncollt;cted, he continued to
bring them to class with him, announcing that he still had them. The Professor testified that he
brought the Student's paper to class with him and the Student never collected her paper.

4,

The Student's Final Mark Was Improperly Reco1·decl

A.
The Student argues that her final mark of 66.68% was improperly recorded, in that it was
recorded as a 66% when it should have been rounded up to a 67%. This rounding error was
corrected only after the Student made several efforts to do so. The Student alleges that the misrecording of the grade was deliberate (page 5/46 of Student's faxed appeal, received February
18, 2010).
B.

The Division responds that the recording error is not relevant to this request for a re-read,

It denies that the rounding enor was deliberate, and also points o\lt that since the error has been
col1'ected, the issue shollld not be included in this appeal.

5,

UTSC Violated the Student's Privacy

A,
The Student is concerned that UTSC may be violating her privacy because of various
con111nmications among administrators and between administrators and faculty regarding what
she considers to be confidential information, (See St\ldent's letter dated October 20, 2009, on
page 32/46 of Student's faxed appeal, received February 18, 2010). As evidence she submits an
e-mail from the Professor in another course, dated 19 October 2009, in which that Professor
wrote, "Any instructions about your grades in my co\lrses (present or past) that I am to follow
will come from the Vice Dean's office. I cannot address any of your req\lests without
instructions from that office to do so."

B.

The Division denies any improper disclosure of information about the Student.

6.

The Student Was Reqllil'ecl to Pay S13 for a Clerical Check

A.
In her statement supporting this appeal the St\ldent refers to several statements made by
the Vice Dean on October 22, 2009 and also refers to the Chair info1ming her that she would be
required to pay a refundable fee of$13 in order to obtain a clerical check on her grade in this
course. Because the clerical check resulted in a grade change (see section 4 above, regarding the
rounding error) the $ 13 was refunded to the Student. Nonetheless the St\ldent asserts that she
shollld not have been required to make the initial payment.
5

B.

The Division defends its policy on requiring payment for clerical checks, and points out
that in this case, because an error was detected, the $13 was returned to the Student.

7.

UTSC's Processes Are Slow ancl Are Poorly Explained

The Student asserts that UTSC was slow to inform her that she was following inconect
procedures, taking 20 days to give her infonnation about the correct process to ask for a re-read.
She also makes several references to the efforts she had to make to track down her graded
proposal, and various other corrections she has requested. She stresses the dif11culty that these
delays have caused her, because of their effect on her academic standing. Improperly recorded
grades, whether due to rounding errors or undervalued assignment marks, cause her more stress
than they might other students, because of her precarious academic status.
A,

The Student's statements contain many references to a number of problems that do not appear to
be related to POLB80H3, Introduction to International Relations. For example, in her statement
supporting this appeal, she refers to a conversation with a Vice Dean regarding a prior incident
between her and another student (page 5/46 of Student's faxed appeal, received Febrnary 18,
2010).
B.
The Division denies that the Student is treated differently than any other student, and
asserts that administrative procedures are fair, rational, and completed as quickly as possible.
The Division submits its Calendar as evidence of the clarity and specificity of its policies.

IV.

Reasons for Decision

This Conunittee has considered all of the Student's arguments, including some arguments that do
not seem directly relevant to the specific assignment in POLB80H3, Introduction to
Intemational Relations for which she has requested a re-read. We have unanimously concluded
that the Appeals Board of UTSC was justified in denying her request for a re-read. The
Student's appeal to the Governing Council is denied. Following are our reasons for the denial.

1.

The Proposal Was Under-Valued

The Student has not made the kinds of substantive arguments that UTSC requires before granting
a petition for a reread. She has asserted that her proposal was undervalued, but not discussed the
work she produced, and instead relies on conclusory statements that her proposal deserved a
better mark than it received. The Student's relationship with UTSC is deeply fraught, and she
appears to sincerely believe that her academic work is being unfairly evaluated. However
arguments about late returns, rounding errors, user fees, and administrative delays do not have
any bearing on the academic merit of the work she produced.
The Student's submission of a former student's proposal is problematic evidence. This Division
noted the alarming similarity between the 2008 paper and the Student's submission in 2009.
The Professor suggested that the difference in marks was clue to the different priorities and focus
of the two different graders. Your Cotmnittee notes that the Student's proposal, while nearly
6

identical to the paper submitted in 2008, contains several grammatical errors that are not present
in the earlier submission, which could account for the lower mark. The Student's proposal also
omits many footnotes that were present in the earlier submission, which could also justify the
lower mark. Your Committee finds it curious that the student would use a nearly identical, but
grammatically correct, paper written by another student in a previous year, as evidence that her
paper was unfairly marked, since such a level of similarity would warrant investigation for
academic misconduct.
In the absence of any substantive defense of the proposal, and in light of the Professor's
explanation for the mark he gave, this Committee does not find that the proposal warrants a reread.
2.

The Course Was Subject to a Strictly Enforced Quota System on Marks

There is no evidence that the Professor was required to assign a lower mark to the Student's
proposal than the merits of the submission warranted. The Student appeared genuinely confused
about the origin of the notion that faculty are limited in the number of As they can give out, and
seemed not to recognise it as an allegation she raised in her original petition. Instead, she
mistakenly interpreted UTSC's written response to her petition as making the claim that there is
a quota system on the number of grades faculty can assign. She described the submissions,
prepared on behalf of the Division by its lawyer, as an "affidavit" in which Vice Dean Scherk
avowed that there was such a system. The Student's sununary of the document was not accurate.
When it was pointed out to the Student that the document she was quoting, was actually quoting
her original claim, as stated in her request for a re-read, dated September 8, 2009, she offered no
response.
In the absence of any evidence of such a system, and in light of Vice Dean Scherk's testimony
that there was no such distribution system and the Professor's clear denial that he was subjected
to a limit on high grades, the Committee cannot give any weight to this allegation,
3.

The Proposal Was Rctumecl to the Student Late

This claim seems peripheral to the Student's claim that the proposal was undervalued. The
Student seems to coru1ect these claims and interpret them as evidence that UTSC singles her out
for unfair treatment. She makes a fair point when she says she was forced to write her research
paper without the benefit of feedback on her proposal. However that point is not relevant to this
appeal for a re-read of the proposal. She is not challenging her mark on the research paper, and
seems to have written a successful research paper without her proposal, receiving a B+ on that
submission. The Student has made no claim that the final research paper, which was based on
the proposal that is the subject of this appeal, was not graded fairly.
It does not appear to be the fault of the Professor that the Student did not have access to her
graded proposal when she wrote her research paper. The Professor testified that he saw theemail address "O
@utsc ... " handwritten across the bottom of his evaluation sheet of the
proposal (page 17/46 of Student's faxed appeal, received February 18, 2010). He testified that
this looked like an official University of Toronto address, and that he believes he used that to
7

send the Student her proposal. While the Student denied ever using that address, she may be
confused, On June 16, 2009 a TA communicated with Student using the e-mail address
0
@utsc,utoronto.ca. This e-mail was printed out and included in the paper work
submitted by the Student, (page 30/46 of Student's faxed appeal, received Febrnary 18, 20 l 0),
which indicates that at one time this was a functioning e-mail address for the Student.
In any event, even ifthere were an error in addressing the e-mail, or if the Professor had an
incorrect address on file, emailing the graded proposal was not the only method of returning
students' work. The Professor testified that he brought the graded proposal to class with him
several times, and that the Student failed to pick it up, The Committee finds it unfortunate that
the Student did not receive her marked proposal until after the research paper was due, but must
assign the responsibility for that to her. The timing of the return of the proposal is not related to
the mark received on the original submission,

4.

Remaining Grounds for Appenl

The remaining grounds offered by the Student are not, in this Committee's judgment directly
relevant to the mark on her proposal in POLB80H3, Introduction to Intemational Relations. The
Student seems convinced that many of the things she finds frustrating are connected, and seems
to believe that these other issues serve as evidence of a concerted effort on the part of the
Division to single her out and under-value her academic work, The Committee saw no evidence
of any such effort.
The fact that the Student's final mark was improperly recorded due to a rounding error is
undoubtedly frustrating, especially in circumstances like the Student's where her precarious
academic standing is sensitive to low marks, Nonetheless, there is no evidence that this was an
intentional mis-recording, and it cannot be constrned as evidence that her proposal was marked
unfairly. The Student reports that after speaking with the Vice Dean the grade was changed on
ROSI by October 19, 2009 (page 5/46 of Student's faxed appeal, received Fcbrnary 18, 2010).
Since the correction has been made and the Student has been restored to her proper academic
status, the Co1muittee sees no remaining controversy on which to make findings,
The Student is agitated by the communications among administrators and between administrators
and faculty about her standing. It is understandable that the Student is concerned that her
privacy be respected, but there is no evidence that any of her personal information was disclosed
inappropriately. Nothing about the Student was disclosed to people outside the institution, and
the people within the institution who were infonned of details about the Student needed to use
the information in order to perform their duties, The actions the Student describes are examples
of information being shared within the Division and where the disclosures were necessary in
order for UTSC to perform its functions,
Even if the e-mail were found to contain a reference to an improper commnnication between the
Division and a faculty member, which is not at all clear to your Co1muittee, it does not touch
upon this course or the mark at issue here, This Committee notes that the evidence offered, the
other Professor's October, 2009 e-mail, is not relevant to this specific appeal. The Professor for
this appeal was not involved in that exchange. He marked the Student's paper months before
8

that e-mail was sent, and expressly denied receiving any communications regarding the marks he
was to give the Student.
The Student's remaining complaints are grievances that do not seem to be directly relevant to
this appeal. They do not pertain specifically to the written submission for which she requested a
re-read. Nor do they seem to be evidence of a pattern of discrimination or conspiracy against the
Student. The Division requires all students making requests for clerical checks to pay a $13 fee,
and refunds the fee when the student is able to show an error occurred. In this case, the fee was
refunded. Whether it is an ideal practice to charge a user-fee for clerical checks, and ask
students to bear the costs of these individual searches and re-calculations is not for this
Committee to determine. The policy is fairly administered.
The Student's anxiety about the length of time it took for her to properly file her appeal is also
understandable, but it is equally understandable that the Division might inadvertently misfile one
of the Student's appeals, petitions, and clerical checks, especially as they increase in number. In
any event, it seems to this Committee that the Division made a good faith effort to keep each of
the Student's administrative requests on track, and a twenty day delay in conecting a misfiling
seems reasonable, given the number of students, faculty, and Departments at UTSC.

Conclusion
The issue in this case is whether or not UTSC appropriately applied its policy on granting rereads of term work. The section on "Special Consideration, Petitions, and Appeals" of the UTSC
Calendar sets forth the conditions under which a re-read will be granted, and the Professor and
the Division have set forth a clear defence of the Subcommittee on Academic Appeals' Board
rnling that the Student did not at1iculate clear grounds for reconsideration, neither addressing the
substance of her answer nor identifying the nature of the miscvaluation. None of the arguments
offered by the Student have been specific discussions of her answers. She has listed a series of
grievances about timeliness and concerns about other incidents, but her discussion of the
proposal has been conclusory and lacking in detail. This Committee has considered all of the
Student's arguments carefolly, but the Division acted within its clearly stated policies.
For all of these reasons it is the unanimous decision of the panel that this Student's appeal and
request for a re-read of her proposal in POLB80H3, Introduction to International Relations, is
denied.

9

