Case #706

   DATE: May 21, 2013
   PARTIES: University of Toronto v. J.S.
   Hearing Date(s): May 7, 2013
   Panel Members:
   Wendy Matheson, Chair
   Dionne Aleman, Faculty Member
   Adel Boulazreg, Student Member
   Appearances:
   Tina Lie, Assistant Discipline Counsel for the University
   Jeff Marshman, Department of Computer Science
   In Attendance:
   The Student
   Luc De Nil, Vice-Dean, Students, School of Graduate Studies
   Andrea Sass-Kortsak, Associate Director, Academic Affairs and Graduate
   Coordinator, Dalla Lana School of Public Health
   Christopher Lang, Director, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances

   Trial Division â s. B.i.1(d) of the Code â plagiarism â submitted
   practicum report containing plagiarized passages â Agreed Statement of
   Facts â guilty plea â Joint Submission on Penalty â second offence â
   Student admitted guilt early and cooperated with the University â
   Student agreed to attend program on academic integrity before
   registering for any further courses â grade assignment of zero in the
   course; suspension just under five years; notation on transcript until
   graduation; report to Provost for publication

   Student charged with one offence under s. B.i.1(d) and in the
   alternative, one offence under s. B.i.3(b) of the Code . The charges
   related to an allegation that the Student submitted a final practicum
   report that included verbatim or nearly verbatim passages from sources
   that were not properly cited. The Student attended the hearing. The
   Student pleaded guilty to the charge under s. B.i.1(d) and the matter
   proceeded by way of an agreed statement of facts. The Panel accepted
   the Studentâs guilty plea. The Student and the University submitted an
   agreed statement of facts regarding penalty and adopted a joint
   position on sanction. The Student had been previously sanctioned in
   respect of academic dishonesty under s. B.i.3(b) of the Code. The
   previous offence related to two incidents that were treated together as
   a first offence and dealt with at the Decanal level. The Student had
   been warned that any subsequent offences would be treated more
   severely. The Student had admitted the charges early in the process and
   had cooperated with the University throughout. The Student had also
   agreed with the University that he would attend and participate in a
   mutually agreeable program or workshop regarding academic integrity
   prior to registering for any further courses with the University. The
   Panel noted that to reject a joint submission, the Panel would have to
   conclude that accepting the joint submission would bring the
   administration of justice into disrepute. The Panel concluded that this
   was not such a case and therefore accepted the joint submission on
   penalty. The Panel imposed a final grade of zero in the practicum
   courses, a suspension just under five years, a notation on the
   Studentâs transcript lasting until graduation, and ordered that the
   case be reported to the Provost for publication.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12849
