THE UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO

IN THE MATTER OF charges of academic dishonesty made on February 14, 2013.
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code of Behavior on Academic 1\1alfers,
1995,

AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Act, 1971, S.O. 1971, c. 45 as amended
S.O. l 978, c. 88

BETWEEN:
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO

-AND-

REASONS FOR DECISION

Date of hearing: May 7, 2013
Tribunal Members:
Ms. Wendy Matheson, BmTister and Solicitor, Chair
Professor Dio1me Aleman, Department of Mechanical and Industrial Engineering, Faculty Panel
Member
Mr. Adel Boulazreg, Student Panel Member
Appearances:
Ms. Tina Lie, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Banisters
Mr. Jeff Marshman, Legal Case Worker, Downtown Legal Services
In Attendance:
Mr. ~ . the Student
Professor Luc De Nil, Vice-Dean, Students, School of Graduate Studies
Professor Andrea Sass-Ko1tsak, Associate Director, Academic Affairs and Graduate Coordinator
Dalla Lana School of Public Health
Mr. Christopher Lang, Director, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances

-2-

Charges and Hearing:

l.

2.

The Trial Division of the Tribunal held a hearing on May 7, 2013 to consider the
follow ing charges brought by the University of Toronto against •
(the
Student) under the Code ofBehaviour on Academic 1\1allers, 1995 (the Code):
1)

that on or about September 4, 2012, the Student knowingly represented the ideas,
or the expressions of the ideas of another as his own work in the final practicum
repo11 that the Student submitted in the Univei-sity of Toronto courses CHL
60 lOY and CHL 601 l H ("Courses"), contrary to section B.I. l (d) of the Code;
and,

2)

in the alternative, that by submitting the final practicum report in the Courses, the
Student knowingly engaged in a form of cheating, academic dishonesty or
misconduct, fraud or misrepresentation not otherwise descdbed in the Code in
order to obtain academic credit or other academic advantage of any kind, contrat}'
to section B.I.3(b) of the Code.

The Student attended the hearing, was represented by student counsel from Downtown
Legal Services, and pied guilty to the above charges. The University indicated that if the
plea of guilty to charge l, above, was accepted, the second charge would be withdrawn in
that it was in the alternative.

Agreed Statement of Facts & Finding on Charges
3.

At the outset of the hearing, the Tribunal was advised that the University had entered into
an Agreed Statement of Facts with the Student. That Agreed Statement is attached as
Appendix A to this decision. The Tribunal also received into evidence, on consent, a
Joint Book of Documents that are referred to in the Agreed Statement of Facts.

4.

As set out in more detail in the Agreed Statement of Facts, the circumstances giving rise
to the charges involved a 16~week practicum placement in relation to the Courses that the
Student was required to complete in order to obtain his Master of Public Health degree.
On September 4, 2012, the Student submitted a final practicum rep011 titled "Optimal
Cancer Screening Strategies: A Focused Review of Simulation Models,, (the "Repo1i").

5.

ln the course of reviewing and grading the Report, the professor noted that several of the
passages in the Report were reproduced verbatim or nearly verbatim from secondary
somces that were not contained in the Report's list of references. In addition, the
passages in the Report were not identified th.rough the use of quotation marks or any
other method of indicating that they were verbatim or nearly verbatim quotes from
secondary sources.

6.

The Tribunal was provided an annotated excerpt from the Report that demonstrated the
concerns initially noted by the Professor.

-37.

With respect to the Report, the Student has admitted that he knowingly included verbatim
and nearly verbatim excerpts from several secondary sources, failed to attribute those
verbatim and nearly verbatim excerpts appropriately using quotation marks or other
appropriate means and failed to include three of the secondary sources in the list of
references at the end of the Report.

8.

After reviewing the facts contained in the Agreed Statement of Facts and Joint Book of
Documents, the Tribunal deliberated and concluded that the facts demonstrate that the
charge 1 was proved, and agreed to accept the guilty plea in respect of that charge. Given
that finding, the University withdrew charge 2, and that charge is therefore not the subject
of a finding of this Tribunal.

Penalty
9.

The parties submitted a further Agreed Statement of Fact regarding penalty, which is
attached as Appendix B. These agreed facts show that the Student had previously
received sanctions in June of 2011 in respect of academic dishonesty under section
B.l.3(B) of the Code. These sanctions related to two courses in which the Student
purported to submit two assignments electronically, where the electronic files did not
actually contain the assignments. The two incidents were treated together as a first
offence and were dealt with by the Vice-Dean. The Student received a grade of zero in
each of the two courses and an annotation on his transcript for less than one year. The
Vice-Dean, in his letter to the Student confirming these sanctions, warned the Student
that a second offence would be treated more severely.

10.

The parties in this hearing made a Joint Submission on Penalty. The Joint Submission
proposed that the Student be given a final grade of zero in the two courses that were the
subject of charge 1, be suspended from the University until April 30, 2017 (about four
years) and have a notation of his academic record and transcript until graduation. It was
also proposed that this case be reported to the Provost for publication of a notice of the
decision of the Tribunal and the sanctions imposed, with the name of the student
withheld.

11.

In addition to the proposed penalty, the student also agreed with the University that he
would attend and participate in a mutually agreeable program or workshop regarding
academic integrity prior to registering for any further courses at the University.

12.

In support of the Joint Submission, the parties asked the Tribunal to take into account the
fact that the Student admitted the charges at an early stage in the process and cooperated
with the University, including by the agreement on the facts in the Agreement Statement
of Facts, by pleading guilty and by the Joint Submission on Penalty.

13.

The Tribunal considered the factors that are to govern its decision, as set out in The
University ofToronto and j\tfr. C. dated November 5, 1976, at p. 12, and the various
illustrative cases provided to it. The Tribunal also recognized that the high threshold that
must be met for the Tribunal to reject a joint submission. To meet that threshold, the
Tribunal would have to be of the view that accepting the joint submission would bring

-4the administration of justice i.nto disrepute. The Tribunal concluded that this is not such a
case.
14.

The Tribunal therefore accepted the joint submission on penalty.

Decision of the Tl'ibunal
15.

The Tribunal ordered as follows:
1. the Student is found guilty of the academic offence of plagiarism, contrary to section
B.1.1 (d) of the Code of Belwvio11r on Academic Ma!lers;
2. the following sanctions shall be imposed on the Student:

a. he shall receive a fi nal grade of zero in the courses CHL601 0Y and
CHL601 1H;
b. he shall be suspended from the University from May 7, 2013 until April 30,

2017;and
c. the sanction shall be recorded on his academic record and transcript from the
date of this order until the date he graduates;
3. this case be reported to the Provost, with the Student's name withheld, for publication

of a notice of the decision of the Tribunal and the sanction imposed.
All of which is ordered as of May 7, 2013 .

/),<Jday of May, 2013.

Dated at Toronto, this (7\.

Wendy Matheson, Chair

APPENDIX A

THE UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL OF THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO

IN THE MATTER OF charges of academic dishonesty filed on February 14, 2013,

AND IN THE MATTER OF the Universily of To,onto Code ol Behaviour on Academic

M•E~95,:9 I

AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Act, 1971, S.O. 1971, c. 56 as a
1978
88
s.o.
• C.

TME UNlVERSITV TRH?J.fiJV\t ,? t
UNIVERSITY OF TO~~r:'f\'0

. •

BETWEEN:

-AND-

by

I , I

J

..,,::(....U.). . . . ~. .

University of Toronto {the "Provost") under the Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters
("Code"). For the purpose of this hearing, the Provost and ~ -

("Mr. .

..) have

prepared this Agreed Statement of Facts ("ASF") and a joint book of documents ("JBD"). The
agree that:

each document contained in the JBD may be admitted into evidence at the
Tribunal for all purposes, including for the truth of the document's contents,
without further need to prove the document; and

if a document indicates that it was sent or received by someone, that is prima
facie proof that the document was sent and received as indicated.

A.

Charges and guilty plea

2.

Mr. •

admits that he received a copy of the charges filed by the Provost. The

charges are included in the JBD at Tab 1.

t.

Ll:.1/.)~f!.:!1..½.......................7 .
th!s -::::in
cfavo1.11u,yj
~{L;
I
' 20..../ J..

This hearing arises out of charges of academic misconduct filed by the Provost of the

Provost and Mr. -

t.

the ......

AGREED STATEMENT OF FACTS

(b)

.

'! e l e t ll

'

'J

(a)

, :·

\..

THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO •··········

1.

,

2

3.

Mr.

SIii admits that he received a copy of the notice of hearing in this matter and that

he has received reasonable notice of this hearing. A copy of the notice of hearing is included in
the JBD at Tab 2.

4.

Mr. • waives the reading of the charges filed against him, and pleads gullty to both

charges:

5.

The Provost agrees that if the Tribunal convicts Mr.

Sill on charge 1, the Provost will

withdraw charge 2.

.s
6.

At all material times, Mr.

Sill was a registered student at the University of Toronto

School of Graduate Studies, in the Master of Public Health ("MPH") program. A copy of Mr.
current academic record is included in the JBD at Tab 3.

B.

The Practicum

7.

In the Summer 2012 term, Mr. s■ enrolled in CHL 6010Y and CHL 6011H, a 16-week

practicum placement (the "Practicum").

Mr. s■ was required to complete a practicum

placement in order to obtain his Master of Public Health degree.

8.

A copy of the MPH Epidemiology Practicum Guidelines (the "Guidelines") is included in

the JBD at Tab 4. Mr.

9.

SIii admits that he received a copy of the Guidelines.

The academic requirements for the Practicum included the submission of a final

practicum report one week before the end date of the Practicum.

10.

On September 4, 2012, Mr. -

submitted a final practicum report titled "Optimal

Cancer Screening Strategies: A Focused Review of Simulation Models" (the "Report"). A copy
of the Report is included in the JBD at Tab 5. The Report has been highlighted as described
below.

11 .

Professor Nancy Krieger was responsible for reviewing and grading the Report.

In the

course of reviewing and grading the Report, Professor Krieger noted that several of the
passages in the Report were reproduced verbatim or nearly verbatim from secondary sources

3

that were not contained in the Report's list of references.

In addition, the passages in the

Report were not identified through the use of quotation marks or any other method of indicating
that they were verbatim or nearly verbatim quotes from secondary sources.

12.

With respect to the Report, Mr. -

(a)

admits that he knowingly:

included verbatim and nearly verbatim excerpts from secondary sources,
including:
(i)

"Statistical models for cancer screening", by C.E. Stevenson, which is
included in the JBD at Tab 6 (the "Stevenson Article");

(ii)

"Use of Modeling to Evaluate the Cost-Effectiveness of Cancer Screening
Programs", by Amy B. Knudsen, et al., which is included in the JBD al Tab

7 (the "Knudsen Article");
(iii)

"Selecting a decision model for economic evaluation: a case study and
review", by Jonathan Karnon and Jackie Brown, which is included in the
JBD at Tab 8 (the "Karnon Articfen); and

(iv)

"Computer Disease Simulation Models: Integrating Evidence for Health
Polley", by Carolyn M. Rutter et al. (the "Rutter Article"), which is included
in the JBD at Tab 9;

(b)

failed to attribute those verbatim and nearly verbatim excerpts appropriately
using quotation marks or other appropriate means; and

(c)

falled to include the Knudsen Article, the Karnon Article and the Rutter Article in
the list of references at the end of the Report.

13.

The Report, included in the JBD at Tab 5, has been highlighted to indicate the text in the

report that was taken verbatim or nearly verbatim from the Stevenson Article (identified in the
margin as "1"), the Knudsen Article (identified in the margin as "2"), the Karnon Article (identified
in the margin as "3") and the Rutter Article (identified in the margin as "4"). Mr. -

agrees that

the highlighted text should have been referenced appropriately using quotation marks or other
appropriate means, and the Knudsen Article, the Karnon Article and the Ruiter Article should
have been included in the list of references at the end of the Report.

4

14.

Mr.. admits that he knowingly:
represented in the Report the ideas of another person, the expression of the

(a)

ideas of another person , and the work of another person as his own ;

(b}

committed plagiarism in the Report contrary to section B.1.1 (d) of the Code; and

(c)

engaged In a form of cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or
misrepresentation in order to obtain academic credit, contrary to section B.l.3(b)
of the Code.

C.

The meeting with the Dean's Designate

15.

On January 31, 2013, Mr. -

met with Prof. Luc De Nil, the designate of the Dean of

the University of Toronto School of Graduate Studies.

Mr. -

admits that Prof. De Nil

provided the warning that was required to be given to him under the Code.
16.

Mr.

W admitted to Prof. De Nil that he had violated the Code by knowingly committing

plagiarism in the Report.

D.

Acknowledgments

17.

Mr. -

undertakes to attend and participate in a mutually agreeable program or

workshop regarding academic integrity prior to registering for any further courses at the
University of Toronto.
18.

Mr. •
(a)

acknowledges that:
the Provost has advised Mr. •

(b)

of his right to obtain legal counsel and that Mr.

has done so;

he is signing this ASF freely and voluntarily, knowing of lhe potential
consequences he faces, and does so with the advice of counsel.

5

Signed on May ..f_, 2013.

Signed on May:I_, 2013.

~ : Robert A. Centa
Assistant Discipline Counsel
University of Toronto

861158_1.DOC

APPENDIX B

THE UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL OF THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO

IN THE MATTER OF charges of academic dishonesty filed on February 14, 2013,

f::I77

AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic~~,

AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Act, 1971 , S.O. 19fHE 581\ff~~~i' "Y' ry •: 1 ~f\!f,\l_

8 0 978
88
· ·1
· c.

UNiVERSITV QC' / . ~· . r .... .

BETWEEN:

THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTC\he ......

_ ANo _

-·

1,

L.t:l;L\'.f.:\f:t;...... ~-~.·. :: . "......

v; .
··f:l:?7·~·-··. · · "

th1s -=1 flday 01

j')

AGREED STATEMENT OF FACTS ON PENALTY

1.

This hearing arises out of charges of academic misconduct filed by the Provost of the

University of Toronto (the "Provost") under the Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters
("Code"). For the purpose of the penalty phase of this hearing, the Provost and ~ ("Mr. . . .) have prepared this Agreed Statement of Facts ("ASF on penally"). The Provost and
Mr. -

agree that:
(a)

each document attached to this ASF on penalty may be admitted into evidence at
the Tribunal for all purposes, including for the truth of the document's contents,
without further need to prove the document; and

(b)

if a document indicates that it was sent or received by someone, that is prima

facfe proof that the document was sent and received as indicated.
2.

In the Winter 2011 term, Mr. -

was enrolled in CHL 5402H (Epidemiologic Methods

II) and CHL 5418H (Scientific Overviews in Epidemiology). During the Winter 2011 term, Mr.
-

submitted:

7

20••I✓•••.

2

(a)

an electronic file purporting to contain Assignment #3 for CHL 5402H, which
could not be opened; and
a transmittal email purporting to attach Assignment #1 for CHL 5418H, which did

(b)

not contain any attachment.

3.

The electronic submissions referred to in paragraph 2 did not contain Assignment #3 for

CHL 5402H or Assignment #1 for CHL 5418H.

4.

On June 2, 2011 , Mr.

SIii admitted to Professor Berry Smith, Vice-Dean, Students,

School of Graduate Studies at the University of Toronto, that he had engaged in a form of
cheating, academic dishonesty, misconduct, fraud or misrepresentation in respect of
Assignment #3 for CHL 5402H and Assignment #1 for CHL 5418H, in order to obtain academic
credit or other academic advantage, contrary to section B.l.3(b) of the Code.

5.

That day, Vice-Dean Berry Smith imposed the following sanctions:

(a)

a grade of zero (FZ) in course CHL 5402H;

(b)

a grade of zero (FZ) in course CHL 5418H; and

(c) .

an annotation on Mr. · • s transcript running from June 3, 2011 to April 30,
2012.

6.

On June 3, 2011, Vice-Dean Berry Smith wrote to Mr.

SIii confirming the above

sanctions. A copy of Vice-Dean Berry Smith's letter is attached to this ASF on penalty at Tab 1.
Vice-Dean Berry Smith warned Mr. -

in the letter as follows:

While I trust that you have learned from this experience, I must warn you that a
second offence will be treated much more severely.
7.

Mr.

(a)

SIii acknowledges that:
the Provost has advised him of his right to obtain legal counsel and that he has
obtained legal advice; and

3

(b)

he is signing this ASF on penalty freely and voluntarily, knowing of the potential
consequences he faces.

Signed on May _f_, 2013.

Signed on May

f , 2013.

Tin@F(

,

Assistant Discipline Counsel
University of Toronto
870689_ 1.00 C

i

UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
SCHOOL OF GRADUATE STUDIES

~.

Letter of Decision
By E-Mail
Friday June 3, 2011

Dear Mr. •

-r:1 or,'7-·
1 , f\0 l
I

.

C) Ir'r7f, (f' .1:7

I

\

~ ~ /_.)

!

,___..

\ ,
t
, \J -

:

l am writing to convey to you the official results of the meeting held on Thursday June 2, 2011 at the
School of Graduate Studies with respect to the allegation about you involving Assignment #3 for course
CHL 5402H and Assignment # I for course CHL 541 SH.
Professors Badley and Johnson, Faculty of Medicine Vice-Dean Sass-Kortsak, Emma Thacker (notetaker),
and I attended this meeting with you. The meeting was conducted in accordance with the procedures
outlined in the Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters. During the course of the meeting, you admitted
that you had committed the offence of academic misconduct.

I have considered the evidence and the circumstances of the case as presented to me at the meeting in
determining the sanction (with reference to the Code schedule in C.l(b)). I have also considered the advice
of the graduate unit representatives. As described in the meeting, the sanctions you will receive are:
I. FZ in course CHL 5402H
2. FZ in course CHL 54l8H
3. An annotation indicating academic misconduct to appear on your academic record from
June 3, 2011 to April 30, 2012.
While I trust that you have learned from this experience, I must warn you that a second offence will be
treated much more severely.
Yours sincerely,

j<b0J.J . Berry Smith
Vice-Dean, Students
/ejt

c.c.

J. Alderdice, A. Purandar~, A. Sass-Kortsalc, E. Badley, I. Jolmson, H. Kelly

6S St George Slrecl, Toronto, ON. MSS 229. Canada
Tel: + I 4 16 978-5986 • Fax: + I 416 971-2327 •sgs. vdeanstudents@uton,>nlQ.ca.1,www.sgs.uloront9.ca

