Case No.: 1000
THE UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
IN THE MATTER OF charges of academic dishonesty filed on October 24, 2018
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic
Matters, 1995,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Act, 1971, S.O. 1971, c. 56 as
amended S.O. 1978, c. 88

BETWEEN:
UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
- and L

E

REASONS FOR DECISION

Hearing Dates: Friday, November 23, 2018 and Friday, January 11, 2019
Members of the Panel:
Ms. Sara Zborovski, Co-Chair
Professor Georges Farhat, Faculty Panel Member
Ms. Daryna Kutsyna, Student Panel Member
Appearances:
Mr. Robert A. Centa, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg Rothstein
LLP
Hearing Secretary:
Ms. Krista Osbourne, Administrative Clerk & Hearing Secretary, Appeals, Discipline and
Faculty Grievances, University of Toronto
Not in Attendance:
Ms. L
E
1.

, the Student

This panel of the University Tribunal held a hearing on Friday, January 11, 2019 to

consider the charges brought by the University of Toronto (the “University”) against Ms.
L

E

1995 (the “Code”).

(the “Student”) under the Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters,

2

A.

Preliminary Issue: Proceeding in the Absence of the Student

2.

The hearing was scheduled to begin at 9:45 am on November 23, 2018. At that

time, Discipline Counsel advised that neither the Student nor a representative of the
Student had responded to the Notice of Hearing.
3.

Discipline Counsel made submissions on proceeding with the hearing in the absence

of the Student. He advised the Tribunal that the following attempts had been made to
provide notice of the charges and hearing to the Student:
i.

On October 24, 2018, the University attempted to contact the Student
by email at her utoronto email address to advise that she had been
charged with certain offences under the Code.

ii.

On November 8, 2018, the University served the Notice of Hearing to
the Student to her utoronto email address, the email address which
she provided in ROSI.

iii.

On November 15, 2018, the University served the Notice of Hearing by
sending a copy by courier to the address in Cairo, Egypt provided by
the Student in ROSI.

4.

These attempts at providing notice to the Student were made following numerous

attempts (by email to the Student’s utoronto email address) between September 13, 2017
and January 30, 2018 inviting the Student to a meeting with the Dean’s Designate to
discuss the allegations of misconduct, none of which the Student responded to.
5.

As of the November 23, 2018 hearing date, the Student had not responded to any of

the above-noted correspondence.
6.

However, in light of the evidence presented that the Student’s last login to her

utoronto account was on September 17, 2018, prior to the first attempts by the University to
notify the Student of the charges, and given the short period of time between the service of
materials on the Student in Cairo (on November 15th) and the hearing date (November 23rd)

3

the Tribunal adjourned the hearing to January 11, 2019 to provide additional time for the
Student to respond to notice of the hearing.
7.

At the hearing on January 11th, Discipline Counsel advised of the following additional

attempts which had been made to contact the Student to advise of the new hearing date,
including by again serving the Notice of Hearing and package of documents to the Student’s
address in ROSI in Cairo, Egypt, which were received on December 1, 2018 and by
confirming that the Student had neither accessed her utoronto email account nor provided
any forwarding email address in ROSI.
8.

Pursuant to sections 6 and 7 of the Statutory Powers Procedure Act (the “Act”) and

Rule 17 of The University Tribunal Rules of Practice and Procedure (the “Rules”), where
reasonable notice of an oral hearing has been given to a party in accordance with the Act
and the party does not attend the hearing, the Tribunal may proceed in the absence of the
party and the party is not entitled to any further notice in the proceeding.
9.

The University requested that the Tribunal proceed with this hearing in the absence

of the Student.
10.

Pursuant to Rule 9, a Notice of Hearing may be served on a student by various

means, including by sending a copy of the document by courier to the student’s mailing
address in ROSI or by emailing a copy of the document to the student’s email address in
ROSI.
11.

The University’s Policy on Official Correspondence with Students expressly states

that students are responsible for maintaining a current and valid postal address and email
account on ROSI. Students are expected to monitor and retrieve all mail, including emails,
on a frequent and consistent basis.
12.

The onus of proof is on the University to demonstrate that it provided a student with

reasonable notice of the hearing.

4

13.

Based on totality of the attempts made to provide notice to the Student, and

particularly given the evidence that the courier packages were received at the Student’s
address in Cairo, Egypt, the Tribunal concluded that the Student was given reasonable
notice of the hearing in compliance with the notice requirements of the Act and the Rules.
14.

The Tribunal therefore determined on January 11, 2019 that it would proceed to hear

the case on its merits in the absence of the Student, and the hearing proceeded on the
basis that the Student was deemed to deny the Charge made against her.
B.

The Charge and Particulars

15.

The Charges and Particulars were detailed in a letter dated October 24, 2018 and

are set out below:
i.

On or about February 6, 2017, you knowingly represented as your own
an idea or expression of an idea, and/or the work of another in an
essay based on the cartoon “School Begins” (the “Essay”) that you
submitted in partial completion of the requirements for HIS 272 (the
“Course”) contrary to section B.I.1(d) of the Code.

ii.

In the alternative to charge #1, you knowingly engaged in a form of
cheating,

academic

dishonesty

or

misconduct,

fraud

or

misrepresentation not otherwise described in the Code in order to
obtain academic credit or other academic advantage of any kind in the
Course, contrary to section B.I.3(b) of the Code.
Particulars
iii.

At all material times, you were a registered student in the University of
Toronto Mississauga. In Winter 2017, you registered in the Course,
which was taught by Professor Elspeth Brown.

iv.

On or about February 6, 2017, you completed and submitted the
Essay. The Essay was worth 15% of the final grade in the Course.

5

v.

The Essay contained ideas, and/or the expression of ideas and/or the
words of another that you did not cite appropriately.

vi.

In the Essay, you knowingly represented the work of other persons as
your own, and you knowingly included ideas and expressions that
were not your own, but were the ideas and expressions of other
persons, which you did not acknowledge.

vii.

For the purposes of obtaining academic credit and/or other academic
advantage, you knowingly committed plagiarism in the Essay.

C.

The Evidence

16.

The University called the evidence of Dr. Wellum, who was the teaching assistant in

the Course.

As such, Dr. Wellum was responsible for grading the work turned in by

students in the Course.
17.

Dr. Wellum directed the Tribunal to the instructions provided to students in respect of

the Essay, and specifically that no outside research was required, but that if outside sources
are used, they must be properly cited.

It was clear from the evidence presented that

students had been advised that, while no outside research was required for the Essay,
using outside research without proper citations would be considered plagiarism, explained
in the Course syllabus as “the act of using the ideas or words of another person as one’s
own original work and is therefore a gross form of cheating.”
18.

Dr. Wellum walked the Tribunal through the Essay submitted by the Student, which

was entered into evidence with certain phrases highlighted. Dr. Wellum’s evidence was that
the Student had used quotation marks in odd places in the Essay and he also noted a wide
variance in the quality of language, including grammatical errors mixed in with the use of
very sophisticated language. Upon noticing this, Dr. Wellum entered the unusual phrases
into google and discovered a number of web pages that had similar and/or verbatim
language as the language used by the Student in the Essay. No citations were provided to
any of these websites.

6

19.

During the hearing, Dr. Wellum directed the Tribunal to the websites where he found

the similar / verbatim wording as used by the Student.
D.

Decision of the Tribunal

20.

The onus is on the University to establish on the balance of probabilities, using clear

and convincing evidence, that the academic offence charged has been committed by the
Student.
21.

The Student was charged with two offences under Sections B.I.1(d) and B.I.3(b) of

the Code, which read:
B.I.1(d) It shall be an offence for a student knowingly: to represent as one’s
own any idea or expression of an idea or work of another in any academic
examination or term test or in connection with any other form of academic
work i.e. to commit plagiarism[…]
B.I.3(b) It shall be an offence for a […] student […] knowingly: to engage in
any form of cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or
misrepresentation not herein otherwise described, in order to obtain
academic credit or other academic advantage of any kind.
22.

The Tribunal determined that the evidence clearly established that the Essay

submitted by the Student contained ideas that were not her own and that were not cited
appropriately. In this regard, the Tribunal determined that the evidence established that the
Student knowingly represented the work of other persons as her own, and knowingly
included these ideas and expressions of another person without proper acknowledgement.
23.

Having concluded that the Student included ideas that were not her own in the

Essay without proper citation, the Tribunal found it more likely than not that the Student had
knowingly committed plagiarism in the Essay for the purpose of obtaining academic credit
and/or another academic advantage.

7

24.

The Tribunal found that the Student is guilty of plagiarism, contrary to section

B.I.1(d) of the Code.
E.

Penalty

25.

The matter continued with a hearing on the appropriate sanction. The University

requested that the Tribunal make an order that the Student receive a final grade of zero in
the course HIS 272, that she be suspended from the University until January 11, 2021 and
that a notation of the sanction be added to her academic record and transcript until January
11, 2022.
26.

The panel reviewed a number of Tribunal decisions presented by the University.

These cases establish the seriousness of plagiarism as an offence. Plagiarism strikes that
at the heart of the integrity of academic work and is widely understood to be an
unacceptable form of cheating. Students at the University are made aware of this when
they enroll in the University and are made aware of the Code, which states:
The concern of the Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters is with the
responsibilities of all parties to the integrity of the teaching and learning relationship.
Honesty and fairness must inform this relationship, whose basis remains one of
mutual respect for the aims of education and for those ethical principles which must
characterize the pursuit and transmission of knowledge in the University.
…
The University and its members have a responsibility to ensure that a climate which
might encourage, or conditions which might enable, cheating, misrepresentation or
unfairness not be tolerated. To this end, all must acknowledge that seeking credit or
other advantages by fraud or misrepresentation ... is unacceptable, as is any
dishonesty or unfairness in dealing with the work or record of a student.
27.

Students are reminded by professors and instructors throughout their time at the

University of the importance of integrity and the prohibition on any form of academic

