Case 1000

DATE:

   April 10, 2019

PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v. L.E.

Hearing Date(s):

   November 23, 2018 and January 11, 2019

Panel Members:

   Ms. Sara Zborovski, Chair
   Professor Georges Farhat, Faculty Panel Member
   Ms. Daryna Kutsyna, Student Panel Member

Appearances:

   Mr. Robert A. Centa, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland
   Rosenberg Rothstein LLP

In Attendance:

   Ms. Krista Osbourne, Administrative Clerk & Hearing Secretary, Appeals,
   Discipline and Faculty Grievances

   The Student was charged with two counts of academic misconduct under
   the Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters, 1995 (the â Code â) on the
   basis that she knowingly committed plagiarism by submitting an essay
   for academic credit containing an idea and/or an expression of an idea
   and/or the work of another that she did not cite appropriately.
   Specifically, the Student was charged with plagiarism under s. B.i.1(d)
   of the Code , and in the alternative, academic dishonesty under s.
   B.i.3(b) of the Code .

   Neither the Student nor a legal representative of the Student appeared
   on the first day of the hearing, November 23, 2018. The Panel heard
   evidence of the efforts taken by the University to serve the Student
   with notice, including service by email to the email address provided
   by the Student in ROSI and service by courier to the address in Cairo,
   Egypt, provided by the Student in ROSI. The Panel heard evidence that
   the Student had last logged into her University email account on
   September 17, 2018 (prior to the first attempts of the University to
   notify her of the charges). It also noted the short period of time
   between the service of the materials on the Student in Cairo (on
   November 15, 2018) and the first hearing date (November 23, 2018). The
   Panel adjourned to allow the Student additional time to respond to the
   notice of hearing. Neither the Student nor a legal representative of
   the Student appeared on the adjourned hearing date, January 11, 2019.
   The University advised the Panel of additional attempts to serve the
   Student with notice of the new hearing date, including service by
   delivery to the Studentâs address in Cairo, Egypt, which was received
   on December 1, 2018. Although it was confirmed to the Panel that the
   Student had neither accessed her University email account nor provided
   a forwarding email address in ROSI, the Panel was satisfied that the
   totality of attempts made to provide notice to the Student (and
   particularly given that the notice of hearing had been received at the
   Studentâs address in Cairo, Egypt) demonstrated that notice had been
   adequately provided to the Student in accordance with the requirements
   of the Statutory Powers Procedure Act and the University Tribunal Rules
   of Practice and Procedure . As such, the Panel decided to proceed with
   the hearing in the Studentâs absence.

   The Panel heard evidence from the teaching assistant responsible for
   grading the Studentâs work, who explained that he had noticed quotation
   marks in odd places in the Studentâs essay and a wide variance in the
   quality of the language, with grammatical errors mixed in with the use
   of very sophisticated language. Upon carrying out an internet search
   for the phrases used by the Student in the essay, the teaching
   assistant discovered a number of websites containing similar and/or
   verbatim language. No citations were provided in the Studentâs essay to
   any of these websites. The Tribunal determined that the evidence
   clearly established that the essay submitted by the Student contained
   ideas that were not her own and that were not cited appropriately. The
   Tribunal found the Student guilty of plagiarism, contrary to s.
   B.i.1(d) of the Code .

   In determining the appropriate sanction, the Panel noted the
   seriousness of the offence of plagiarism, stating that this offence
   strikes at the heart of the integrity of academic work and is widely
   understood to be an unacceptable form of cheating. The Tribunal noted
   that students at the University are made aware of this when they enrol
   and are reminded throughout their time at the University by their
   professors and instructors of the importance of integrity and the
   prohibition of any form of academic cheating including plagiarism. The
   Tribunal also noted that students are given significant guidance on how
   to specifically avoid plagiarism. In this case, the Student did not
   respond to considerable correspondence from the University on this
   issue, did not attend the hearing and as a result, there were no
   mitigating circumstances for consideration. The Tribunal imposed the
   following sanctions: a final grade of zero; a suspension from the
   University until January 11, 2021; and a notation of this sanction on
   the Studentâs academic record and transcript until January 11, 2022.
   The Tribunal also ordered that the case be reported to the Provost for
   publication of a notice of the decision and the sanctions imposed, with
   the name of the Student withheld.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/28413
