THE UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO

IN THE MATTER OF charges of academic dishonesty made on April 29, 2009;

AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic
Matters, 1995;
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University o_fToronto Act, 1971, S.O. 1971, c. 56 as
amended S.O. 1978, c. 88

BETWEEN:
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO

~and~

Members of the Panel:
Ms. Kirby Chown, Chair

Mr. Graeme Hirst, Faculty Panel Member
Ms. Nikola Cunjak, Student Panel Member

Appearances:

K-

Ms. Lily Haimer, Counsel for the University
Ms. KIi

the Student, did not appear

Preliminary

[1]

A hearing of the Trial Division of the University Tribunal was convened on
Tuesday February 10, 2009 to consider charges under the University of Toronto
Code ofBehaviour on Academic Matters 1995 (hereafter the "Code"), against the
Student. The charges were set out in a letter to the Student dated September 18,
2007.

[2]

The Panel of the Tribunal was made up of Kirby Chown, Chair; Graeme Hirst, a
faculty member; and Nikola Cunjak, a student member. Counsel for the
University of Toronto was Lily Harmer. The Student was not represented and did
not attend the hearing.

[3]

Three minutes after the time at which the hearing was scheduled to begin, the
Student had still failed to appear. The University proposed to proceed in the
Student's absence and the Panel heard submissions with respect to this.

[4]

Ms. Harmer presented the Panel with the affidavit of Betty-Ann Campbell, a law
clerk, which described in detail the extensive efforts made to contact the Student,
to notify her of the charges, to advise her of the seriousness of the charges and of
the hearing before the Tribunal. As well, the Student was provided with a copy of
the Notice of Hearing and the charges along with detailed disclosure of the
evidence.

[5]

The Panel had to decide whether the University's attempts to provide the Student
with notice were reasonable and whether they met the requirements set out in the
Code and in the Statutory Powers and Procedures Act (hereinafter the "SPPA ").
After considering the evidence in the affidavit of Ms. Campbell and the
submissions of counsel, the Panel was satisfied that provisions in the Code and in
the SPPA had been met and ruled that the University could proceed with the
hearing in the Student's absence.

[6]

In particular, the Panel noted that in December 2008, the Student had responded
to an e-mail from Ms. Campbell and provided her a new phone number and
address for future correspondence. The Student acknowledged via e-mail on
January 24, 2009 that she had received the disclosure brief but indicated she
would not be able to return to Canada for the hearing and asked about
alternatives. Ms. Harmer corresponded with the Student in January 2009 to
review possible options but indicated if the matter could not be settled it would
have to be heard by the Tribunal. The Student failed to respond to Ms. Harmer's
correspondence or to the correspondence from Ms Campbell about choosing a
hearing date. She was notified of the February 10, 2009 hearing date via email on
January 6, 2009. Thus the Panel was satisfied that the Notice of Hearing, the
charges, and the disclosure and the date for the hearing were brought to the
Student's attention in a timely fashion.

Hearing on the Facts
[7]

The charges are as follows:
(1) On or about June 3, 2007, you knowingly engaged in a form of
cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or
misrepresentation not otherwise described in order to obtain academic
credit or other academic advantage of any kind by falsely advising Mr.
Mmieza Memari that you received a passing mark and were entitled to
academic credit in ACT466H, contrary to Section B. 1. 3 (b) of the
Code.

2

(2) On or about June 4, 2007, you knowingly engaged in a form of
cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or
misrepresentation not otherwise described in order to obtain academic
credit or other academic advantage of any kind by falsely advising
Professor Sam Broverman that you had written the tests administered
in ACT466H and that you were entitled to academic credit for
ACT466H, contrary to section B. 1. 3 (b) of the Code.
(3) On or about June 11, 2007, you knowingly engaged in a form of
cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud, or
misrepresentation not otherwise described in order to obtain academic
credit or other academic advantage of any kind by falsely advising Mr.
Morteza Memari that you received ce1iain grades in three tests
administered in ACT466H, contrary to Section B. 1. 3(b) of the Code.
(4) On or about June 11, 2007, you knowingly forged or in any other way
altered or falsified an academic record, and/or uttered, circulated or
made use of such forged, altered or falsified record, namely, your
purported test results for ACT466H, contrary to Section B. 1. 3(a) of
the Code.

(5) In the alternative to 4 above, on or about June 11, 2007, you
knowingly forged or in any other way altered or falsified a document
or evidence required by the University, and/or uttered, circulated or
made use of such forged, altered or falsified document, namely, your
purported test results for ACT466H, contrary to Section B. 1. l(a) of
the Code.
(6) On or about June 12, 2007 you knowingly engaged in a form of
cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or
misrepresentation not otherwise described in order to obtain academic
credit or other academic advantage of any kind by falsely advising
Professor Sam Broverman that you received certain grades in three
tests administered in ACT466H and that you were entitled to
academic credit in ACT466H contrary to Section B. 1. 3(b) of the

Code.
(7) On or about June 12 2007, you knowingly forged or in any way
altered or falsified an academic record, and/or uttered circulated or
made use of any such forged altered or falsified record, namely your
purp01ted test results for ACT466H, contrary to Section B. 1. 3(a) 9f
the Code.
(8) In the alternative to 7 above, on or about June 12, 2007 you knowingly
forged or in any other way altered or falsified a document or evidence

3

required by the University and/or uttered, circulated or made use of
any such forged altered or falsified document, namely, your purported
test results for ACT466H, contrary to Section B. 1. l(a) of the Code.
[8]

Particulars of the charges are as follows:

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

All material times you were a student at the University of Toronto in the
Faculty of Arts and Science. In academic term Winter 2007 you were
enrolled in ACT466H which was taught by Professor Sam Broverman.
On or about June 3, 2007 you contacted Mr. Morteza Memari, Associate
Registrar at St. Michael's College, to question the grade of zero you
received in ACT466H. You advised Mr. Memari that you had received a
mark above fifty percent and that the recorded grade of zero was incorrect.
On or about June 4, 2007, you contacted Professor Sam Broverman,
instructor for ACT466H, to question the grade of zero you received in
ACT466H. You advised Professor Broverman that you had written the
three tests administered in the course and that the grade of zero was
incorrect.
Ou or about June 11, 2007, you contacted Mr. Memari again to question
the grade of zero you had received in ACT466H, and you provided him
with the pm-ported marks you said you had received on the three tests
administered in ACT466H.
On or about June 12, 2007, you contacted Professor Broverman and again
stated that you had written the three tests administered in the ACT466H.
You provided him with the purported marks you said you had received in
those three tests. You further claimed you had received a passing grade in
the course and had therefore earned 0.5 academic credit.
You did not write any of the three tests administered in ACT466H in the
academic te1m Winter 2007; the marks you provided to Mr. Memari and
to Professor Broverman were false; and you did not earn academic credit
in ACT466H in that term.

[9]

Counsel for the University indicated the University would be proceeding on
charges 1, 2, 3 and 6. The other charges were withdrawn.

[ 1O]

The University called four witnesses: Professor Sam Broverrnan, Morteza
Memari, Keith Broere and Phillip Ip.

[11]

Professor Broverman knew the Student through his role as student advisor and as
well because he had taught her in two prior courses. Professor Brove1man
testified that the entire course mark in ACT466H was based on three term tests
written in class. I;Ie indicated that the Student was required to pass ACT466H in
order to graduate from the specialist program.

[12]

Professor Broverman testified that the Student contacted him before the start of
the course to indicate she would have to fly over from Hong Kong for the term

4

tests and inquired whether alternative arrangements could be made to
accommodate her. He told her that this would not be possible. Professor
Broverman noted that the Student did not attend any of the lectures in ACT466H
and was not present for any of the three term tests administered in the course. He
confirmed that his teaching assistant, Keith Broere, came to each term test, had
each student sign in and then checked the identification card of each student
against the sign in list. At the conclusion of each test, the number of test papers
was counted and cross checked with the head count and the sign-in list. Mr.
Broere marked all three tests and returned them to Professor Braverman who then
returned the tests to the students - the first two tests were returned in class and the
third was returned after the conclusion of the term.
[13]

ProfBroverman testified that he did not receive any marked tests for the Student
from Mr. Broere. He did not return tests one and two to the Student in class as
there were no such tests to return and the Student was not present. The Student
never made any effort to contact him with respect to picking up test number three.

[14]

Professor Broverman submitted the final marks for ACT466H on May 1, 2007.
He gave the Student a mark of zero for each of the three tests and a course mark
of zero for the whole course.

[15]

Convocation was June 14, 2007. On Monday June 4, 2007, Professor Braverman
learned via e-mail from Mo1teza Memari, Associate Registrar for St. Michael's
College, that the Student had contacted Mr. Memari via email to advise that she
hoped to graduate on June 14, 2007 and indicated that her zero grade in ACT466
was incorrect. She asse1ted that she had accumulated a score above fifty percent
on the three term tests and expected a passing grade in the course. Professor
Broveiman advised Mr. Memati that the Student had not in fact written any of the
three term tests and as a result had correctly ended up with a mark of zero for
each test and zero for the course.

[16]

The Student emailed Professor Broverman directly on June 4, 2007 with the same
assertions. Professor Braverman reiterated that the Student's name was not on the
two of the three term test sign-in sheets that he had in his possession nor did she
ever come to his office to pick up the third test. He indicated that he was prepared
to meet with the Student to discuss matters further. They met on June 13 but
there was no resolution. Professor Braverman indicated she could discuss matters
further with St. Michael's College Registrar, the Dean of Arts and Science if she
wished.

[17]

Professor Broverman was shown a document entitled Degree Request Form dated
March 22, 2007 which was submitted by the Student on or about April 20, 2007
to the Office of the Registrar and Student Services requesting confomation that
she had completed all of the requirements to graduate with an Hon BSc. On the
form, her program status was indicated as complete. This was an error on the part
of the University as the final marks for ACT466H had not yet been submitted.

5

[18]

Mr. Memari testified next. His testimony concerned the correspondence behveen
the Student, himself and Professor Broverman over the student's assertions about
ACT466H.

[19]

Mr. Memari reviewed the extensive e-mail correspondence between himself and
the Student and himself and Professor Braverman. In this email correspondence,
the Student repeatedly asserted that she had attended the lectures, had written the
three term tests and had passed all three tests. She provided passing grades she
alleged she had received for the three tests. Mr. Memari relayed this information
to Professor Broverman but accepted Professor Broverman's statement that he
had no record of the Student having taken the tests and that the correct mark for
the course was zero and so advised the Student.

[20]

Mr. Memari testified that he advised the Student via email that she could speak to
Professor Broverman to see if this matter could be resolved but if it could not, she
would not be able to graduate on June 14, 2007. He also met with the Student on
June 13, 2007 and explained how she could pursue this matter further with the
Dean of the Faculty but based on the facts, he told her she could not participate in
graduation.

[21]

The Student did not participate in graduation which was held on June 14, 2007.

[22]

The next witness was Keith Broere who was the Teaching Assistant for Professor
Broverman in the ACT466H course during the relevant period in Winter 2007.

[23]

Mr. Broere testified that he did not know the Student. He explained the routine
he followed for each term test which included handing out the tests, collecting
signatures of the students on a sign in sheet, checking the students' identification
against the sign in sheet, collecting the tests, counting them and cross checking
them against the attendance list. He would then mark the tests and provide the
corrected tests and the marks to Professor Braverman.

[24]

Mr. Broere supervised all three tests for ACT466H and followed the above
procedures on each occasion. He marked all three tests. The Student did not sign
in on the sign in sheet for any of the three tests. He had no exam papers from the
Student for any of the three tests and accordingly did not assign her a mark for
any of the tests.

[25]

Mr, Broere testified that it was not possible for a student to write a test and not
sign in as he counted the number of tests at the end and cross checked that number
with the headcount of the room and the sign in sheet. The students are kept in the
room until this is reconciled. He 'had never had a discrepancy between the
number of students and the number of tests and did not in Winter 2007.

6

[26]

He marked the third test in ACT466H in mid to late April and provided the marks
electronically to Professor Broverman in a spreadsheet. His computer was
password protected.

[27]

The final witness called was Dr. Peter Ip who works in the University of Toronto
Computing and Network Services. He attempted to find information on where the
Student was located when she logged into her computer and sent the various emails to Professor Braverman and to Mr. Memari. He did find that most of the
ISP' s were based in Hong Kong.

[28]

The Panel was presented with a document brief containing, inter alia, copies of
the e-mails referred to above between the student and Mr. Memari and Professor
Brovennan as well as other University officials; her academic transcript, and her
degree request.

Decision of the Tribunal
[29}

After hearing the submissions of counsel and considering all the evidence, the
Panel was satisfied that counsel for the University had proved the charges on the
basis of clear and compelling evidence.

[30]

The Panel agreed that this was a unique case in which the Student had completely
fabricated her involvement in an entire course in order to suggest she had taken
the course and had completed three term tests with a passing grade in order to get
her degree. Despite the Student's assertions in her e-mails that she had attended
class, had written the term tests and had passed the course, the Panel found that
there was overwhelming evidence that she did not attend class nor write any of
the three tests. The Panel was persuaded by the careful and thorough procedures
that Mr. Broere carried out in each of the three tests which supported the
University's case that the Student in fact was not there and did not write any of
the three tests.

[31]

The Panel did not place any weight on the evidence of Mr. Ip who attempted to
discern where the Student was when she sent various e-mails to the University.

[32]

The Panel was satisfied on the evidence before it that the Student is guilty of the
charges at paragraphs 1, 2, 3, and 6 and has committed the serious act of academic
misconduct.

ADJOURNMENT OF HEARING
[33]

The Panel adjourned the hearing after making this finding. The hearing was to be
rescheduled at a future date for evidence and submissions re sanction. The
hearing was subsequently adjourned to May 25, 2009.

7

[34]

The Student did not attend the penalty phase of the hearing nor was she
represented by Counsel.

SANCTION
[35]
On May 25 th the hearing resumed for the penalty phase. The University argued
that the appropriate sanction in this matter was:

(a)

recommendation to the Governing Council that the Student be expelled
from the University.

(b)

in the interim, a five year suspension until Governing Council has
considered the recommendation for expulsion, with notice of the
suspension to be placed on the Student's record for six years or until
graduation, whichever comes first.

(c)

that the Office of the Provost publish a notice of this decision in the
University newspaper with the name of the Student withheld.

[36]

The Panel considered the submissions by Counsel for the University and the
principles for deciding the appropriate sanction as set out in the reasons for
decision in the case of The University ofToronto and Mr. C (November 5, 1976)
in the dissent of Mr. Sopinka, as he then was, which principles have been adopted
consistently by Panels of the University Tribunal.

[37]

The Panel considered the nature of the offence in this case. The Student did not
attend any of the classes in ACT466, did not write any of the three mandatory
tests yet asserted to the Associate Registrar and to her Professor that she had
indeed been present, had indeed written the tests and had indeed passed and
should therefore be allowed to graduate. Her conduct in June 2007 represented a
prolonged series of misrepresentations and falsehoods as she attempted to
persuade more than one individual at the Univetsity of these untrue asse1tions in
order to graduate. The University responded to her assertions by actively trying
to investigate the matter given her rapidly approaching graduation date. They did
so in good faith but were unable to substantiate her claims.

[38J

The Student's conduct was a direct assault on the academic integrity of the
University. She attempted to get credit for a course she had not taken and to
graduate based on false pretences. This clearly is in dramatic contrast to other
students who have worked hard and legitimately to complete their courses and
their degree requirements.

[39]

The Student did not appear. As a result, the Panel was not provided with any
information about any mitigating or extenuating circumstances that may have led

8

her to engage this course of deception. As well, the Panel had no evidence
relating to her character. We do however note that there is no record that the
Student had committed any prior academic offences.
[40]

The Pane! was struck by the fact that at no point this course of conduct did the
Student admit to any mistake nor evidence any remorse over her actions.
Although the Student initially co-operated with Counsel for the University with
respect to this hearing, that co-operation and any communication soon ceased.

[41 J

Accordingly the Panel was unanimously of the vie\v that the sanction requested
by the University was appropriate.

[42]

Therefore the Panel detem1ines that the appropriate sanction is as follows:
1.

reco1ru11endation to the Governing Council that the Student be expeHed
from the University. In the interim, that the Student to be suspended and
that suspension be noted on the Student's record for a period of six years
or graduation, whichever comes earlier.

2.

that the Student receive a grade of zero in the course.

3.

that the Provost publish a notice of this decision \Vith the name of Student
withheld.

I certify that this is the decision of the Panel

Date

Kirby Chown, Barrister and Solicitor (Chair)

9

