Case #520

   DATE: November 3, 2009
   PARTIES: University of Toronto v. K.K.
   Hearing Date(s): February 10, 2009, May 25, 2009
   Panel Members:
   Ms. Kirby Chown, Chair
   Prof. Graeme Hirst, Faculty Member
   Mr. Nikola Cunjak, Student Member
   Appearances:
   Ms. Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel for the University

   Trial Division â s.B.1.3(b) and s.B.1.3(a) of the Code â academic
   dishonesty or misconduct â forged academic record â made
   misrepresentations to a professor and assistant registrar in order to
   convocate â Student did not attend hearing -- reasonable notice given
   to the Student -- finding of guilt â adjournment for sentencing â
   sentencing factors in Mr. C â seriousness of offence â no mitigating
   factors or extenuating circumstances â University submission on penalty
   accepted â Panel ordered: recommendation of expulsion; grade of zero in
   the course; report to the Provost.

   The Student was charged with eight charges, four of which were under s.
   B.1.3(b), and four of which were under s. B.1.3(a) of the Code. The
   charges stemmed from allegations that the Student had provided false
   information to a Professor and an associate registrar in order to
   convocate. The Student did not attend the Hearing. The Panel found that
   reasonable notice of the Hearing was given to the Student.The
   University proceeded on the four charges under s.B.1.3(b) and withdrew
   the other four charges. The University called four witnesses: the
   Professor, the associate registrar, the TA, and an expert from
   University of Toronto Computing and Network Services. The Tribunal
   found the student guilty on all four charges. The hearing was adjourned
   for sentencing. The student did not attend the sentencing hearing. The
   Panel considered the sentencing factors in Mr. C (November 5, 1976).
   The nature of the offence was held to be serious and a direct assault
   to the academic integrity of the University. There were no mitigating
   or extenuating circumstances available due to the Studentâs absence.
   The Panel accepted the Universityâs submission on penalty and ordered:
   a recommendation of expulsion; a grade of zero in the course; and a
   report to the Provost.

   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12748
