THE UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
TRIAL DIVISION
IN THE MATTER OF charges of academic dishonesty made on December 4, 2012,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academ ic
Matters, 1995,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Act, 1971 , S.O. 1971, c. 56 as
amended S.O. 1978, c.88

BETWEEN:
UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
- AND-

REASONS FOR DECISION
Hearing Date: Friday, July 12, 2013
Members of the Panel:
Paul B. Schabas, Barrister and Solicitor, Chair
Professor Pascal van Lieshout, University of Toronto Mississauga, Department of
Speech-Language Pathology
Mr. Adam Found, Student Panel Member
Appearances:
Mr. Robert Centa, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Barristers
Mr. ~ ~ . the Student
Ms. Betty-Ann Campbell, Law Clerk, Paliare Roland Barristers
Ms. Serene Tan, Instructor: GGR208H5S: People and Places
Ms. Rana Nouri, Witness for the Student
Ms. Rohina Gui, Witness for the Student
In Attendance:
Ms. Lucy Gaspini, Manager, Academic Integrity and Affairs, University of Toronto
Mississauga
Ms. Natalie Ramtahal, Coordinator, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances

-2-

Introduction

1) A panel of the Trial Division of the University Tribunal convened to hear this matter
on Friday, July 12, 2013. For the reasons which follow, the panel has concluded
that Mr. -

is guilty of charge one, and dismisses charges two and three.

The Charges and Particulars

The charges, and the particulars of those charges, are as follows:
1.

On or about August 16, 2012, you knowing ly represented the ideas,

or the expressions of the ideas of another as your own work in an essay
that you submitted in the University of Toronto course GGR208
("Course"), contrary to Section B.1.1 (d) of the Code.
2.

On or about August 16, 2012, you knowingly submitted an essay

containing purported references to sources that had been concocted,
contrary to section B.1.1 (f) of the Code.
3.

In the alternative, by submitting the essay in the Course, you

knowingly engaged in a form of cheating, academic dishonesty or
misconduct, fraud or misrepresentation not otherwise described in the
Code in order to obtain academic cred it or other academic advantage of
I

any kind, contrary to section B.l.3(b) of the Code.
Particulars

4.

At all material times you were a student at the University of Toronto

Mississauga.
5.

In Winter 2012, you enrolled in the Course, which was called

People and Places, and which was taught by Serena Tan.
6.

As one of the requirements of the Course, you were required to

submit a research essay, which was worth 20% of the final grade.

-3-

7.

On August 12, 2012, you submitted an essay titled "Peoples

Republic of China" (Essay").
8.

You submitted the Essay to obtain academic credit.

9.

You submitted the Essay knowing that it contained verbatim or

nearly verbatim passages from other sources which were not placed in
quotation marks or properly attributed to their original sources. You knew
that the Essay contained ideas or expressions of ideas which were not
your own. You did not include these sources you used in your
bibliography.
10.

You submitted the Essay knowing that it contained references to

sources that were concocted or/and that you did not consult. You did so
in order to obtain an academic advantage and for the purpose of
attempting to conceal your plagiarism.
11.

You knowingly submitted the Essay with the intention that the

University of Toronto rely on it as containing your own ideas in considering
the appropriate academic credit to be assigned to the work.
The Evidence for the University

2) The University called two witnesses.
3) The first witness was Serene Tan, the instructor in course GGR 208 H5S: People
and Places, taught at UT Mississauga, in the summer session 2012. Ms. Tan holds
a PhD from York University and is currently a Policy Associate at the Mowat Centre.
Prior to the summer of 2012, she had taught a course at New College and had
previously taught courses at York University.
4)

Ms. Tan described the course as being about populations, migration, and
globalization. She identified the course syllabus, which included a section on
evaluation and a section on academic integrity. The evaluation included two

-4-

assignments each worth 20% of the total mark. Otherwise evaluation was through
a mid-term in-class test, final exam and class participation.
5) The syllabus also contained a second dealing with academic integrity, which
included a reminder to students to be familiar with , and adhere to, both the Code of
Student Conduct and the Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters, 1995. Students

were also referred to a document "How Not to Plagiarize," by M. Proctor. Students
were also advised that papers would be submitted to www.turnitin.com for the
purpose of detecting plagiarism. Ms. Tan also indicated that in her first lecture she
normally reminds students that they are not to cheat. She noted that this particular
course was a second year course so she also expected students to be familiar with
the requirements of academic honesty. Ms. Tan readily conceded that she included
the section on academic integrity in the syllabus because it is required by the
Department.
6) This case dealt with the second assignment, a research essay. Ms. Tan reviewed
the assignment sheet noting that it asked students to write a 2,000 word essay on a
country of the student's choice, looking at demographics or migration issues,
analyzing something that she had covered in class in more detail. The grading and
assessment scheme provided to students clearly directed them to "include citations
where applicable. References should be properly cited and should include scholarly
and credible sources (peer reviewed articles or books.)"
7) Mr. ~ chose to write his essay on the People's Republic ·of China, looking at two
contemporary issues: China's one-child policy, and poverty.
8) Ms. Tan explained that she read the paper twice and initially gave it a mark of 14
out of 20. Following the marking, she checked the results on turnitin.com. She
explained that turnitin.com looks for similarities. She noted that Mr. ~

•s essay

had a "51 %" simflarity index. This concerned her as she normally expects to see a
result between 1% and 9%. As she put it "anything over two digits would cause her
to take a closer look." 51 % indicates a remarkably high similarity to other works,
she said.

-5-

9) While the turnitin.com information is interesting, the University made it clear that it
was placing no reliance on that information in proving the charges . Rather,
evidence of the results from turnitin .com was only led to explain why Ms. Tan took
further steps. The Panel also places no reliance on the turnitin .com results.
10) Ms. Tan then conducted her own investigation. She explained that she took
highlighted passages from the turnitin.com results and put them in a Google search,
which led her to identify three documents which were remarkably similar to portions
of Mr. ~ · s paper. As she put it "the text in Mr. ~

·s paper is very similar to the

sources she found, and words and numbers appear in a very similar order."
0

11) In particular, Ms. Tan printed out sources entitled Poverty in China" (Source #1), an
excerpt from "The Effect of China's One-Child Family Policy after 25 Years" (Source

#2 , an article from The New England Journal of Medicine), and "Issues and Trends
in China's Population (Throughout History and Today)" (Source #3).
12) Ms. Tan reviewed with us the similarities she identified and concluded that there
was an unacceptable degree of similarity between Mr. ~ · s paper and the
sources. Only one of the sources (Source #3) was cited in Mr. ~

•s footnotes ,

and there were no quotation marks around words that appeared to be taken from
the sources.
13) In cross-examination by Mr.~. it was suggested to Ms. Tan that she told the
class that all she wanted to see was where students got their material from, in a
bibliography. Ms. Tan conceded that this was "possible", but did not recall telling
students that quotation marks were unnecessary, as Mr.~ suggested. There
was also some cross-examination on the fact that the first source printed out by Ms.
Tan when the matter came to light, entitled "Poverty in China", could not be found
again at the same url on the internet. However, Ms. Tan had a copy of Source #1
printed shortly after this came to light, and the same content now appears verbatim
on Wikipedia.

-6-

14) The University also called Ms. Betty-Ann Campbell, a law clerk at Paliare Roland ,
the law firm representing the University. Ms. Campbell assists in preparing
disclosure and otherwise supports counsel to the University on these matters.
15) She explained that she too did Google searches using passages from Mr. ~

•s

paper and identified additional similarities between the paper and the article in the
New England Journal of Medicine and the other sources identified by Ms. Tan. In

cross-examination, she acknowledged that Wikipedia is a commonly used website,
containing shared content, which Mr. ~ suggested is "inherently unreliable".
16) With the exception of the opening paragraph of Mr. ~

's essay, each paragraph

of the essay bears a very close similarity to the three sources identified by Ms. Tan.
The Evidence for the Defence

17) Mr. ~ called two witnesses prior to testifying on his own behalf. The first witness
was a neighbour who gave very brief evidence to the effect that Mr. ~ is of good
character. Aside from telling the Panel that she had given Mr. ~ $1 ,500.00 for
safekeeping which he then gave back to her, she gave no specific evidence and
simply asserted that Mr.~ helped her, that she had no problems with him, and
thinks he is a good person.
18) The second witness, Ms. Rohina Gui, was also a neighbour who described Mr.
~ as a good person, often helping his mother who took care of Ms. Gui's child.

She also said that Mr. ~ took good care of her car when she was away.
19) Ms. Gui also gave evidence regarding Mr. ~

•s conduct in preparing the essay.

Because of the noise of children at home, Ms. Gui let Mr. ~ work at her home,
where she was studying for medical exams. She recalls Mr. ~ making notes
about an assignment about China and population including making a chart with
pencil. She was shown notes which Mr. ~

subsequently testified were the notes

he made in preparation for the paper, and said that she remembered seeing those
notes. She recalls that Mr. ~ was not happy doing this work, finding it dry and
boring. Ms. Gui also said that she recognized some of the topics of the articles that

-7-

Mr.

SIi put before her and wh ich he subsequently testified were his source

materials. As she put it, this was "probably your research".
20) In cross-examination, Ms. Gui agreed that she doesn't have a specific recollection
of seeing any of the particular articles, she just recalls Mr.

SIi doing an essay

about the one-child policy and rising HIV rates. Nor could she state with certainty
that the handwritten notes were the very notes made by Mr.

SIi- In re-

examination by Mr. •. she was asked to describe her degree of certainty that
the notes and articles were those used by Mr . •

in 2012, "on a scale of one to

ten". With respect to both exhibits, she answered "eight out of ten".
21) M r . . testified on his own behalf. He identified the notes (Exhibit 12) shown to
Ms. Gui as the notes he used to prepare his paper, and identified the research
papers contained in the bundle (Exhibit 13) as the articles be used when preparing
his essay. Those articles were highlighted. Exhibit 13 included a copy of Ms. Tan's
Source #3, but did not include the other two sources.
22) Mr.

SIi then took the Panel at length and in detail through his paper and the

footnotes in order to show that the footnotes properly supported what he had
written. He noted that many of the similarities in the text referred to dates, common
facts and statistics which would show up in any review of similarities between one
document and another. He described many of the phrases used in the text which it
was alleged overlapped or were taken verbatim from other sources to be simply
common phrases.
23) Mr.

SIi also complained that the first time he got copies of Ms. Tan's three

sources was in the disclosure received from Mr. Genta. He complained that Ms.
Tan's first source, which is described in an internet hyperlink in Ms. Tan's letter to
the Chair of the Geography Department dated September 4 , 2012, is no longer
accessible at that hyperlink. However, as noted by Ms. Tan, that source appears
verbatim today on the internet on Wikipedia.
24) Mr.

SIi also said that he had no motive to plagiarize. He noted that the course

was pass/fail, and that he could "easily" have passed the course without even

-8-

writing this assignment. However he introduced little evidence to support this
assertion, noting only that he had received a 70 percent on the first mid-term, and
that he would have been entitled to a participation mark.
25) Mr. ~

's misconduct, however, was effectively disclosed in cross-examination.

26) First, the bundle of sources, or articles, that Mr. ~ identified as the materials he
used when preparing the paper, were printed from the internet in late June 2013, in
preparation for th is hearing. This is clear from the dates on Exhibit 13. To give just
one example, the first page of Exhibit 13 is a download from a website and the date
6/25/2013 appears on the bottom right-hand corner. Another example of the
printing dates is contained at the bottom of one of the articles which has the words
"This content downloaded .. .on 25 June 2013 ... ". When this was put to Mr . •

,

he attempted to explain that his computer crashed in February 2013 and all of his
documents were "washed away", so he had to download them again. He argued
that if he was fabricating, he would have hidden those dates on the print-out.
27) However, Mr. ~

's explanation here is not credible. First, his response to Mr.

Centa's questions on this issue were inconsistent with his initial statement that the
sources were the very documents which he had used in preparing his paper.
Indeed, the bundle of articles were also the documents that he asked Ms. Gui to
confirm that he had worked from last summer. His story changed on crossexamination, stating that he worked from "soft copies" when he was doing his
research , looking at PDF's which he was able to highlight on his computer. As he
said , "I did not have to print it out when I was writing my paper". This, of course , is
inconsistent with the evidence of Ms. Gui as put to her by Mr. • . Mr. •

,s

response to questioning on these issues was to accuse Mr. Centa of "playing with
words", or he simply did not answer the questions put to him, such as refusing to
respond to the suggestion that the blue highlighting he had placed on Exhibit 13 had
only been put there in June 2013 in preparation for this hearing.

- 9-

28) The second way in which Mr. ·

•s story fell apart was in the juxtaposition of

passages from his paper and the three sources identified by Ms. Tan - two of which
(Source #2 and Source #3) Mr.

81111 said he didn't rely on at all in his paper.

29) One example of extraordinary similarity is that the four sections of Mr. •,s paper
dealing with China's one-child policy cited exactly the same sources as were
included in the New England Journal of Medicine article (Source #2). Further, in
comparing similar paragraphs from the two documents, footnotes appeared in
similar places at the conclusion of sentences which contained similar wording. Most
revealing, however, was the identical citation of one particular source. This
occurred in footnote 10 of Mr. ·

·s paper which contained the following

reference: "World Bank Health Nutrition and Population Division. Development
data. (Accessed August 26, 2005 at http://www.worldbank.org/hnpstats.)" This is
identical to footnote 28 of the New England Journal of Medicine article, right down
to the "Accessed August 26, 2005" reference. Mr.

81111 gave no explanation for the

use of this identical footnote. Clearly he did not access the World Bank source on
August 26, 2005, and the only reasonable inference is that the source was lifted
from the New England Journal of Medicine article, along with the other footnotes.
30) In cross-examination, Mr.

81111 refused to concede the extraordinary similarities in

wording, ideas, and sentence order. He claimed that it wasn't surprising to see
similarities because he had read very widely in the field and was very familiar with it.
However when confronted with some of the more striking similarities, he simply
refused to answer questions. We were asked to compare, for example, the
following passages:

- 10 -

From the New England Journal of
Medicine

"Several options for the future have
been suggested. One possibility is that
everyone could be allowed to have up to
two children, with a space of at least five
years between them .1 It has been
predicted that this option would yield a
total fertility rate of 1.7 during the next two
decades, which would help to normalize
the sex ratio, reduce the 4:2:1
phenomenon, and be acceptable to the
majority of people.
But the government feels that vigilance
is still essential. It is feared that any
wavering in implementation of the policy
may compromise the goal of keeping the
population below 1.4 billion by 2010, which
in turn could threaten economic growth
and stability....

From Mr. S-s Paper
"Future of One Child policy
Chinese government is considering
several options for the future of one child
policy. One of the options under
consideration is to allow up to two children,
with a space of at least five years between
them. 1 Predictions state that this option
may lead to a fertility rate of 1.7 during the
next two decades. This would help
normalize the sex ratio, reduce the 4:2:1
phenomenon and would receive general
acceptance from the majority population.
However, the government feels that
vigilance is crucial. The government is
worried that any wavering in the
implementation of the policy may hamper
the goal of keeping the target population
which could threaten economic growth and
stability.

As a result in 2002 government
Therefore, in 2002 it was announced
announced its intention of not making any
that there would be no fundamental policy
fundamental policy changes, however,
changes but that certain aspects of policy
some aspects of policy implementation
2
implementation would be relaxed. For
may be relaxed.2 Some policy relaxation
example, couples are to be allowed choice would include client centered family
in contraceptive methods as part of soplanning services that would give choice in
called client-centered family-planning
contraceptive methods. Furthermore,
services. These changes have now been
couples would not have to obtain
introduced in 800 counties (out of a total of permission to have their first child, a move
3000), and more are planned.
from the very unpopular system of local
Furthermore, couples no longer need to
birth quotas, which meant that couples
obtain permission to have a first child , a
would have to delay their pregnancy if
move that spells the end of the very
local quota was exceeded . These
unpopular system of local birth quotas,.
changes reflect Chinese government's
which meant that couples were forced to
efforts to adopt a cautious and gradual

1

Greenhalgh S, Bongaarts J . Fertility policy in China: future options. Science 1987;235:1167-1172
No relaxation of Chinese one couple, one child policy. People's Daily Beijing. September 2, 2002.
(Accessed August 16, 2012, at
Http://English. peopledaily.com.cn/200209/01/eng20020901_102440.shtml.)
1
Greenhalgh S, Bongaarts J . Fertility policy in China: future options. Science 1987;235:1 167-1172
2
No relaxation of Chinese one couple, one child policy. People's Daily Beijing. September 2, 2002.
(Accessed August 16, 2012, at
Http://English. peopledaily.com.cn/200209/01/eng20020901_102440.shtml.)
2

- 11 -

delay pregnancy if the local quota was
exceeded. These changes, together with
declining fertility aspirations, have reduced
(though not eliminated) the tensions
associated with the government's efforts to
control population growth and have
allowed the government to adopt a
cautious and gradual approach to relaxing
the one-child policy."

approach to relaxing one child policy."

31) The similarities in both text and citation of sources is unmistakeable, and was even
more striking in the sections of Mr. ·
Here, Mr. ~

•s paper dealing with poverty in China.

·s sources are identical to those contained on the Wikipedia entry

(which is also Source #1 printed out by Ms. Tan when the plagiarism first came to
light).
32) Mr. •,s only explanation was to argue that this is "the language you're going to
use if you're using the source documents ... those are plain words ... there's nothing
special about them". He also asserted that anyone who is writing about those
topics would use those sources.
33) A cursory comparison of the New England Journal of Medicine article and the
Wikipedia article with the essay submitted by Mr. ~ demonstrates that the ideas

and sentences are extremely similar, placed in the same order and in very similar
language, with identical footnotes. Even Mr. ~ s introduction, titled
"Background" is strikingly similar to Ms. Tan's Source #3. While at least there Mr.
~ provided a footnote to that source, the language he used is strikingly similar.

There is simply no reasonable explanation for the similarities other than Mr. ~
simply lifting whole sections from these documents, making minor changes to the
texts so that sentences would not be identical, and passing them off as his own
work. Mr. •

admitted that he knew he was not to use anyone else's work and

pass it off as his own without any attribution. He also agreed that he knew that if he
was going to use verbatim or nearly verbatim language from sources, he must put
those words in quotation marks and cite them. It is clear that he violated these rules

- 12 -

which were known to him, especially as a senior student in the fourth year of his
studies.
Conclusion on Charge One

34) In our view, Mr. ~ is guilty of the first charge against him, that he "knowingly
represented the ideas, or the expressions of the ideas of another as your own work
in an essay that you submitted to the University of Toronto ... , contrary to Section
B.1.1 (D) of the Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters." The panel is mindful of
the fact that the onus of proof in these cases is on the prosecutor, who "must show
on clear and convincing evidence that the accused has committed the alleged
offense." Mr. Centa has also noted that while the charge uses the word
"knowingly", the term "knowing" is deemed to have been met "if the person ought
reasonably to have known" that they were committing an offense under the code.
35) We conclude the first charge has been clearly and convincingly established.
Indeed, the evidence is so strong, and Mr. ·

·s explanations either non-existent

or so unconvincing, that if actual knowledge was required we would infer that he
had it. Mr. ~

·s explanation that he only used the underlying sources is incapable

of belief. In particular, the "arrow through the heart", to use Mr. Centa's words , is
contained in Mr. ~ · s footnote 10 containing the reference to having accessed a
document on August 26, 2005, which is exactly how it appears in the New England
Journal of Medicine article. In short, Mr. ~

deliberately plagiarized by stringing

together passages and footnotes from three different sources, two of which were
not attributed in his paper.
36) In reaching this conclusion, we have also considered , and rejected , Mr. ~

·s

closing submissions, much of which repeated his evidence. He asked us to give
weight to his witnesses; however, his witnesses did not help his case. The first
witnesses' evidence gave only the barest of good character evidence, while Ms.
Gui's evidence actually undermined Mr. ~

·s story. By having Ms. Gui state that

she believed Mr. ~ had source documents with him, she contradicted Mr. ~

·s

subsequent explanation, given in cross-examination, that he only had soft copies of

--- -~-- - ~- - - ~~="""""'"""'-"""""-=--"""""===~- - - - - --

- 13 -

the documents when preparing the essay. Mr.~ was reduced to asserting that
he had notes showing that he had done research, but even the notes contained no
independent verification. Finally, while we are mindfu l that Wikipedia can be
changed over time and is not, as Mr.

SIii submitted, a reliable source which could

have been created after he wrote the paper, the document printed out by Ms. Tan
when she first suspected plagiarism is identical to the Wikipedia entry printed out by
Ms. Campbell in preparation for the hearing. In our view, the reliability of Wikipedia
is not an issue here. What is important is the fact that Mr. ~

's paper tracks,

almost verbatim, a source found by Ms. Tan in the summer of 2012, and which
continues to appear on the Internet in a Wikipedia entry.
Charges Two and Three
37) As to the second charge , Mr. Centa submits that this is made out by use of footnote
10, which is identical to footnote 28 in the New England Journal of Medicine article.
Mr. Centa submits that by representing in his paper that he relied on a source which
was clea rly not reviewed by Mr. ~

. he has breached subsection B.l.1 (f) of the

Code which makes it an offence to "submit any academic work containing a
purported statement of fact or reference to a source which has been concocted."
However, charge two asserts that Mr. ~ "knowingly submitted an essay
containing purported references to sources that had been concocted" which is
particularized to also include "sources ... that you did not consult". The word
"concocted" connotes making something up that does not otherwise exist.
38) In our view, the charge as phrased alleges that Mr. ~ made up sources that did
not exist. However, whether the source existed or not, clearly Mr. SIii did not
review it as he could·not have accessed it in 2005. Given the wording of
Subsection B.i.1 (f) of the Code, which specifically addresses "concocting" a
reference, we are not satisfied that this subsection makes it an offence to cite
something without having looked at it, which is as far as the evidence takes us. By
copying the footnote , this is an example of the plagiarism covered by charge one.
Accordingly, while in no way condoning Mr.

SIii's conduct, we are not satisfied

----

- 14 -

that charge two has been established, or should properly be found against him in
light of our findings on charge one.
39) Mr. Centa stated at the outset that if a finding of guilt was made on charge one
and/or charge two , it would not be necessary to deal with charge three .
Accordingly, we find Mr. ~ guilty on charge number one and dismiss charges
two and three. We remain seized of the matter in order to address penalty at a
hearing to be scheduled through the Office of the Governing Council.

Dated at Toronto, thisg>~

of August, 2013

