Case 697

   [1]Case 697 - Sanction

DATE:

   August 8, 2013 and January 17, 2014

PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v B.S.

Hearing Date(s):

   July 12, 2013 and December 17, 2013

Panel Members:

   Paul Schabas, Chair
   Pascal van Lieshout, Faculty Member
   Adam Found, Student Member

Appearances:

   Robert Centa, Assistant Discipline Counsel
   Michael Alexander, Lawyer for the Student (at Sanction only)
   The Student
   Betty-Ann Campbell, Law Clerk, Palaire Roland Barristers (at Finding
   only)
   Serene Tan, Instructor (at Finding only)
   Rana Nouri (at Finding (only)
   Rohina Gul (at Finding only)

In Attendance:

   Lucy Gaspini, Manager, Academic Integrity and Affairs, UTM
   Natalie Ramtahal, Coordinator, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty
   Grievances

   Student charged with an offence under each of s. B.i.1(d), B.i.1(f) and
   B.i.3(b) of the Code. The charges related to allegations that the
   student had submitted a plagiarized essay and allegedly concocted a
   reference. The Student submitted a paper in a course at the University
   of Toronto Mississauga knowing that it contained verbatim passages from
   unreferenced sources and concocted references to conceal his
   plagiarism.

   The syllabus contained a section on academic integrity and advised that
   assignments were to be submitted to www.turnitin.com, a plagiarism
   detection site. The assignment at issue had a remarkably high
   similarity index of 51%. Upon further investigation the instructor
   pinpointed three sources with an unacceptable degree of similarity to
   the Studentâs paper, with only the third source referenced in the
   footnotes.

   The Panel found the Student guilty of the charge under s. B.i.1(d) of
   the Code, noting that while the term âknowinglyâ is used, that is
   deemed to have been met if âthe person ought reasonably to have knownâ
   they were committing an offense. The evidence against him was strong,
   his explanations were unconvincing and the Panel found the Student
   guilty of deliberate plagiarism. The Panel found the evidence so
   convincing they would have also have found the Student knew he was
   plagiarizing. The Panel was not satisfied that the charge under s.
   B.i.1(f) of the Code was established. S. B.i.1(f) requires âconcoctingâ
   a reference. While not condoning the Studentâs behaviour, the Panel did
   not find this an accurate charge for the Studentâs conduct as the
   footnote was plagiarized from a source that existed. It was not
   necessary to deal with the charge under s. B.i.3(b) of the Code.

   In reasons for Decision on August 8, 2013, the Panel found the Student
   guilty of plagiarism.

   The University submitted a penalty of a final grade of zero in the
   course, a suspension of three years from the date of the order, and a
   notation on the Studentâs academic record for four years. The
   University noted that the penalty is up to Panel discretion and there
   is no binding appellate authority.

   The Student submitted a penalty of zero for the paper (worth 20% of the
   course grade), a one year suspension, and a notation on the Studentâs
   transcript until he graduates (expected two years). Additionally, the
   Student was prepared do a year of community service as a demonstration
   of remorse but proposed no plan and the Panel had no power to impose or
   oversee such a âsanctionâ.

   The Panel, recognizing that there is no formula dictating a specific
   sanction for a particular act, did note that a two year suspension is
   akin to a starting point for a first offender. Additionally some
   decisions state that a two year suspension is the appropriate
   âthresholdâ penalty for plagiarism (Case No. 509,488, and 521). While
   the Panel was not bound by any presumption of a two year suspension as
   a starting point it did recognize the importance of fairness and
   consistency. The Panel considered the case of Mr. C (Case No.
   1976/77-3) which stated that the purposes of punishment are
   reformation, deterrence, and protection of the public and set out a
   number of criteria in assessing punishment. The Panel considered the
   seriousness of the offense of plagiarism noting that it cannot be
   tolerated. Â Both the preamble to the Code and Section B of the Code
   assert this and instructors stress the importance of integrity and give
   guidance on how not to plagiarize. The seriousness of the offense meant
   that, absent mitigating factors, the sanction must reflect the harm
   caused and convey the seriousness of the misconduct to others. In this
   case the plagiarism was significant as virtually the whole paper was
   plagiarized knowingly and deliberately.

   The Panel addressed the Studentâs submissions noting the importance of
   rehabilitation and that for a first offense of plagiarism a student is
   not generally given a life sentence. The Panel also noted that falling
   behind oneâs peers a result of suspended graduation may not be a
   disadvantage as economic circumstances are unpredictable and many
   students take a âgap yearâ during their studies. The Panel agreed with
   the University that there were no mitigating circumstances and the
   Studentâs conduct aggravated the matter. The penalty should be
   consistent with principles that have guided other panels. While many
   first offense plagiarism cases receive two year suspensions some
   receive lighter sentences when there are mitigating circumstances and
   others receive longer suspensions when aggravating factors are present.

   The Panel imposed a three-year suspension from the date of the order,
   assigned a grade of zero in the course, and ordered a notation on the
   Studentâs transcript for three and a half years or until the Student
   graduates, whichever occurs first.
   [2]View Case

References

   1. http://live-the-office-of-the-governing-council.pantheonsite.io/media/13070
   2. file:///media/13023
