Case #428

   DATE: June 2006 (no specific date provided)
   PARTIES: University of Toronto v. The Student
   Hearing Date(s): May 3, 2006
   Panel Members:
   Mr. Ron Slaght, Chair
   Prof. Melanie Woodin, Faculty Panel Member
   Coralie DâSouza, Student Panel Member
   Appearances:
   Mr. Robert Centa, for the University
   Ms Betty-Ann Cambell, assisting Mr. Centa
   Professor Roger Beck, Deanâs Designate for Academic Discipline at UTM
   The Student did not appear
   Trial Division - s. B.i.1(d) and s. B.i.1(f) of Code â plagiarism and
   concoction -Â  essay plagiarized from internet and containing concocted
   references â hearing not attended â reasonable notice of hearing â see
   Code and the Statutory Powers Procedures Act â finding of guilt - paper
   intentionally and knowingly concocted and efforts taken to disguise
   fact â finding of guilt -Â  if process had been availed at decanal
   level then maximum penalty would have been one-year suspension - fair
   and relevant to consider choice not to engage in disciplinary process
   and that the matterÂ  might have been disposed of at decanal level - no
   mitigating evidence - Universityâs submission on penalty accepted â
   grade assignment of zero for course; two-year suspension; two-year
   notation on transcript; and report to Provost
   Student charged under s. B.i.1(d), s. B.i.1(f), and alternatively,
   under s. B.i.3(b) of the Code. The charges related to allegations that
   the Student submitted an essay containing passages plagiarized from the
   internet and concocted references. The Student did not appear at the
   hearing and was not represented by counsel. The Panel considered
   records of correspondence and attempted correspondence, registered
   letters signed for by the Student and the fact that the Studentâs
   address was considered by a private investigator, and found that the
   provisions in the Code and the Statutory Powers Procedures Act had been
   met and that the University could proceed in the Studentâs absence. The
   Panel found that while ideally the Notice should have been given
   earlier then one week before the hearing, the history and the Studentâs
   failure to respond to letters and documents known to have been received
   was sufficient to prove that reasonable notice was provided to the
   Student. The Panel considered the submission of the University and the
   testimony of the course professor and teaching assistant and found that
   the paper was the Studentâs and was submitted by the Student or in her
   name with the intent that it be considered and graded. The Panel found
   that large passages from the essay were copied from unattributed
   sources on the internet and that the University had proved its charges
   under s. B.i.1(d) and s. B.i.1(f) of the Code. The Panel considered the
   evidence and a Book of Authorities and found that a two-year suspension
   and notation was appropriate. The Panel found that the Student
   intentionally and knowingly concocted the paper and took efforts to
   disguise the fact. The Panel observed that if the Student had availed
   herself of the process at the divisional level then a maximum penalty
   of a one-year suspension could have been imposed. The Panel found that
   it was fair and relevant to consider that the Student had chosen not to
   engage in the disciplinary process and that the matter might have been
   disposed of at the divisional level. The Panel found no mitigating
   evidence. The Panel accepted the Universityâs submission on penalty and
   imposed a grade of zero in the course; a two-year suspension; a
   two-year notation on the Studentâs academic record and transcript; and
   that a report be issued to the Provost.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/13056
