THE UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL OF THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO

IN THE MATTER OF charges of academic dishonesty made on November 25, 2013
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters, 1995,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Act, 1971, S.O. 1971 , c. 56 as amended S.O. 1978,

c. 88

BETWEEN:

THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO

-AND-

REASONS FOR DECISION

Date of Hearing: Wednesday, January 15, 2014
Members of the Panel:
Mr. Jeffrey Leon, Barrister and Solicitor, Chair
Dr. Chris Koenig-Woodyard, University of Toronto Mississauga, Department of English
and Drama, Faculty Panel Member
Mr. Michael Dick, Student Panel Member
Appearances:
Mr. ~ert Centa, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland, Barristers
Ms.
(the "Student") appeared in person, without counsel

'tl><a ta

In Attendance:
Dr. Kristi Gourlay, Manager, Office of Student Academic Integrity, Faculty of Arts and
Sciences
Sinead Cutt, Administrative Assistant, University of Toronto, Office of the Governing
Council

2

Preliminary Matters

1.

The Trial Division of the University Tribunal was convened on January 15, 2014

to consider ten charges brought by the University of Toronto against the Student under
the Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters, 1995 (the "Code").
2.

The Student was provided with a document setting out the charges by way of

letter dated November 25, 2013 from Professor Edith Hillan, Vice-Provost, Faculty &
Academic Life.
3.

The Student attended the hearing without counsel. The Student confirmed that

she preferred to deal with this matter without counsel and that she understood the
nature and consequences of the charges, the documents and the proceedings.
The Charges

4.

The charges against the Student related to three separate courses and incidents

and related to the knowing falsification of documents and evidence in the context of
seeking academic accommodations from the Committee on Standing of the Faculty of
Arts and Science, at the University of Toronto (the "Committee"), all contrary to
Section B.1.1 (a) of the Code.
5.

The charges are as follows:
(i)

On or about May 2, 2013, the Student knowingly falsified a document or
evidence required by the University of Toronto, or uttered, circulated or
made use of a falsified document, namely, a Petition form seeking

3

academic accommodations or relief that she submitted to the Committee
on Standing of the Faculty of Arts and Science at the University of Toronto
(the "Committee"), contrary to Section B.1.1 (a) of the Code.
(ii)

On or about May 2, 2013, the Student knowingly falsified evidence
required by the University of Toronto, namely, a Personal Statement,
which she submitted to the Committee in support of your request for
academic accommodation, contrary to Section B.1.1 (a) of the Code.

(iii)

On or about May 2, 2013, the Student knowingly forged or in any other
way altered or falsified a document or evidence required by the University
of Toronto, or uttered, circulated or made use of any such forged, altered
or falsified document, namely, a Verification of Student Illness or Injury
Form, dated April 30, 2013, which she submitted in support of her request
for academic accommodations, contrary to Section B.1.1 (a) of the Code.

(iv)

On June 28, 2013, the Student knowingly falsified a document or evidence
required by the University of Toronto, or uttered, circulated or made use of
any such falsified document, namely, a Petition form that she submitted to
the Committee seeking academic accommodations or relief, contrary to
Section B.1.1 (a) of the Code.

(v)

On or about July 4, 2013, the Student knowingly falsified evidence
required by the University of Toronto, namely, a Personal Statement dated
July 4, 2013, which she submitted to the Committee in support of her

4

request for academic accommodation, contrary to Section B.1.1 (a) of the
Code.
(vi)

Between June 25 and July 4, 2013, the Student knowingly forged or in any
other way altered or falsified a document or evidence required by the
University of Toronto, or uttered, circulated or made use of any such
forged, altered or falsified document, namely, a University of Toronto
Verification of Student Illness or Injury Form, dated June 25, 2013, which
she submitted in support of her request for academic accommodations,
contrary to Section B.l.1(a) of the Code.

(vii)

On or about August 19, 2013, the Student knowingly falsified a document
or evidence required by the University of Toronto, or uttered, circulated or
made use of any such falsified document, namely, a Petition form that she
submitted to the Committee seeking academic accommodations or relief,
contrary to Section B.l.1(a} of the Code.

(viii)

On or about August 22, 2013, the Student knowingly falsified evidence
required by the University of Toronto, namely, a Personal Statement,
which she submitted to the Committee in support of her request for
academic accommodation, contrary to Section B.1.1 (a) of the Code.

(ix)

Between August 15 and August 22, 2013, the Student knowingly forged or
in any other way altered or falsified a document or evidence required by
the University of Toronto, or uttered, circulated or made use of any such
forged, altered or falsified document, a Verification of Student Illness or

5

Injury Form, dated August 15, 2013, which she submitted in support of her
request for academic accommodations, contrary to Section B.1.1 (a) of the
Code.
(x)

In the alternative to each of the charges above, the Student knowingly
engaged in a form of cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud
or misrepresentation in order to obtain academic credit or other academic
advantage of any kind, which violated section B.l.3(b) of the Code.

Plea
6.

Counsel for the University filed, as Exhibit "1", an Agreed Statement of Facts.

The Student acknowledged in that Agreement that she signed the Agreement freely and
voluntarily and knowing the potential consequences faced. She acknowledged that she
had the opportunity to obtain legal advice and that she had either done so or waived her
right to do so. The Student further waived the reading of the charges and pied guilty to
all ten of the charges. The Panel again asked the Student whether she understood the
charges and the consequences and she confirmed that she did, that she did not require
the charges to be read and that she wanted to plead guilty.
The Facts

7.

In addition to the Agreed Statement of Facts, counsel for the University filed a

Joint Book of Documents ("JBD"), which was marked as Exhibit "2".

The Student

agreed with the admission of the documents to prove the truth of their contents.

6
8.

The fact pattern in relation to the conduct of the Student was similar for all three

incidents that formed the subject matter of the charges. Charges 1 to 3 relate to the
Student's enrollment in MAT135 in the Winter of 2013. She petitioned the Committee
for academic accommodation for an exam missed on April 30, 2013 (JBD, Tab 4). In
support, she submitted a Personal Statement {JBD, Tab 5) claiming that she was ill on
the date of the exam. The Student admitted this is false and that she circulated the
Statement knowing that it was false. She also submitted in support of the Petition a
University of Toronto Verification of Student Illness or Injury Form (JBD, Tab 6),
purportedly signed by a treating physician from the North York General Hospital. The
Student did not attend the North York General Hospital and was not treated by the
physician.

In fact, the medical note was purchased by the Student from an online

service. The Student admitted that she knew the document was forged and falsified
when she submitted it in support of her request for academic accommodation.

The

University relied on this documentation and granted the Student's Petition for academic
accommodation (JBD, Tab 7).
9.

Charges 4 to 6 relate to CHM138 in which the Student was enrolled in the

Summer of 2013. The same pattern was followed, including a Petition (JBD, Tab 8), a
Personal Statement (JBD, Tab 9) that the Student admits was false and that she
submitted knowing that it was false and a University of Toronto Verification of Student
Illness or Injury (JBD, Tab 10) purportedly signed by a different physician at St.
Michael's Hospital. The Student admits that she did not attend at the hospital, that she
was not treated and that the medical note was again purchased from an online service

7

and that she submitted it knowing that it was a false document. The University again
granted the Student's Petition for academic accommodation (JBD, Tab 11).
10.

Charges 7 to 9 relate to the Student's enrollment in the Summer of 2013 in

CHM139 and again follow the same pattern of a Petition for academic accommodation
(JBD, Tab 12), a Personal Statement in support (JBD, Tab 13) that was false and
submitted by the Student knowing that it was false and a University of Toronto
Verification of Student Illness or Injury (JBD, Tab 14), purportedly prepared and signed
by a medical doctor at the Scarborough Hospital. The Student admitted that she did not
attend at that hospital and that she did not receive treatment on the date alleged. The
Student purchased this document from an online service and admitted that she
submitted it knowing it was a false document in support of her request for academic
accommodation.
11.

More generally, the Student admitted that she knowingly circulated all of the false

information and the forged or falsified documents to the University: (a) in order to obtain
an academic advantage; (b) to mislead the University and staff and faculty; and
(c) expecting that the University and its staff and faculty would rely on this information to
their detriment and would provide her with an academic advantage.
12.

The Student met with a representative of the University, at which time she

admitted committing the academic offences, that she had purchased the medical notes
and submitted them to support her petitions for accommodation and that her personal
statements were false.

Significantly, she provided the University with the contact

information for the individual who sold the notes to her, as well as receipts for the e-

8

transfers that she had used to pay for two of the three forged medical notes.

The

Student indicated that she filed the false petitions because she was behind in her
academic work as she was busy running a business and making money was more of a
priority for her than her academic studies.

This motivation was confirmed by the

Student in the Agreed Statement of Facts.
Finding

13.

The Tribunal considered the evidence contained in the Agreed Statement of

Facts and the Joint Book of Documents and the plea of guilty. The Tribunal accepted
the Student's plea of guilty to charges 1 through 9. Counsel for the University withdrew
the charge in paragraph 10.
Penalty

14.

The Parties submitted a Joint Submission on Penalty that was marked as Exhibit

"3".

Counsel for the University also provided a Book of Authorities.

The Joint

Submission on Penalty proposed that the Tribunal impose the following sanctions on
the Student:
(i)

a final grade of zero in each of the courses MAT138, CHM138 and
CHM139;

(ii)

a five-year suspension from the University to commence on the day the
Tribunal makes its order;

9

(iii)

a notation of the sanction on the Student's academic record and transcript,
for a period of six years commencing on the day the Tribunal makes its
order.

15.

It was further proposed that the case be reported to the Provost for publication of

a notice of the decision of the Tribunal and the sanction imposed in the University
newspapers, with the name of the Student withheld.
16.

The Student confirmed that she understood what was being proposed and that

she wanted to deal with this without counsel.
17.

It is not necessary to review the authorities and helpful summary of cases

provided by counsel for the University. The Panel is aware that it should only depart
from a Joint Submission on Penalty if to accept that Joint Submission would bring the
administration of justice into disrepute.
18.

This is a case with multiple falsified documents and multiple petitions for

academic accommodation in different courses. The Student had no prior findings of
academic dishonesty against her. She attended and participated in the hearing. She
was fulsome and forthright in her cooperation with the University.

Counsel for the

University acknowledged that this demonstrated a level of insight and remorse.
Counsel for the University furthe·r submitted that under these circumstances, the
sanctions imposed should be serious and sufficient to vindicate the important values of
the University in issue, but also give the Student an opportunity to rehabilitate a
relationship with the University if she chooses to do so.

10
19.

The Tribunal agrees that it is important to impose sanctions that will give effect to

specific deterrence of the Student and general deterrence within the University
community. The type of conduct at issue here goes to the very heart of the relationship
of trust and good faith between a student and the University. The University does, as
required under the Ontario Human Rights Code, accommodate students who are ill as a
matter of fairness and common sense. This necessarily involves a need for trust and
good faith on the part of students not to abuse the process, particularly since the
University cannot possibly check each and every request for accommodation.
20.

In this context, multiple and serious breaches of trust and dishonesty merit

serious sanctions.

Indeed, a more severe sanction (i.e., expulsion) might well be

warranted where there are relevant prior offences, a lack of remorse and/or a failure to
cooperate with the University.

Here the Tribunal was influenced by the Student's

interaction with the University, particularly in assisting the University in its attempts to
ferret out those who engage in the despicable conduct of selling forged documents
through an online service.
21.

The Tribunal considered the matter and accepted the Joint Submission on

Penalty.
Decision

22.

The Tribunal ordered as follows:
{i)

THAT the Student is found guilty of nine counts of the academic offence of

forging or falsifying a document required by the University of Toronto, or

11
circulating such a document, contrary to section B.1.1(a) of the Code of
Behaviour on Academic Matters;

(ii)

THAT the following sanctions shall be imposed on the Student:
(a)

she shall receive a final grade of zero in each of the courses MAT
135, CHM 138 and CHM 139;

(b)

she shall be suspended from the University from the date of this
order until January 15, 2019; and

(c)

that a notation be placed on her academic record and transcript for
a period of six years from the date of this order;

(iii)

THAT this case shall be reported to the Provost for publication of a notice
of the decision of the Tribunal and the sanctions imposed, with the name
of the Student withheld.

µ,_.,
DATED at Toronto this iD day of

fi);J ,

2014.

