THE UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO

IN THE MATTER OF charges of academic dishonesty made on October 27, 2006;
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic
lvlatters, 1995;
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University a/Toronto Act, 1971, S.O. 1971, c. 56 as amended
S.O. 1978, c. 88

BETWEEN:
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
- and Mr. S.S.

Members of' the Panel:
• Mr. Raj Anand, Chair
• Professor Ikuko Komuro-Lee, Faculty Member
• Mr. Christopher Oates, Student Member
Appearances:
• Ms. Lily Hanner, Assistant Discipline Counsel for the University, and Ms. Jodi Martin

•
•

Mr. Maurice Vaturi, Counsel for the Student, and Mr. Ben Zacks
Mr. S.S., Student

In attendance:
• Professor G.S. Graham, Dean's Designate, University of Toronto at Mississauga
• Ms. Lucy Gaspini, Academic Affairs Officer, University of Toronto at Mississauga

Preliminary

[1]

The Trial Division of the University Tribunal was convened on November 26, 2007 and
January 11, 2008 to consider charges under the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour
on Academic lvlatters, 1995 (the "Code") laid against the Student by letter dated October
27, 2006 from Professor Edith Hillan, Vice-Provost, Academic.

[2]

The Student attended the hearing and was represented by counsel.

Hearing on the Facts
[3]

The charges are as follows:
1. On or about April 24, 2006, you knowingly used or possessed an unauthorized aid or
aids or obtained unauthorized assistance in an academic examination or term test,
namely the final examination in GGR207H5S - Cities, Urbanization and
Development, contrary to Section b.i. l.(b) of the Code of Behaviour on Academic
};falters.
2. In the alternative on or about April 24, 2006, you knowingly engaged in a form of
cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or misrepresentation not
otherwise described in the Code in order to obtain academic credit or other academic
advantage of any kind during the final examination in GGR207H5S - Cities,
Urbanization and Development, contrary to Section B.i.3.(b) of the Code.
Note: Wherever in the Code an offence is described as depending on "knowing", the
offence shall likewise be deemed to have been committed if the person ought reasonably
to have known.

[4]

Particulars of the charges are as follows:

1. At all material times you were enrolled in GGR207H5S - Cities, Urbanization and
Development. This comse was taught by Professor Allan Walks.
2. The final examination in the course was held on April 24, 2006. No aids were
permitted in the examination room. Jackets with front pouches were required to be
removed.
3. During the examination, you were found to be in possession of a cell phone, cue cards
containing text related to the exml1ination, and a photocopy of a prior year's
examination with answers.
[5]

In response to the reading of the Charges, the Student pleaded "Not Guilty" to both
Charges.

[6)

The University called three witnesses: lv1r, Eerik lives, the Teaching Assistant (TA); Ms.
Jennifer Heywood, the Chief Presiding Officer (CPO); and Professor Walks.

[7]

The first witness, Mr. Eerik lives, testified from Vancouver via video conferencing. Mr.
lives testified that he was the TA for GGR207, Cities, Urbanization and Development
and was present as an assistant invigilator for the final exam held on April 24, 2006. As
an invigilator, Mr. lives was responsible for taking attendance and supervising students
during the exam to ensure compliance with examination procedures. Mr. lives testified
that the CPO made a series of announcements at the outset of the exam and periodically

2

thereafter as groups of students anived after the start of the exam. These announcements
informed students that cell phones, notebooks, bags, and jackets with large pockets,
described as "kangaroo jackets", were prohibited during the exam.
[8]

During the exam, Mr. lives esco1tcd the Student to the washroom where he waited 10 to
15 tee! from the washroom door for the Student to return. Upon exiting the washroom,
the witness noticed that the Student held an open cell phone in his hand. Mr. lives
testafied that the Student appeared to be checking the cell phone and pressing its keys.
lvlr. lives reported being surprised to find the Student in possession of a cell phone, given
that students had been told repeatedly that cell phones were prohibited during the exam.
As the Student approached the witness, Mr. lives told the Student that he was not
supposed to be in possession of a cell phone and that the Student should make sure that
the cell phone was turned off. The Student assured Mr. lives that he had the phone on
silent. Mr. lives reiterated the prohibition against cell phones during the examination, but
promised the Student that he would not repo1t the incident if the Student promised to turn
the phone off. The witness did not check to see if the phone had been tumed off and,
therefore, could not testify with certainty whether the cell phone had, indeed, been turned
off.

[9]

Following the washroom break and approximately 15 minutes after retuming to the
classroom, the CPO approached Mr. lives and showed him a stack of note cards that she
had taken from the Student. Mr. lives then informed the CPO that he had found the same
Student in possession of a cell phone during the washroom break. Upon hearing this, the
CPO approached the Student and confiscated the cell phone.

[10]

The CPO and Mr. Ilves sought advice from the Exams Office to determine if they were
allowed to keep the phone or if it had to be retumed immediately at the end of the exam.
They were instructed by staff in the Exams Office to bring the phone to the Exams
Office. Mr. lives testified that he had not viewed the contents of the cell phone.

[ 11]

Mr. lives was asked to describe the clothing that the Student had been wearing during the
washroom break. He reported that the Student wore a large hooded sweatshht of the type
that the CPO Imel instructed students to remove prior to the exam. Discipline counsel
then asked the witness what he understood to be the problem with this type of jacket. He
testified that it was probably the size of the pockets that was problematic, since it would
be easy for students to hide items in them. Mr. lives acknowledged that he had not raised
the jacket issue when he accompanied the Student to the washroom for two reasons:
firstly, because he thought that the prohibition against jackets with la1·ge pockets was an
odd request and, secondly, he did not want to cause the Student further anxiety. When
asked if he had received any invigilator training, the witness replied that he had not.

[12]

During cross-examination, counsel for the defence, Mr. Vaturi, asked Mr. llves if
students were stopped at the front of the room until the conclusion of the announcements,
to which the witness responded that he could not remember. When asked if he had ever
heard the expression "kangaroo jacket" before, the witness testified that he had not, but
that the CPO had described what she meant by the term, namely jackets with large

3

pockets or a pouch at the front. The witness was asked why he had thought the
prohibition against such clothing was an odd request, to which Mr. lives responded that
that rule had not been in effect in other exams that he had invigilated. Mr. lives testified
that, when he saw the Student leaving the washroom with the cell phone, he reminded the
Student that cell phones were not permitted during the exam and that he should shut the
phone off. When asked why he had merely instructed the Student to shut the phone off,
rather than confiscating the phone, the witness replied that he bent the rules a little bit,
since he had no reason to cause the Student stress. The witness was asked if the Student
knew the rules were being bent for his benefit, to which Mr. lives replied that he
presumed so, given the announcements that were made at the beginning of the exam.
(13]

The second witness, Ms, Jennifer Heywood, was asked by discipline counsel to describe
the role of the Chief Presiding Officer. Ms. Heywood explained that as CPO she is
responsible for ensuring that an examination is conducted in an equitable manner; that the
examination envirnnment is as comfortable as possible, so that students can perform to
the best of their ability; and that all examination regulations are followed. Ms. Heywood
testified that she had attended CPO training sessions, received an 8-page training package
and was provided with ongoing email updates and reminders from the UTM Registrar's
Office. The training package included a list of announcements that had to be made at the
beginning of every exam.

[14]

The witness testified that students are permitted entrance to the exam rnom 15 minutes
prior to the beginning of the exam. While the students were assembled outside of the
exam room and dming their procession into the room, Ms. Heywood announced that cell
phones must be turned off and placed in the students' bags and that jackets and bags must
be left at the front of the room prior to taking a seat in the exam room. Because a large
number of students were writing this exam, Ms. Heywood repeated this announcement
several times. At 5 minutes before the exam, the doors were closed. The TA, who was
standing at the door, allowed latecomers to wait by the door inside the exam room until
they could be seated. Students who arrived after the exam had staiied were required to
speak with Ms. Heywood privately, at which time she infonned me them of the rules
concerning cell phones, jackets and bags. Ms. Heywood recalled that she spoke with
some late arrivals privately, but was not ce1iain if the Student was among them.

[15]

Ms. Heywood testified that, once all the students were seated, she read the official exam
regulations to them from the front of the room. The witness also testified that these same
regulations are posted on the door of every examination room and are printed on the first
page of every examination. The notice posted on the door and printed on the examination
states:
"It is an academic offence for students to possess the following items
at their examination desks: cell phones, pagers, personal digital
assistants or wristwatch computers. If any of these items are in your
possession, put them in your belongings at the front of the room before
the examination begins. No penalty will be imposed."

4

Ms. Heywood repmted that aller reading this notice aloud, there were a few students who
came forward lo deposit their cell phones with their other belongings, For those students
who were afraid of losing their cell phones, Ms. Heywood offered to hold their cell
phones al the front of the room until the conclusion of the exam. In addition to these
official announcements, the witness testified that she also made a special announcement
regarding various items of personal apparel, including kangarno jackets. When asked to
define a "kangarno jacket", the witness said it was a jacket that has a hood and a pocket
in the front. Ms. Heywood testified that, while the students were finding their seats, she
instructed them to remove such jackets. The witness was asked if she provided an
explanation of what she meant by the term "kangaroo jacket", to which Ms. Heywood
replied that she did.

[ I6)

Discipline counsel asked Ms. Heywood if she was acquainted with the Student prior to
this incident, to which she responded that she was not. The witness' first encounter with
the Student occuned when the Student returned from the washrnom, at which time Ms.
Heywood noticed that he was wearing a "kangaroo jacket". Upon seeing the Student,
Ms. Heywood approached his desk and explained that such a jacket was not pe1111itted
during the exam. The Student indicated that he wanted to keep the jacket on, so Ms.
Heywood asked him to show her what, if anything, was in his pockets. The Student
readily complied and withdrew from his pocket a piece of paper and some index cards.
Ms. Heywood identified the items she had taken from the Student. The paper was the
2005 Spring examination for GGR207H5S and the cards contained notes on urbanization.

[ 17]

Upon finding and confiscating the above listed items, the witness infonned the Student
that it was an academic offence to be in possession of such material during an exam. Ms.
Heywood instructed the Student to continue writing and that the issue would be dealt
with at the end of the exam. Ms. Heywood recalled that the Student apologized for
having the items. Following this exchange, Ms. Heywood sought the advice of the
instructor of the course, Professor Walks. Professor Walks identified the items Ms.
Heywood confiscated as an old exam from the GGR207H and study notes related to the
course. While in conversation, the TA joined Professor Walks and Ms. Heywood and
reported finding the Student in possession of a cell phone. He relayed the instructions
1hat he had given the Student regarding the cell phone. The TA was told that asking the
Student to simply shut the phone off was not sufficient and that the phone would also
have to be confiscated.

[ 18]

Ms. Heywood then approached the Student and asked him if he was in possession of a
cell phone, to which he replied that he was. The witness informed 1he Student that
possession of a cell phone constituted an academic offence, that she had to confiscate the
phone, and that the Student was to remain aller the exam to discuss these issues. At the
time the phone was confiscated, the witness noticed that the phone was on. Ms.
Heywood placed the phone on the podium at the front of the room. While it sat on the
podium, the phone was vibrating and receiving text messages. The witness characterized
this as an extreme case because, during the thitty exams over which she had presided, she
had never encountered anyone who so blatantly disobeyed examination rules.

5

[19)

At the end of the exam, Ms. Heywood and Professor Walks informed the Student that the
old exam, the index cards and the cell phone had to be taken to the Exams Office in the
Registrar's Office. When Ms. Heywood was asked about the Anomaly Report she was
required to write, she testified that she wrote the report when she returned to the Exams
Office.

[20)

On cross-examination, Ms. Heywood was asked to explain why she characterized this as
an extreme case. She replied that it was not because the act was "more wrong" than other
types of misconduct, but that it occurred after so many verbal and written warnings.
Defence counsel asked the witness where, in the Code of Behaviour on Academic
,v!atters, does it prohibit cell phones during examinations. Ms. Heywood replied that the
Code prohibits all types of unauthorized aid and that a cell phone falls into the category
of an unauthorized aid. Mr. Vat\U'i then asked the witness to indicate where in the Code a
cell phone is defined as an unauthorized aid. At this juncture, counsel for the University,
Ms. Harmer, acknowledged that the Code does not specifically identify cell phones as
unauthorized aids. Ms. Heywood testified that the University had made it clear that cell
phones were considered unauthorized aids when it published prohibitions against them on
examinations and exam room doors.

[2 l)

On direct examination, the third witness, Professor Walks, testified that he had written on
the examination that no aids were permitted, which meant that students were prohibited
from bringing anything into the exam room that could assist them to answer the exam
questions. The witness confirmed that the warning quoted in paragraph 15 above was
printed on the examination, in compliance with University policy.

[22)

Professor Walks was asked if he recalled the announcements made by the CPO, to which
he responded that he did. He explained that CPOs were given pre-written text to read at
the outset of every exam and he confirmed that he heard the CPO read the announcement
at this exam. Professor Walks also recalled that the CPO made an announcement
regarding jackets, specifically kangaroo jackets, and that she had described to the
students what she meant by the term.

[23)

With respect to the incident involving the Student, Professor Walks could not remember
if he had seen that the phone was on or if he had been told by the CPO that it was on
when taken from the Student. Professor Walks identified the paper items taken from the
Student: a copy of an old GGR207 final exam and index cards with notes relating to the
content of the material being tested. The witness testified that the old exam contained
similar, and in some cases identical, questions to those on the exam that the Student was
writing. At the end of the exam, Professor Walks accompanied the CPO and the Student
to the Registrar's Office, at which time the cell phone and index cards were given to the
Registrar. The witness stated that he did not review the contents of the text messages on
the cell phone; rather the Registrar checked the text messages.

[24)

The Chair asked Professor Walks how students would gain access to previous exams, to
which the witness responded that old exams are made available in the library. The

6

witness was then asked if an answer key was provided with the exam, to which he
responded that students had to find the answers on their own initiative.
[25]

Defence counsel asked the witness how an old exam can be an aid, if none of the answers
are provided. Professor Walks agreed that, without answers, an old exam could not be an
aid. Professor Walks was then asked to compare the notes on the index cards to the
answers the Student provided on his exam. The comparison did not provide any evidence
that the Student had copied from the cards or used the cards to help answer the exam
questions. In fact, the witness acknowledged that some of the answers on the note cards
were overlooked in the answers provided on the exam.

(26]

Mr. Vaturi then questioned Profossor Walks about the meeting he had with the Student
on May 3, 2006. At that meeting, the Student showed Professor Walks a collection of
cards, approximately 40 in total, from which the few cards found in his possession during
the exam had been taken. During that meeting, the Student explained to Professor Walks
that the whole incident was a mistake; he had never intended to use the items for the
purpose of cheating on the exam. The cards were in his pocket because he had been
using them to study prior to the exam; he had simply forgotten to remove them before
entering the exam room. When asked if the Student seemed to be honest and genuine
during the meeting, Professor Walks confirmed that that had been his assessment.

[27]

Mr. Vaturi asked Professor Walks whether, if a person were going to cheat, one would
choose a few note cards randomly or take the whole set of cards to the exam. The
witness responded that having a small subset of the cards in his possession seemed to
indicate that the Student had no intention of using the cards as an aid during the exam.
Professor Walks was then asked if the Student achieved a higher mark on the final exam
compared to his term work, to which the witness responded that he had not. The final
exam mark was consistent with the assignments completed by the Student during the
term.

[28)

On direct examination, the Student admitted that his academic record was not particularly
good. He noted that there had been some improvement over the 5 years he attended
University of Toronto, but acknowledged that the first few years were rather poor. Mr.
Vaturi asked the Student if he had taken any steps to improve his performance, to which
the witness responded that he had sought help from the Academic Skill Centre at UTM in
his third year. The Student was instructed to note key concepts on cue cards while
reading course materials, and then use these cue cards as study aids. The Student
confomed that he followed this advice.

[29]

Mr. Vaturi asked the Student about his exam schedule in the Spring of 2006. The Student
explained that he had six final exams scheduled as follows: April I 0, 17, 19, 24, 25, and
26. The exam in question occimed on April 24, 2006. The Student testified that he
studied during the weekend prior to the exam (April 22 and 23) in a 24-hour library
located at UTM. He reported that he went home only to freshen up and then returned to
the library. Consequently, he got very little sleep prior to the exam. The Student could
not recall eating on the day prior to the exam. Defence counsel produced a doctor's

7

report dated April 26, 2008 which stated that on the 26 111 the Student was experiencing
weakness, fatigue, dehydration and headache.
[30]

The Student reported that he al1'ived in the examination room after 12:00 noon,
whereupon he noticed that other students had already arrived and taken seats. The
Student testified that he felt very nervous when he arrived to write the exam. The witness
reported that he did not hear any announcements; he did not hear Ms. Heywood ask him
to remove his kangaroo jacket.

[31]

When asked about the cell phone, the Student admitted that he had a cell phone in his
possession, but he thought that he had turned it off before he entered the exam room.
However, the phone he was using on the day of the exam was a loaner phone, which had
been given to him while his regular phone was being repaired. The loaner phone was a
different model than the one the Student was accustomed to using. The Student
speculated that perhaps he had inadvertently left the cell phone on because he did not
know how to operate it properly. When asked why the Student had not turned the phone
off after the washroom break, as the TA had instrncted him, the Student replied that he
thought he had shut the phone off. The Student again concluded that he had foiled to shut
the phone off because he was not familiar with the pmiicular model loaned to him.

(32]

The Student recollected that the CPO asked to check the pockets of his jacket after
learning about the cell phone, not before, contrary to the testimony of the CPO. He stated
that a fow other people who were seated in close proximity also had their jackets
checked. The Student had the impression that others were searched as a cover, so that he
would not foe! singled out. The witness rep01ied being as surprised as the CPO to find
the cue cards and exam paper in his pocket. The Student stated that he did not make a
filss; he simply reached into his pocket, fo\lnd the items, and handed them over to the
CPO.

[33]

The witness was asked if he knew that possession of a cell phone constituted an academic
offence. He replied that he did not think it was an offence to merely be in possession of a
phone; rather, it was his understanding that a student could possess a cell phone during an
exam provided it was tumed off. The Student was then asked to review the waming
written at the top of the exam paper. He was asked what he understood an "aid" to be.
He reported that an aid wo\lld be anything that might enhance his performance on an
exam. The Student admitted that he had merely skimmed the waming paragraph, rather
than reading the text in detail. The witness stated that, when he read that ce11ain items
were prohibited at the desk, he interpreted that to mean on the desk.

[34]

On cross-examination, the Student was asked ifhe was late for all his exams, to which he
replied that he was not. It was then suggested to the Student that he m\lst be familiar with
the rnles regarding books, bags, jackets, etc., since he attended some exams on time. The
Student confirmed that he was aware of the policies and that he complied with them at all
exams. The Student also confirmed that he had been told at previous exams that cell
phones, calculators, etc. were not pennitted at the desk during the exam. The witness
testified that, while he had heard the University announcements read by either a CPO or

8

an instructor at other exams, he did not actively listen to the announcements, since he was
confident that he had already complied with the policies. Given that he had heard these
announcements at other exams, discipline counsel presumed that the Student was aware
Iha! he could be charged with an academic offence for possessing prohibited items during
an exam. The witness affirmed that he was aware of the possibility; however, he
reiterated that he understood at the desk to mean on the desk.
[35]

Discipline counsel challenged the Student's explanation for the cell phone being on.
After reviewing the witness' earlier testimony, the Student was asked how he could not
have known how to shut the phone off, since he had already written two exams after
receiving the loaner phone. The Student responded that, although a cell phone is his
"life-line" and that he normally took one wherever he went, he could not remembe1· if he
had taken his cell phone to the two exams he had written on April 17 and 19.

[36]

On November 27, 2007 at 12:41 a.m. the hearing adjourned.

[37]

On January 11, 2008 the University Tribunal re-convened to continue the hearing. At the
outset, the Chair provided an overview of the testimony heard on November 27. He
asked counsel for both pm1ies to explain the conclusions that they wished the panel to
draw based on the testimony already heard.

[38]

Discipline counsel began with a review of the Code, specifically Section B.i. l.(b), which
states that "it shall be an offence for a student knowingly to use or possess an
unauthorized aid or aids or obtain unauthorized assistance in any academic examination
01· term test or in connection with any other form of academic work". In the University's
submission, the Student knowingly possessed unauthorized aids in the fotm of a cell
phone (which was turned on), cue cards, and an exam from a previous academic year.
Counsel reviewed the definition of knowing by again referring to the Code, which states
"Wherever in this Code an offence is described as depending on 'knowing', the offence
shall likewise be deemed to have been committed if the person ought reasonably to have
known."

[39]

In light of the Student's testimony, the University argued that the Student knew or ought
reasonably to have known that the items found in his possession were unauthorized aids.
To substantiate this conclusion, counsel for the University directed the panel's attention
to the Student's ROSI record, which revealed that the Student, at the time of the alleged
offence, was registered in the second term of his third year at the University. Given the
Student's experience and knowledge, the University argued that it was very difficult to
believe that the Student had not taken greater care in making sure that he was not in
breach of the rules. It was incumbent upon the Student to make sure that he was in
compliance with the exam rnles. With respect to the "ought reasonably to have known"
aspect of the Code, discipline counsel introduced a decision of the Discipline Appeals
Board, which affirmed that the Code "penalizes not only intentional [offences J but also
[offences] that result from unreasonable ignorance ... It is important to note and to reflect
in sanctions that the offence occurs not only when the student knows, but also when the

9

student 'ought reasonably to have known' ." 1 The University concluded that the Student
knew, but that he chose not to take the necessary steps to abide by the rules. However,
even if he did not know some or all of the rules or if he did not know that he was in
possession of prohibited items, he ought reasonably to have known and he ought to have
taken steps to deal with them.
[40]

Counsel for the Student focused the panel's attention on the meaning of the word "aid"
and noted that the Code does not define a cell phone as an unauthorized aid. While
acknowledging that cell phones were prohibited, defence counsel pointed out that cell
phones were not identified as aids. The cue cards and old exam can legitimately be
called aids, since they are connected with the course and academic performance;
however, a cell phone is something else. Mr. Vaturi reminded the panel of his client's
cooperative behaviour during the exam and the candor of his testimony at the hearing.
The Student had stated frankly that he was unaware that he had aids in his jacket pocket
and he admitted to being ignorant of how to correctly operate the loaner cell phone.

[41]

Defence counsel undertook an analysis of the phrase "ought reasonably to have known".
Mr. Vaturi argued that the phrase entails more than mere knowledge; it suggests a
subjective element. It implies the intent to do wrong.

[42)

Following these submissions, the Chair asked if the argument put forth by the Student
could not be said of thousands of other students registered at the University. That is,
most students report feeling stressed, fatigued and anxious when writing exams and,
therefore, may not pay attention to things they might otherwise. Nothing in the evidence
presented distinguishes the Student's state of mind from thousands of other students.
Why should this Student be excused from the objective standard of "ought reasonably to
have known" he was in possession of unauthorized aids? In response, Mr. Vaturi agreed
that if all students suffer the same state of mind, then they all could make the same claim
as his client. However, he argued that generalizations should not be made; each case
must be considered on its own merits.

[43]

In her reply, discipline counsel discussed the concept of "unauthorized aid". She stated
that it is clear that an unauthorized aid is anything that is not allowed in an exam that
could help or assist a student in writing an exam. Ms. Hanner argued that "unauthorized
aid" is not defined in the Code for a reason: it is impossible to create an exhaustive list,
since the Code cannot anticipate every situation or every new invention.

Decision of the Tribunal

[44]

Following deliberation, the panel found the Student guilty of having cmnn1itted an
offence under Section B. l.i.(b) of the Code. The panel concluded that the Student
subjectively knew and ought reasonably to have known that the three items (cue cards,
previous year's exam and the cell phone, at least while on) were unauthorized aids; and

1 Jn the Matter o/1he University Tribunal (Appeal Division) between the University o/Toronto and Mr. C.Z., henrd
on Murch 30, 2006 on appeal from the decision of the University Tribunal of November 8, 2004, pp 8-9.

10

he ought to have known that he had those unauthorized aids in his possession during the
exam.
Penalty Phase
[45]

The University submitted that the appropriate penalty in the circumstance was:
- a grade of O in GGR207
!-year suspension from attendance at the University
a notation on the Student's transcript for 2 years or until graduation, whichever
OCC\lt'S first

[46]

In addition, the University requested that a report of the decision be made to the Provost
for publication in the University's newspaper with the Student's name withheld.

[47]

The University placed a Book of Authorities before the panel so that it might have an
opportunity to review several decisions of other panels of the University Tribunal in
similar cases. In particular, the panel reviewed the criteria for sanction first proposed by
the late and fonner Mr. Justice Sopinka in the matter of the appeal of Mr. C. (November
5, 1976). According to these guidelines, the Tribunal should consider the following six
criteria when deciding on an appropriate sanction:
a) the character of the person charged;
b) the likelihood of a repetition of the offence;
c) the nature of the offence committed;
d) any extenuating circumstances surrounding the commission of the offence;
e) the detriment to the University occasioned by the offence;
f) the need to deter others from committing a similar offence.

[48]

Counsel for the University characterized the Student's attitude as lackadaisical. Even
though he knew the rules, he chose not to follow them. The nature of the offence and the
detriment to the University are comingled in the University's submission, Ms. Harmer
explained that it is very difficult to monitor several hundred students dming an exam.
Consequently, the rules are explicit and are constantly reiterated to students by various
means. When a student willfully disregards the mies, it jeopardizes trust and integrity,
the foundation of the teaching/leaming relationship, As for general deterrence, Ms.
Harmer argued that it is important to send a message to other sll1dents and to the
community that the University will uphold its rules and regulations.

[49]

Mr. Vaturi argued that the cases cited by discipline counsel were not similar and,
therefore, should not be considered relevant as precedents. For example, in some cases,

11

the defendants were repeat offenders, which is not true of this Student. He had never
been charged with academic misconduct before this incident. In other cases, defendants
not only possessed unauthorized aids, but also used them. However, in this case there
was no evidence that the Student even used, much less benefitted, from the aids in his
possession.
[50]

Counsel for the Student turned the panel's attention to the list of possible sanctions
provided by the Coc/e at Section C.ii.(b) and submitted that the panel should impose
sanctions at the more lenient end of the continuum, so that the punislm1ent fits the crime.
Mr. Yaturi informed the panel that the Student is eligible to graduate in June 2008. If he
were given a grade of 0 on the course, he may become ineligible to graduate due to low
grade point average (GPA). Mr. Vaturi argued that had the case come to Tribunal
directly following the allegation, then the Student would have had time to take extra
courses to improve his GP A.

[51]

At this juncture, the Chair sought clarification of the Student's registration status vis-ii.vis graduation, noting that the consequences of the penalty are important to the panel's
deliberations. A review of the Student's transcript revealed that, indeed, the Student had
earned the required 20 credits for a bachelor's degree. What could not be determined
with ce1iainty was whether (a) the Student had completed the program requirements and
(b) the imposition ofa grade of0 in the course would lower the GPA to the point that the
Student would become ineligible to graduate.

[52]

Ms, Harmer argued that the answers to these questions were not relevant to the panel's
deliberations and cautioned that following this reasoning would result in inequitable
treatment of defendants. That is, weaker students with lower GP As would be dealt with
more leniently than those with higher GPAs. Counsel stated that the Tribunal had to
allow the "chips to fall where they may". Fairness dictates that a student should be dealt
with on the basis of the offence, the consistent approach of the Tribunal to those offences
in the past, and, to some extent, extenuating circumstances.

[53]

The Chair suggested that the offence and the offender appeared to be the significant
factors to be taken into account. Moreover, all sorts of subjective factors had been
adduced already and will be adduced in every case, in order to differentiate one offender
from another. This may lead to an offender being treated more leniently, because of
individual circumstances, than someone else who committed the same offence.

[ 54]

The Chair requested that the parties provide written submissions on the academic
consequences of proposed penalties, addressing both fact and principle. It was agreed
that Mr. Vaturi would provide written submissions by January 25, 2008, with discipline
counsel providing a reply by Febrnmy 8, 2008.

Sanction and Reasons

[55]

On June 26, 2008 the panel reached a decision on penalty. The Chair requested that the
Judicial Affairs Officer circulate that decision to the paities via email.

12

[56]

The decision was circulated via email to the patties on June 26, 2008. It stated that the
Tribunal imposes the following sanction in the matter of the Student, with full reasons to
follow:
Mark of Oin GGR207H5S for the Winter 2006 session
Notation on the Student's transcript for two years
A recommendation that the Provost publish the results of the hearing with the
Student's name withheld

[57]

The Tribunal's reasons for the penalty imposed are as follows.

[58]

In terms of the nature of the offence, it was at the less serious end of the spectrum of
cases that come before this Tribunal. There is no evidence that the student used the cell
phone, cards or previous examination to assist him in any way in this examination, or that
he gained any benefit from their presence.

[59]

Nevertheless, the Student knew from his seven terms at the University, the many
examinations he had previously written, and the warning at the front of the examination
in question, that the three categories of aids were unauthorized. He acknowledged in
testimony that two of them (the cue cards and the old examination) were prohibited
items. Indeed, the application of common sense, even without any specific listing of
unauthorized aids, dictated this conclusion. I do not accept Mr. Vaturi's argument that
there is nothing in the Code to say a cell phone is an aid, when both the examination
paper and common sense prohibited it. Whether or not the Student turned his mind to the
issue, he should have taken more care in ensuring that he was not violating the rnles.
Any student is expected to do so, and that is why the offonce is written as "knew or ought
to have known."

[60]

This was a first allegation of an academic offence against this student at the Decanal or
Tribunal level. There is nothing to suggest that a repetition of this offence is likely.

[61]

On the other hand, the detriment to the University, and the need to deter other students
from bringing study notes, "cheat sheets" or similar items into closed book examinations
is self-evident. TI1e integrity of the University's processes and the value of the academic
recognition it bestows is dependent on widespread respect for straightforward rules of the
kind at issue in this case. Conversely, the University should not be compelled to produce
evidence of actual use and benefit obtained from prohibited notes or similar items before
it is able to enforce its rules and impose sanctions. To allow disregard of a blanket
principle - check unauthorized aids at the door before writing the exam - is to
compromise the University's processes and tempt other students to test its ability to catch
them.

[62]

It is important to consider mitigating or extenuating circumstances where they exist. The
Student's counsel suggested that the stress and fatigue of preparing for and writing
examinations was relevant in this regard. We disagree. Stress will affect almost every
student undergoing evaluation in a post-secondary institution, and the related

13

phenomenon of fatigue will affect many of them. It is inconceivable that these
circumstances can j,1stify disdain for such an elementary and widely-understood principle
as the meaning of a closed book examination.
(63)

As a general matter, however, the personal circumstances of the offender are certainly
relevant to any disposition that results from an academic offence. Character evidence
exemplifies the proposition that the adjudicator must consider both the offence and the
offender in fashioning an appropriate sanction, In this com1ection, we found the
University's submission - that the academic impact of the sanctions proposed by the
respective parties is an improper consideration for the Tribunal - to be surprisingly onesided. We say so for several reasons.

(64]

First, the impact on the University of the offence and its disposition is taken into account
in virtually every case, including this one, under the seminal Mr. C. case. We have given
weight to that factor in this case, as noted above. It would be anomalous if the impact on
the offonder did not attract some attention as well. Put differently, the impact on the
others - the University's "public" in this case - and on the individual in question - is a
reflection of the twin factors of general and specific deterrence. The Tribunal must make
its best choice of a penalty which will have the appropriate impact on the University
community and on the student in question, and to do so the Tribunal must exercise its
best understanding of the University community generally and the student who appears at
the hearing,

[65)

Second, in using the terms specific and general deterrence, we are aware that this is not a
criminal or quasi-criminal proceeding (even if the University's Code is still written in
terms of "charges", "offences", "guilt" and "prosecutions", and the Mr. C, case itself
largely mirrors criminal law principles in its discussion of sanctions), but rather an
administrative law issue of University discipline. There is ample judicial authority for the
application of criminal law principles of sentencing, with appropriate recognition of the
unique attributes of the particular administrative context, in cases of professional or
regulatory discipline: see for example, Re Mumo (1993), 105 D,L,R. (4th) 342 (Sask.
C,A.), at pp. 349-50, adding in a case of teacher misconduct that "it is the consequences
of an authority's decision that have the most direct impact on the individual concemed";
Pottie v. N.S. Real Estate Commission (2005), 37 Admin. L.R. (4th) 131 (N.S.S.C.) at
paras. 60-61 (the object of the imposition of sanctions resulting from breaches of the Act
or of professional miscondi1ct are not dissimilar to the pmpose and principles of
sentencing contained in the Criminal Code ... "); Jaswal v. Medical Bd, (Nfld.) (1996), 42
Admin. L.R. (2nd) 233 (Nfld. S,C,), applying Pottie at para. 35.

[66)

Third, under both criminal and administrative law discipline principles, mitigating or
extenuating circumstances are obviously relevant. These necessarily involve a
consideration of the individual characteristics of the offender, and whether in those
circumstances it would be unduly harsh or excessive to impose a penalty that was
otherwise dictated by previous cases in which the misconduct was objectively similar.

[67]

Fourth, these principles are reflected in the cases put forward by the parties before us.

14

[68]

In Mr. C, itself (tab 1 of the University's casebook), after stating the oft-quoted
sentencing principles, Mr. Sopinka noted: "We are told that the appellant will not lose
credits in respect of subjects which he completed in the session except for the credit in
Sociology, In the circumstances, therefore, I am of the opinion that the local branch of the
Trial Division which tried this case was justified in imposing the maximum sentence ... "

[69]

In M. (tab 3), the Tribunal referred to two types of individual circumstances - past history
and future impact - in its penalty decision:
"We also recognize what we have been told in terms of the difficult
circumstances of Mr. M.'s background .. ,So, we are prepared to accept that
there is relevance to the difficult circumstances that Jl.,lt·, M. has quite clearly
experienced in this life. We were not inclined to agree with the University's
proposal for a suspension in this case, We believe that, for the most part, the
necessary disciplinary sanction can be achieved through the sanction proposed
by Mr. M.'s counsel, that being a grade of zero for the course, with a letter of
reprimand, We believe that, for the most pmi, the necessary disciplinary effect
can be achieved in that way."

[70]

The University cited the Ms, B, decision (tab 4 of its supplementary briet), in which the
Tribunal specifically considered at page 9 that "if expelled, [the student) would be
deprived of any opportunity to obtain her degree after several years of attendance at the
institution", but ultimately concluded "that the matter of the student's seniority should
count against her rather than be taken into account in amelioration of any penalty",

[71]

The same proposition emerges from Ms. D. (tab 4 of the original brief), an appellate
decision in which the Tribunal Appeals Board rejected the student's "principal argument"
that the jury below had not given "sufficient weight to the personal circumstances of the
appellant, and the relevance of substantial mitigating circumstances" (p.4). The
University countered that these points, including the academic choices available to the
student at that point, had been explicitly put forward by her counsel. The Board noted
that the jury had recognized "the unusual circumstances resulting from the closure of
the .. ,program" and that a juror had asked a series of questions about "the possibility of the
appellant concluding her studies elsewhere, The juror then remarked: 'It seems to be a
rather impo1tant factor, the Faculty .. ,is going to cease offering these courses .. .'
[University counsel]: "It's an impo1tant factor for your consideration, no question." The
Board stated: "Notwithstanding its evaluation and obvious appreciation of the relevant
personal factors .. ,the jmy dete1111ined that a delayed suspension was not an appropriate
penalty in the appellant's case."

[72]

We consider that the Ms, B, and Ms. D. decisions contradict the University's submission
that consideration of the academic consequences of a proposed penalty is improper; to the
contrary, it provides an example of explicit consideration of the consequences but
eventual dismissal of the argument that those consequences should favour the student's
position. It would be surprising if the Tribunal were entitled to consider the academic
consequences of its disposition only when those consequences militate against the

15

student; only thrn\lgh inq\liry and assessment of the implications of its intended penalty
can the Tribunal determine which side that evidence supports.
[73]

The University argues that in the Mr. P. decision (tab 6 of its supplementary brieJ), the
Tribunal said at paragraph 13 that while the st\ldent's circumstances - "he is very close to
obtaining his degree from this University and that, sho\lld he be expelled, he may have
difficulty in securing a place at another university" - were "perhaps unfortunate, we are
not persuaded that this is a relevant factor for us to consider". We note, however, that in
the next paragraph, the Tribunal did in fact consider and reject the argument that this
detriment should result in mitigation of the expulsion penalty. In this sense, the Mr. P.
decision again supports the proposition that consequences for the student - as for the
University - are relevant but not determinative considerations in weighing the various
factors in Mr. C.

(74]

In virtually eve1y case, the parties provide some context in order to permit the Tribunal to
assess whether the competing penalty submissions would be overly harsh or lenient in the
circumstances of the particular offender. Thus, in the related Mr. D.L. and Ms. Y.W.
decisions, the Tribunal noted the academic histories of the students between their
offences in 2002 and the Trib\lnal hearing in 2005. The delay, and the res\lltant
graduation of the two sn1dents in the meantime, was explicitly listed by the Tribunal as
having been taken into account. In the Ms. T. case (tab 5 of the supplementary brieJ), the
jury spokesperson imposed
"a notation on the transcript of one year rather than two years, with regard to
the situation of the defendant, taking into consideration her personal
circumstances and in the desire not to impose an extraordinary burden on the
defendant. We felt that it would be fairer to allow her to make a new start.. .. "

(75]

In this case, the student's counsel argued for a reprimand and no other penalty. The
University submitted that he should receive a zero in the course, a one year suspension,
and a notation on the student's transcript for two years or until graduation, which
occurred first.

[76]

Mr. Vaturi's argument in terms of academic consequences was based on a zero grade
and/or suspension being dispropo11ionate, harsh and punitive because they would prevent
the Student from graduating or delaying his graduation by one or two years. A zero grade
wo\lld drop his weak l.87 GPA "forther behind from the required CGPA of 2.00 making
his entrance into the [Industrial Relations] Program much more difficult and eliminating
all his chances of graduation this year .... If the Student does not graduate this year, he will
11
have to return for one more year to take additional courses to raise his average.

[77]

We have considered the academic consequences put forward by Mr. Vaturi. They do not
coincide with the information submitted in the University's post-hearing brief, but we did
not need to resolve their differences. We concluded that even on the info1mation
contained in his counsel's submission, the detriment to him of a zero grade is neither
disproportionate nor unduly harsh in the context of the many other factors we have
considered above. To the contrary, a zero grade is entirely consistent with every previous

16

Tribunal decision to which we were referred. It is the base minimum. A simple reprimand
on the uncontradicted facts of this case would eliminate all general deterrence: it would
provide every University student with an incentive to bring unauthorized aids into a
closed book examination, with no risk upon detection other than a "slap on the wrist"
unless the University were to amass proof that the aids were actually used in the
particular situation. It would make a mockery of the warning on the examination paper
and the meaning of a closed book examination.
(78]

Conversely, we regarded the suspension sought by the University as an excessive penalty
for a first offence, involving no use of the unauthorized aids during the examination, with
no likelihood of repetition by this student, Mr. Vaturi was quite correct in his analysis of
the five cases put forward by the University. Y.L. (tab 2) and Ms. D. (tab 4) were second
offences that resulted in suspensions. Mr. M. (tab 3) and Mr. C. (a first offence case at tab
6) resulted in a zero grade and no suspension. Ms. T. (tab 5) was a suspension case in
which we have no information about previous offences but do note that the unauthorized
aid was found on the student's desk.

(79]

We therefore decided upon the penalty as conveyed to the paiiies above.

Raj Anand, Chair

Date

17

