Case 499

DATE:

   October 6, 2008

PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v. Mr. S.S.

Hearing Date(s):

   November 26, 2007

Panel Members:

   Mr. Raj Anand, Chair
   Professor Ikuko Komuro-Lee, Faculty Member
   Mr. Christopher Oates, Student Member

Appearances:

   Ms. Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel for the University, and
   Ms. Jodi Martin
   Mr. Maurice Vaturi, Counsel for the Student, and Mr. Ben Zacks
   Mr. S.S., the Student
   The Student was charged under s. B.i.1(b), and alternatively, s.
   B.i.3(b) of the Code. The charges related to a final examination in
   which the Student was found to be in possession of a cell phone, cue
   cards containing text related to the examination, and a photocopy of a
   prior yearâs examination. The Student pleaded âNot Guiltyâ to both
   charges. The Student claimed that he was unaware that he had had aids
   in his jacket pocket and he was ignorant of how to correctly operate
   his cell phone, having believed that he had turned it off. The Student
   produced a doctorâs report, dated two days after the exam, which stated
   that the Student was experiencing weakness, fatigue, dehydration and
   headache. The Student claimed that he felt nervous when he arrived to
   write the exam and that he did not hear any announcements or the exam
   invigilator asking him to remove his jacket. The Student claimed that
   he interpreted the rule that certain items were prohibited âat the
   deskâ to mean âon the deskâ. The University claimed that the Student
   knew or ought reasonably to have known that the items found in his
   possession were unauthorized aids. The Student claimed that while cell
   phones were prohibited at the exam, the Code did not define a cell
   phone as an unauthorized aid. The Student claimed that the phrase
   âought reasonably to have knownâ suggested a subjective element that
   implies the intent to do wrong. The Panel found the Student guilty of
   having committed an offence under s. B.i.1(b) of the Code. The Student
   subjectively knew or ought reasonably to have known that the cue cards,
   the previous yearâs exam and the cell phone (at least while on) were
   unauthorized aids and he ought to have known that he had those
   unauthorized aids in his possession during the exam. With respect to
   penalty, the University claimed that when a student wilfully disregards
   the rules, it jeopardizes trust and integrity. The Student submitted
   that the panel should impose sanctions on the more lenient end of the
   continuum provided by the Code at s. C.ii.(b). The Panel considered the
   Studentâs registration vis-Ã -vis graduation and requested that the
   parties provide written submissions on the academic consequences of
   proposed penalties, addressing both fact and principle. The Panel found
   that the nature of the offence was at the less serious end of the
   spectrum of cases, and that there was no evidence that the Student used
   the cell phone or other aids to assist him in the examination, or that
   he benefited from their presence. The Panel found that the Student knew
   from his time at the University, the examinations he had previously
   written and the warning at the front of the examination in question,
   that the aids were unauthorized. Whether or not the Student turned his
   mind to the issue, he ought to have known that he was violating the
   rules. The Panel observed that the allegation of academic offence was
   the first against the Student and it found nothing to suggest that a
   repetition of the offence was likely.Â  The Panel found that the
   University should not be compelled to produce evidence of actual use
   and benefit obtained from prohibited notes or similar items before it
   is able to enforce its rules and impose sanctions, and to disregard the
   principle that students must check unauthorized aids at the door before
   writing the exam would compromise the Universityâs processes. The Panel
   found that stress and fatigue of preparing for and writing examinations
   was not a relevant mitigating or extenuating circumstance as it had
   affected almost all students undergoing evaluation and it was
   inconceivable that the circumstances could justify a violation of the
   rules. The Panel found that the academic impact of the sanctions
   proposed by the respective parties was a proper consideration for the
   Tribunal for several reasons: the impact of the offence on the
   Universityâs âpublicâ and on the individual in question is a reflection
   of the twin factors of general and specific deterrence; there is
   judicial authority for the application of criminal law principles of
   sentencing in cases of professional or regulatory discipline; under
   both criminal and administrative law discipline principles, mitigating
   or extenuating circumstances are relevant; and the criminal and
   administrative law discipline principles are reflected in the body of
   Tribunal cases. The Panel observed that only through inquiry and
   assessment of the implications of its intended penalty can the Tribunal
   determine which side that evidence supports. The Panel considered
   precedent cases and found that the penalty sought by the Student was
   too lenient while the penalty sought by the University was excessive
   for the circumstances. The Panel imposed a mark of zero in the course;
   a two-year notation on the Studentâs academic record and transcript;
   and that a report be issued to the Provost.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/13058
