Case 588

DATE:

   July 28, 2011

PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v. S.G.

Hearing Date(s):

   June 20, 2011

Panel Members:

   Ms. Roslyn Tsao, Chair
   Prof. Markus Bussmann, Faculty Member
   Mr. Robert Chu, Student Member

Appearances:

   Mr. Robert Centa, Assistant Discipline Counsel for the University
   Prof. Mohammad Mojahedi
   Prof. Sean Hum
   Prof. Konstantinos Sarris

In Attendance:

   Ms. Jane Alerdice, Director of Quality Assessment and Governance,
   School of Graduate Studies
   Ms. Natalie Ramtahal, Coordinator, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty
   Grievances

   Student charged under s. B.i.1(f) of the Code . The charges related to
   allegations that the Studentâs thesis contained concocted statements
   which were essential to the integrity of his thesis. The Student did
   not attend the hearing. The hearing dates were adjourned twice to
   accommodate the Student. The Student requested adjournment for the
   third time but failed to provide the information requested by the
   Tribunal. As such, the Panel allowed the matter to proceed in the
   absence of the Student. The Studentâs thesis supervisor (âthe
   Professorâ) as well as two other professors in the Department submitted
   affidavits and testified orally. The Panel found the Professor to be
   sincere and credible. Based on the testimony of the Professor, the
   Panel held that the University met the burden of proof for each of the
   four allegations of concoction that (1) the Student misrepresented that
   he used âseries loading capacitorsâ in the design and construction of
   his transmission line (circuit boards), (2) the Student misrepresented
   that operational series loading elements were inserted into the line,
   (3) the Studentâs simulated and measured results were necessarily
   fabricated, and (4) the Student digitally altered a photograph included
   in his thesis. The Student claimed that any errors in his research were
   the results of honest and unintentional mistakes. The Panel rejected
   this claim because (1) the Student has demonstrated a pattern of first
   denying any misrepresentation and after being confronted with
   incontrovertible evidence, providing very different explanations and
   finally suggesting that the results were theoretically good enough
   despite the errors; and (2) the facts of the case rules out the
   possibility of an unintentional mistake. Even if the claim of âhonestâ
   and âunintentionalâ mistakes was accepted by the Panel, it would not be
   a defence based on the extended definition of âknowinglyâ in the Code .
   Accordingly, the Panel found the Student guilty under s. B . i.1(f) .
   The Panel stated that the Student ought to have known, as a graduate
   student, that he was submitting concocted academic work for an M.A.Sc.
   thesis. In considering an appropriate sanction, the Panel stated that
   there was no evidence of extenuating circumstances and that there was
   deliberate concoction and a lack of appreciation about the seriousness
   of such academic misconduct. The Panel again noted the Studentâs
   pattern of behaviour. The Panel differentiated this case from D. (Case
   No. 406) in that this case did not involve a consideration of the
   Studentâs rehabilitation/reformation against the need for deterrence
   and protection of the public. The Panel imposed a grade of zero for the
   course; a recommendation to the Governing Council that it cancel and
   recall the M.A.Sc. awarded to the Student; a permanent notation on the
   Studentâs academic record and transcript; and that a report be issued
   to the Provost.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12775
