UNIVERSITY TRlBUNAL
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO

IN THE MATTER OF charges of academic dishonesty made on June 24, 2009,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour 011 Academic
Mallers, 1995,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the Universi(l' of Toronto Act, 1971, S.O. 1971, c. 56 as
amended S.O, 1978, c. 88

BETWEEN:
UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO (the "University")

-AND-

s

G

(tlte "Student")

Tribunal Members:
Ms. Roslyn M. Tsao, Barrister and Solicitor, Chair
Professor Markus Bussman, Depa1iment of Mechanical and Industrial Engineering,
Faculty Panel Member
Mr. Robe1i Chu, Student Panel Member
Appearances:
Mr. Robe1i Centa, Assistant Discipline Counsel for the University, Paliare Roland
Banisters
Professor Mohammad Mojahedi, Depaiiment of Electrical and Computer Engineering
Professor Sean Hum, Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
Professor Konstantinos Sarris, Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering

In Attendance:
Ms. Jane Alderdice, Director of Quality Assessment and Govemai1ce, School of Graduate
Studies
Ms. Natalie Ramtahal, Coordinator, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances
Not In Attendance:
Mr. S
G
, the Student

I.

2.

The Trial division of the Tribunal heard this matter on June 20, 2011.
Student was charged on June 24, 2009 of the following:

The

(a)

In or about June 2007, yo11 knowingly submitted academic work
containing a purpmied statement of fact that had been concocted, which
violated section B.l. I (f) of the Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters
(the "Code).

(b)

In the alternative, in or about June 2007, you knowingly engaged in a form
of cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or
misrepresentation in order to obtain academic credit or other academic
advantage of any kind, which violated section B.l.3(b) of the Code.

The matter had initially been set for hearing in June, 20 l O but was adjourned at
the request of the Student.

Preliminary Issue - Request for Adjournment by Student
3.

The University has acknowledged that the Student has ostensibly requested an
adjournment of this hearing date through email correspondence. A brief review
of the procedural history of this matter is required as background to this
adjournment request.

4.

The University filed an Affidavit of Betty-Ann Campbell sworn J1me 20, 2011
with exhibits (Exhibit "3") setting out the procedural history in the matter.

5.

The charges in this matter were initiated in June, 2009, although the subject
matter of the offence is alleged to have occ1mcd in 2007. The Student, at the time
of the laying of the charges, resided, studied and worked in the U.S. and, as an
Iranian citizen, required a visa to return to the U.S. ifhe left to attend a hearing in
Canada. The Student also preferred a hearing date dming a school break to
accommodate his academic studies.

6,

In setting the original hearing date, the University and Tribunal accommodated
the Student's requests and scheduled a hearing for J\Jne 14, 15, 16 and 17, 2010.

7.

These June, 2010 dates were subsequently adjourned at the request of the Student
and Downtown Legal Services. The adjournment request was consented to by the
University.

8.

Following a Telephone Case Conference in this matter before Senior Chair P.
Jackson on November 23, 2010 for scheduling purposes, Senior Chair Jackson
released a written direction of the same date which included, among other things,
that:

2

(a)

four days of hearing time had been requested by the parties;

(b)

having regard to the Student's academic schedule and his need to obtain a
visa to enter Canada and to return to the U.S., the Tribunal would not
schedule a hearing before June, 2011; and

(c)

the Student had confirmed that he would immediately apply for the
relevant visas.

9.

In January, 201 I, the Tribunal set the within hearing dates of June 13, 14, 20 and
21, 201 I with input and agreement from both the Student and the University.
Accordingly, the Notice of Hearing was delivered January 24, 2011 (Exhibit" I").

I 0.

On about May 20, 2011, the 4 days of hearing were reduced to 2 days of June 20
and21,201I.

11.

On May 24, 201 l, in response to the University's request to file Affidavit
evidence in chief for some/all witnesses, the Student emailed the Tribunal to
advise that he could not participate in the scheduled hearing. lt is important to
reproduce the email of the Student lo identify his stated reasons for not attending
and that he did not intend to participate at that time:

Unfortunate(y I cannot participate in the scheduled hearing due to some
hea/11, issues a11d neither 11111 I allowed to participate in any other
streMf11I activity inc/11di11g any other hearing regarding this matter. I have
mailed my 11nder im•esligation Master's degree to yo11r address. I neither
admit the academic disho11esty charges /IOI' will I di5J!llte them 1111d nor
will I appeal a11y 1•erdict,
I wa11t to thank the University officials for their patience and
1111dersta11ding a11d for giving me two opportunities lo participate i11 the
hearing and I am sony that I cannot pal'licipa/e in the hearing. (emphasis
added)
12.

Based on the Student's May 24, 2011 email, I issued a direction to the parties the
same day to permit the filing of evidence in chief by affidavit provided that such
witnesses were to be made available at the hearing for cross-examination and/or
questions from the Tribunal.

13.

On June 9, 2011, the Student emailed the Tribunal to indicate that he now wished
to attend the hearing but not for 2-3 months. The Student's email stated, in full:

I was i11for111ed by my brother, wl10 is my physicia11, that I will be able to
a/lend the hearing within 2-3 mo11ths from 110w. I would like to attend the
hearing and d~fe11d myself. Also, the visa restrictio11s for Iranian citize11s
3

are re111oved by the U.S govem111e11t a11d I ,viii have 110 prob/e111 ji-0111 that
perspective. I m11 prol'ide you with fl/I official letter co11jir111i11g my
lzea/th issue ifyort are interested. (emphasis added)
14.

15,

On June I0, 2011 at 7: 12 a.m. (this appears to be California time though l refe1TCd
to it being Toronto time in my later direction), my further direction was released
to the parties. This direction reviewed the procedural history, the Student's May
24 th email and requested the following infonnation/documentation to be provided
no later than June 15, 2011 at noon to pennit the University and the Tribunal to
consider the adjournment request:
(a)

a letter from a duly qualified physician (other than the Student's brother)
setting out details of his current medical condition and the basis as to why
the Student could not or should not attend for hearing, his current
treatment regime and a prognosis of when the Student would be able to
participate and why by that time;

(b)

a signed Consent pennitting Mr. Centa to speak with his physician; and

(c)

a letter from the Student's cull'ent academic institution (preferably his
supervisor) to confinn his current academic program, status and
anticipated completion date.

By return email of June 10th at 6:12 p.m. (again, California time), the Student
emailed the Tribunal and advised:
I won 'I be able provid the requestd i11formatio11 in such short time.(sic)

16.

I issued a third direction on June 13, 2011 in response to the Student's June 10th
email which stated ultimately that:
111 short, I urge Mr.
G
to fonvard whatever
evide11celdocume11/atio11 that he wishes the fribunal to consider at the
outset of the scheduled hearing to deter111i11e /,is aqjoumment request. 111e
deadline i11 my direction was given ill an attempt to address the
adjoumment request in advance of the hearing date.

If sufficient doc11me11tatio11 cannot be provided in advance, the Tribunal
will deal with the adjo11mme11/ request as a pre-hearing motion 011 June
20th based on what Mr. G
has s11bmi11ed by the time of hearing. /11
addition, I understand that Mr. G
may participate Jar the p111yJoses
of the motion (and otherwise) by Skype. Mr. Gshould co11firm if he
wishes to so participate with Ms Ram ta ha/ as soon as possible.
I want to make ii clear that if the adjo11mme11t is 110/ granted, the hearing
will proceed as scheduled on June 20 and 21.

4

17.

As at the commencement of the Hearing, the Student did not attend and there had
been no further communication from the Student after my June 13 th email.

18.

Accordingly, at the outset of the Hearing, the Tribunal considered the ostensible
adjournment request of the Student.

19.

The Tribunal has ruled that the hearing may proceed in the Student's absence due
to the Student's failure to provide any documentation or information to
substantiate the reasons for his request for the adjoununent despite having been
given ample opportunity to do so.

Presentation of Evidence

20.

As per the earlier Direction permitting the filing of Affidavit evidence, the
University submitted Affidavits of Professor Mohammad Mojahedi (sworn June
13,201 l), Professor Scan Hum (sworn June 14, 2011) and Professor Konstantinos
Sarris (sworn June 14,201 I), Exhibits "4", "S" and "6", respectively.

21.

Each affiant also provided vive voce evidence at the Hearing and responded to
questions from the Tribunal.

22.

I note that the Student's emails and the Student's December 17, 2008 written
response to the Professor Mojahedi's allegations were tendered to the Tribunal,
not for the trnth of their contents but to demonstrate that the Student had the
oppm1unity to respond. It may be apprnpriate for the Tribunal to refer to these
documents where such documents might give rise to some doubt as the
University's case.

Facts of the Case
23.

The Student's M.A.Sc. Thesis, titled "Dispersion Engineering:
Electronic
Implementations and Microwave Applications", was defended on July 5, 2007
before a committee consisting of Professors P.G. Gulak, S.V. Hum, M. Mojahedi
and C.D. Sarris.

24.

In summary, it is the University's submission that there were four (4) false
statements made by the Student which were essential to the integrity of his thesis:
(a)

that the Student represented that he used "series loading capacitors" in the
design and construction of his transmission line (circuit boards) but upon
inspection of at least one oft he Sl\1dent's actual circuit boards, "inductors"
were, in fact, used;

5

(b)

that the Student represented that functional series loading elements were
inse1ted into the line but, in fact, did not do so based on the inspection of
the circuit board revealing that copper traces were not "cut" where these
elements were situated and were, therefore, merely decoys;

(c)

that the Student's simulated and measured results could not be reproduced
and were, fabricated; and

(d)

a photograph included in his thesis was, as subsequently admitted by the
Student, digitally manipulated.

25.

The University fmther submits that the thesis is an essential component to the
granting of the M.A.Sc. degree.

26.

As the Student is no longer a student at the University, the remedy sought by the
University, among other things, is to cancel the Student's M.A.Sc. degree.

Discol'e1,, of Academic Misco11d11ct
27.

It is impo1tant in assessing the evidence and the Student's response to the
investigation to review how Professor Mojahedi discovered and reached his
conclusions about the Student's academic conduct.

28.

Professor Mojahcdi (hereinafter "the Professor") recommended the Student's
application for admission to the Department of Electrical and Computer
Engineering (School of Graduate Studies) (the "Department") and was the
Student's thesis supervisor.

29.

Prior to the Student's departure for California after receiving his degree, the
Professor requested and obtained the 4 circuit boards that the Student had
designed and fabricated as part of his Master's work.

30.

In the Fall of 2007, the Professor asked his new research student to build on the
Student's results with the aim to publish the results in a scientific journal. The
Student's results could not be reproduced. Despite communication between the
research student and the Student through the balance of 2007 until the spdng of
2008, the research student did not receive a satisfactory explanation from the
Student to the questions raised from the subsequent analysis of the thesis results.

31.

The Professor indicates that the emails from the Student to his research student
were not responsive to the issues raised. After providing the Student with many
oppo1tunities to assist in clarifying specific concerns with the thesis, the Student
indicated that he would be providing no further replies in an email of Febrnary 24,
2008 to the research student.

6

32.

The Professor was very busy in 2008 and it was not until the foll of 2008 that he,
himself, made further efforts to investigate his research student's difficulties in
reproducing the Student's thesis results. At this time, the Professor examined the
circuit boards that the Student had provided as being from his research.

Evide11ce of Mi.1·co,u/11ct - U11iversity's B11rde11 of Proof
33.

It was the evidence of Professor Mojahcdi which fanned the primary basis of the
University's case. Professor Mojahedi earned a Ph.D., M.S. and B.S. in electrical
engineering from the University of New Mexico and completed his Ph.D. in 199.
He received the Popejoy Award for the outstanding doctoral dissertation in
physics and engineering from the University of New Mexico between 1997 and
2000. He has supervised over a dozen University of Toronto students since 2001
for their !vi.A.Sc. or Ph.D. in engineering degrees.

34.

The Tribunal finds the Professor to be have been credible and sincere without any
undue a11i11111s against the Student. The Professor's motivation in pursuing this
matter was that if he did nothing about the alleged "academic misconduct", he
would be condoning it.

35.

The following is a review of the University's evidence of misconduct under each
of the four principle allegations referred to in paragraph 24. above.

a)
St11de11t's 111isreprese11tat/011 that he used "series loading capacitors"
in the design 111ul co11stmctio11 of his tm11s111issio11 /il,e (circuit boards):
36.

When clearly and specifically asked by the Professor, by email, whether the
Student used series loadi11g capacitors as claimed in his thesis, the Student
answered "Yes I did" 1•

37.

It is the Professor's uncontrndicted evidence that his measurements of the series
/oadi11g eleme11ts on one of the circuit boards caused him to conclude that the
element used by the Student was an i11d11ctor and not a capacitor.

38.

Futihermore, when the Student was confronted with the Professor's conclusions
about the use of inductms instead of the thesis-stated capacitors, the Student
attempted to claim (contrary to his unequivocal earlier response that he did use
capacitors) that he may well have used inductors at a frequency above their "selfresonance frequency (SRF)" such that they would behave like the thesis-stated
capacitors. To the Professor's credit, he did assess this explanation and found it to

1

2

Email from Student to the Professor dated November I0, 2008.

The Professor explained that he examined and physically compromised only one of the four circuit boords

and left the other three boards inlact and preserved so that the Studenl would not be prejudiced from using

his remaining boards to defend against lhc allegations ifhe wished.

7

be scientifically implausible. In any event, this type of use of inductors was not
mentioned whatsoever in the Student's thesis.

b)
Student 111isreprese11ted that opemtio11a/ series loading e/eme11ts were
i11serted i11to the line:
39.

The Professor became more concerned about misrepresentations in the thesis and
sent the circuit board (same one for which he had measured the series loading
clements) to an outside company to remove the overlaying solder to expose the
underlying copper traces. 3

40.

The circuit board revealed that the copper traces underlying these same series
loading clements were not nor had ever been cut. The photographs provided to
the Tribunal show, without question, that the copper traces were intact. As a
result, the purportedly operational series loading elements on this circuit board
were nothing more than dummy elements or, in the Professor's view, "decoys".

41.

The Professor's evidence is that, in the absence of the purported operational
elements, the circuit boards could not behave as a left-handed medium (a medium
with negative phase delay), an essential, underlying concept of the Student's thesis
research.

42.

In response to this allegation, the Student indicated in one of his emails that he did
not use etching to remove copper traces but rather he used a "sharp needle" by
hand. The Student suggested that perhaps not all the soldering was removed
which would give the physical appearance that the copper trace had not been cut.
This explanation is not only implausible but also contradictory to the fact that in
other locations on the same circuit board, copper traces can been seen to have
been clearly and substantially cut by etching.

c)
Tlte Student's si11111/ated and measured results were 11ecess11rily
fabricated:
43.

The Student provided data results in his thesis4 which purported to be simulated
and measured results for his four circuit boards.

44.

The Figures and data for the four circuit boards were, in all circumstances,
uniform and consistent in the thesis.

45.

The Professor was unable to simulate the results shown in the thesis for any of the
four boards, and, ce1tainly not for the board which the Professor subsequently

3 11

Copper traccs 11 which arc initially found on a 11 new11 circuit board are 11 cul 11 (removed by hand or by
etching technique) to render inserted elem.cuts opernlive, Copper traces which are not cut before the
insertion of an element result in a 11 short 11 such that any inserted element is essentially a dummy clement.
'Specifically Figures 5.5(a), 5.5(b) and 5.5(c) of the Thesis.

8

physically examined and found had the dummy series loading elements. In
addition, the results from all four boards were consistent with each other under the
Professor's testing.
46.

The Professor's conclusions, which the Tribunal adopts, are: that the other 3
circuit boards must also have had dumrny elements as the Professor's results were
so consistent over all 4 boards; and, that the results were fabricated by the Student
for all 4 boards since the Student's result could not be simulated on any of the
boards.

47.

The Student was invited lo provide his simulation files to the Professor and he
was given access to his old computer files and simulations resident on the
cornputcr network at the University. The Student did not act on this invitation.

48.

In his December 18, 2008 written response, the Student provided another set of
simulation results which admittedly differ from those in his thesis. The Student
nevertheless claims that they are sufficiently close to his thesis results if one is to
look at the results for a significantly higher frequency range. In layman's terms,
the graph of the Student's new results may well simulate those that he submitted
in his thesis but the entire aspect-ratio of the two graphs would have to be
ignored.

49.

The Professor confirmed that if the results that he derived from the Student's 4
circuit boards were reflected in the thesis, the Student's thesis conclusion would
not have been supported.

d)

The Student digitally altered a photograph included i11 his thesis:

50,

The Student has admitted, upon being confronted, that Figure 5.7 of his thesis was
a digitally altered photograph of his circuit board using Photoshop.

51.

The University acknowledges that, in isolation, the altering of a photograph may
be excusable but in light of the foregoing allegations, it is merely fmiher evidence
of deliberate misconduct.

52.

The Student suggested that he used Photoshop because he no longer had access to
a "special camera" which he needed to photograph the circuit board and so he
added the series loading element to an earlier photograph. The Professor notes
that no "special camera" is required to photograph a circuit board and the altered
photograph does not even represent the circuit boards claimed to have been used
for his thesis.

9

El'idence of Professors Hum and Sarris
53.

Professors Hum and Sarris are associate professors in the Department, have
earned Ph.D,s and were members of the oral presentation committee for the
Student's thesis.

54,

Professors Hum and Sal1'is were both asked whether the Student mentioned, al
any time during his presentation, that inductors may have been used instead of the
stated capacitors, Both professors confinned that there was no issue about this
during the oral presentation as the Student's thesis clearly propounded that use of
capacitors,

Student's Claim of Ho11est a111l U11i11te11tio11al Mistake
55,

Although the Student did not appear at nor tender any evidence for the hearing,
we note that in his December 17, 2008 written response, he claims that any errors
with his research and findings were the result of "honest" and "unintentional"
mistakes on his pati.

56.

In considering the possibility that the Student had committed honest and
unintentionnl mistakes, the Tribunal notes the following:
(a)

The Sh1dent has demonstrated a pattern of first denying any
misrepresentation, then, after being confronted with incontrovertible
evidence of the misrepresentation, providing a very different explanation
of actions which he initially denied, then, finally simply suggesting that
the results are theoretically good enough despite the now-demonstrated
errors in his thesis representations 5,

(b)

The use of an inductor instead of a purp01ted capacitor and the failure to
cut copper traces (rendering the series loading elements entirely nonoperational) cannot reasonably be found to be unintentional mistakes,

Decision of the Tribunal
57.

5

Based on the foregoing evidence, the Tribunal finds that the University has
satisfied its burden of showing that the Student knowingly submitted academic
work containing a purpo1ied statement of fact that had been concocted, contrary
to section B.Ll ( f) of the Code,

Professor Mojahedi referred to this as 11 changing the goal posts".

10

58.

The Student was a graduate student and ought to have known that he was
submitting concocted academic work for an M.A.Sc. thesis. The assertion that the
Student committed "honest" or "uuintentional" mistakes (even if accepted by this
Tribunal which it is not), would not, in any event, be a defence based on the
ex Iended definition of "knowingly" in the Code.

59.

The facts and conclusions which were propounded in the Student's thesis cannot
be simulalcd in any manner given the concocted description of the circuit set out
in the thesis.

Penalty

60.

The Tribunal imposes the following penalty at the request of the University:
(a)

the Student receive a final grade of zero in the course RST 9999Y;

(b)

the Tribunal recommends lo the Governing Council that ii cancel and
recall !he M.A. Sc. awarded to the Student; and

(c)

sanction imposed be imposed permanently on the Student's academic
record and transcript; and

(d)

this case be reported lo !he Provost for publication of a notice of the
decision of the Tribunal and the sanction imposed, with the Student's
name withheld.

6 I.

The Tribunal reviewed the often-recited principles of sentencing in academic
offonces. There was no evidence of any extenuating circumstances affecting the
Student and the Tribunal has that there was deliberate concoction and a lack of
appreciation about the seriousness of such academic misconduct. In particular,
we again note that the Student demonstrated a pattern of first denying any
misrcpresentalion, then, after being confronted with incontrovertible evidence of
the misrepresentation, providing a very different explanation of actions.

62.

Unlike the circumstances in the JJ
(May, 2007) decision, there was nothing in
this case to warrant a consideration of the Student's rehabilitation/reformation
against the need for deterrence and protection of the 1rnblie.

63.

An Order with the rnlings and penalty was signed by the Tribunal at the hearing.

Date

1

Roslyn M!'sao, Chait

11

