Report 280

DATE:

   June 11, 2003

PARTIES:

   Ms. S. (The Student) v. the Faculty of Arts and Science

Hearing Date(s):

   June 2nd, 2003

Committee Members:

   Professor Emeritus Ralph Scane, Chair
   Professor Clare Beghtol
   Professor Sherwin Desser
   Mr. Chris Ramsaroop
   Mrs. Susan Scace

Secretary:

   Mr. Paul Holmes, Judicial Affairs Officer

In Attendance:

For the Appellant:

   Ms S., the Appellant ("the Student")
   Ms Elee Scarlett, Counsel
   Mr. Jeremy Speight
   Professor Aurel Braun
   Professor David Wolfe

For the Faculty of Arts and Science:

   Vice-Dean Susan Howson

   Request for late withdrawal without academic penalty from one course.
   The Student received a grade of "C" in the course. It was not in issue
   that the Student suffered physical and psychological effects of a
   serious medical condition, including stress awaiting the diagnosis of
   her condition, and further stress when the diagnosis was received. The
   Committee considered the Studentâs submissions and the University and
   Committee's approach to the policy on late withdrawal without academic
   penalty as described in Report #264 and found that between the receipt
   of her diagnosis and the drop date for the course, the Student was in a
   state of emotional upset from which she had no reasonable time to
   recover. The Committee found that advice to carry on with her courses
   had contributed to the Studentâs stress, and that due to the short
   period between the drop date and the end of the course the Student had
   no time to recover before the evaluations for the course were completed
   and submitted. Appeal allowed. The Committee ordered that the grade in
   the course be vacated, and that the Student be permitted to withdraw
   from that course without academic penalty. The Committee recommended
   that a warning be issued that staff of the University who undertake to
   advise or counsel students, and who receive a student's confidences,
   must not divulge the information received or make any comment based
   upon it, without the student's permission. The Committee stated that it
   was concerned about the reasons for judgment of the Divisional Appeals
   Board. The Committee observed that the exclusive concentration upon the
   better course of action to achieve the Student's goals in launching the
   appeal resulted in the Board failing to consider what the necessary
   conditions to permit late withdrawal were, and whether the Student had
   established those conditions. The Committee observed that if the
   Student had established the necessary conditions than she was entitled
   to the relief sought, whether it was wise to proceed to take it or not.
   Any advice from the Board should follow after the decision called for
   by the appeal and not control the decision.
   [1]View Report

References

   1. file:///media/12651
