Case 00-01-06

   Supplemental Reasons on Penalty to Case# [1]00-01-04 (2000-2001)

DATE:

   September 19, 2001

PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v. Ms. C.

Hearing Date(s):

   May 29, 2001 and August 23, 2001

Panel Members:

   John Keefe
   Professor Patrick Macklem
   Martha Kumsa

   Supplemental reasons on penalty for the Tribunal case #00-01-04.
   Student charged with two offences under s. B.i.1(d), and alternatively,
   two offences under s. B.i.3(b) of the Code. The charges related to
   allegations that the Student submitted a plagiarized take home test and
   a plagiarized essay in one course. The Panel found that in both
   assignments the Student had failed to provide proper attribution for
   words taken from other sources. The Panel found the Student guilty of
   the charges under s. B.i.1(d) and not guilty to the charges under s.
   B.i.3(b) of the Code because the Student had not acted with dishonest
   intent, although the conduct fell within the expanded definition of
   âknowinglyâ as defined in the Code. The Panel found that there were
   unusual and extenuating circumstances, particularly a teaching
   assistantsâ strike and the Studentâs academic background and
   circumstances, but that the issues were more appropriately dealt with
   in the context of penalty. The Panel considered previous Tribunal
   decisions involving plagiarism and sentencing principles, and found
   that none of the cited cases involved a finding of guilt based on the
   extended definition of âknowingly.â The Panel considered the
   instruction provided to the Student on plagiarism; the nature of the
   offence; the fact that the Student believed she had done the assignment
   properly; the teacherâs assistant strike; and the Studentâs academic
   history and status. The Panel found that the Student did not understand
   proper citations techniques. The offence was the Studentâs first. The
   Panel found that although the Student did not plead guilty, she did
   learn from the incident and was unlikely to reoffend. The Panel found
   that a suspension was not warranted because of the lack of dishonest
   intent. At the time of the hearing, the Student required a passing mark
   in the course to graduate. At the onset of the hearing, the Student
   brought a motion to stay the proceedings on the grounds of undue delay
   in proceeding with the complaint. The Panel found that the period of
   delay, while not inordinate, was such that if the Panel ruled in the
   Studentâs favour, she would be unable to graduate within a specified
   period of time. In rendering its original decision, the Panel ordered
   that the Student be allowed to enroll in the summer offering of the
   course, however it failed to address what would happen if the Student
   chose not to apply to that offering of the course or what grade she was
   to be given for her work completed in the course when she first took
   it. The Panel found that if the Student did not apply to the summer
   offering of the course, then she would have to apply to the fall
   offering if she wished to complete the course; and that the Student
   should receive a failing grade in the course, calculated by totaling
   the marks received for all her course work and assuming she received a
   zero for the two assignments in question. The Panel found that giving a
   passing mark in the course was not consistent with its original
   approach, and that in order to achieve a passing grade the Student
   would have to complete the fall offering of the course. The Panel
   imposed that the Student be allowed, pending approval of the course
   instructor, to complete the course by re-writing the two take home
   papers within equivalent time deadlines as the original assignments
   required so that a final mark for the course could be recorded on her
   transcript in time for her to graduate within the specified period of
   time, further to s. C.ii.B.1.(b) of the Code; that if permission of the
   course instructor was not granted, then the Student could apply for
   late admission to the summer offering of the course, and that if she so
   applied, that she be granted late admission to the course; that if the
   Student applied for late admission to the course and it was not
   feasible for the University to grant such late admission, the final
   grade in the course was to be recorded on her transcript equal to the
   average of her course work already completed, excluding the two take
   home assignments, within time for her to graduate within the specified
   period of time; that if the Student did not apply to the summer
   offering of the course, she would have had to apply to the fall
   offering of the course if she wished to complete the course; that the
   Student would be given a failing grade of 37.5 for her work in the
   section of the course at issue; that the Student would receive an oral
   and written reprimand; a one-year notation on the Studentâs academic
   record and transcript; and that a report be issued to the Provost.
   [2]View Case

References

   1. https://governingcouncil.utoronto.ca/system/files/import-files/Case_00-01-041177.pdf
   2. file:///media/13064
