Case 690 - Appeal

DATE:

   October 20, 2014

PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v S.F.

Hearing Date(s):

   October 7, 2014

Panel Members:

   Ronald G. Slaght, Chair
   Elizabeth Peter, Faculty Member
   Jenna Jacobson, Student Member
   Graeme Norval, Faculty Member

Appearances:

   Robert Centa, Counsel for the University
   Julia Willkes, Counsel for the Appellant

In Attendance:

   The Appellant
   John Britton, Deanâs Designate
   Matter before the Discipline Appeals Board (DAB) on appeal from a
   penalty imposed by a Panel. The appellant was not at the Panel hearing
   but had negotiated an Agreed Statement of Facts (ASF) and a Joint
   Submission on Penalty (JSP) including a grade of a zero in the 17
   courses, a suspension from the date of order for five years, and a
   permanent notation be placed on his academic record. The Panel added a
   recommendation that the Appellant be expelled from the University. The
   Appellant, joined by the Respondent Provost, argued that the Panel
   erred in its decision not to impose the JSP sanction. The appeal raised
   the question of when and under what circumstances a Panel may impose a
   penalty other than one agreed to in a JSP and if the original Panel was
   justified in rejecting the proposed sanction agreed to by both parties.
   The DAB noted its broad appeal powers in section E.7(c) of the Code,
   which states: âThe Discipline Appeal Board shall have the power â¦ in
   any other case, to affirm, reverse, quash, vary or modify the verdict,
   penalty or sanction appealed from and substitute any verdict penalty or
   sanction that could have been given or imposed at trial.â The DAB also
   recognized that while it has jurisdiction to do so, it will not
   interfere with decisions found to be reasonable in all circumstances,
   even if other reasonable dispositions can be supported.
   An ASF set out that in two separate years the Appellant submitted
   petitions seeking late withdrawal from 17 courses; 10 in the first year
   and 7 in the second. Â The second petition was denied and the Appellant
   submitted a third petition seeking the same relief as the second
   petition, this time on account of a grandmotherâs death and accompanied
   by a death certificate. The Appellant submitted a Certificate of Death
   and a newspaper death notice for his grandmother. The Appellant met
   with the Deanâs Designate in July 2012 where he admitted to some
   falsifications in his submissions. In October 2012 the Appellant was
   formally charged with 22 counts of academic misconduct. In the ASF the
   Appellant admitted that much of his submissions were false and a
   further AF revealed that the Appellant had been sanctioned for
   plagiarism on two prior occasions.
   The DAB examined principles guiding when a JSP may be accepted or
   rejected. A Panel is not obliged or required to accept a JSP, however
   one may be rejected only when to give effect to the JSP would be
   contrary to the public interest or bring the administration of justice
   into disrepute. If it is to reject a JSP the Panel must clearly
   articulate why it is doing so. The Panel must assess a JSP against the
   backdrop of the values of the University, which may be found in the
   Preamble to the Code and in the shared expectations which members of
   the University abide by. The DAB cited a Law Society Appeal Panel
   decision which stated that only truly unreasonable or unconscionable
   joint submissions should be rejected.
   The DAB allowed the appeal as the imposition of a five-year suspension,
   as opposed to a recommendation of expulsion, was not so fundamentally
   unreasonable to justify rejection of a JSP. The DAB noted the benefits
   joint submissions promote including early resolution, saving time and
   expense, and fostering trust and cooperation. The DAB also noted that
   the penalty in the JSP was so severe it Â could not in any way be said
   to âcondoneâ the Appellantâs conduct, and that the Appellant saved the
   University from a large evidentiary burden in his ASF and JSP. The DAB
   felt that the Panel did not decide if the JSP was reasonable, rather it
   determined that expulsion was an appropriate penalty and imposed it.
   The DAB ordered the Panelâs Order on penalty to be set aside and
   imposed the penalty provided in the JSP.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12862
