Report 264

DATE:

   March 25, 2002

PARTIES:

   Ms. A.H., the Appellant (the Student) v. UTSC

Hearing Date(s):

   March 14th, 2002

Committee Members:

   Professor Emeritus Ralph Scane, Acting Chair
   Professor Clare Beghtol
   Professor Luigi Girolametto
   Ms. Wendy Swinton
   Ms. Geta Yadav

Secretary:

   Mr. Paul Holmes, Judicial Affairs Officer

In Attendance:

For the Appellant:

   Ms. A.H., the Appellant ("the Student")
   Ms. E. Morton, counsel

For UTSC:

   Associate Dean I. McDonald
   Ms. Sherylin Biason

   Request to withdrawal late without academic penalty from one course.
   The Student failed the course. The Student claimed that her stressful
   situation, derived from family pressures, financial circumstances and
   the illness of her mother, prevented her from performing adequately in
   the course. The Committee considered an objection by the Faculty to the
   Studentâs introduction of new evidence and found that while it would be
   wrong to impose rules as rigorous as are imposed by appellate courts,
   the refusal to consider new evidence is an option open to the
   Committee. The Committee recommended that all students are clearly
   warned in writing, at the time that they are instituting the first
   steps of a petition process, that they must make full disclosure of all
   relevant facts upon which they rely, or be at risk of not being allowed
   to raise those facts at later stages of the process. The Committee
   found that the essential nature of the Studentâs issue was sufficiently
   disclosed in her original petition such that the details should be
   allowed to be filled in at the Committee level. The Committee
   considered the Universityâs policy on drop dates and found that the
   policy does not apply when unanticipated circumstances arise after the
   drop date, when then existing circumstances unexpectedly become
   significantly more severe, or when then existing circumstances were
   reasonably expected to abate, but did not. The Committee found that by
   the drop date, the Student was aware of the burdens placed upon her by
   her circumstances and she knew that she had failing grades in her tests
   and her midterm examination. The Committee found that the Studentâs
   receipt of a failing test after the drop date did not justify relief
   because she did not file her petition promptly after receipt of the
   mark. The Committee found that the difficulties the Student faced due
   to her mother's medical condition occurred around or after the drop
   date but that the circumstances did not exempt her from the drop date
   policy. If her return to the family home as a caregiver was foreseen at
   the drop date, the caregiving burden should have been factored into her
   appraisal of her chances of completing all of her courses successfully
   and if it was not foreseen, the Student must have anticipated that her
   situation of living away from home and holding a job to support herself
   would continue. The Committee found that the Student gambled that she
   could succeed in the course, or, if she could not, that she could seek
   to withdraw from one or more of her courses near the end of term.

   Appeal dismissed.
   [1]View Report

References

   1. file:///media/28405
