Report #300

   DATE: June 27, 2005
   PARTIES: Mr. J.W. (the Student) v. the Faculty of Arts and Science
   Hearing Date(s): June 1, 2005
   Committee Members:
   Prof. Ralph Scane
   Prof. Yuki Johnson
   Prof. Joel Kirsh
   Mr. Ari Kopolovic
   Ms. Maureen Somerville
   Secretary:
   Mr. Anthony Gray, Judicial Affairs Officer
   Appearances:
   For the Appellant:
   Mr. J.W. (the Student)
   For the Faculty of Arts and Science:
   Prof Susan Howson, Vice Dean, Undergraduate Education and Teaching
   Ms. Elaine Ishibashi, Associate Registrar
   Faculty of Arts and Science â request to write deferred examination and
   extension on course work â treatment for psychiatric illness â teaching
   style and course expectations unreasonable â abusive instructor â
   instructorâs demands not excessive â instructorâs counterâreactions did
   not exceed permissible bounds â Faculty recommended late withdrawal
   without academic penalty â deferred standing not appropriate â request
   to complete course in a manner not consistent with original course â
   stigma from notation of âwithdrawal without academic penaltyâ not as
   bad as notation of âfailâ â appeal allowed â if the Student accepted
   late withdrawal without academic penalty within thirty days of release
   of the decision then the grade of âFâ would be vacated, and a notation
   of WDR substituted â if the Student did not accept the relief then the
   appeal would be dismissed
   Request for a deferred examination and an extension of time to complete
   term work in one course. The Student had failed the course. The Student
   missed approximately three weeks of classes due to treatment for
   Aspergerâs Syndrome. The Student claimed that the course instructorâs
   teaching style and the course expectations were unreasonable and that
   the instructor was abusive. The course instructor was not available to
   assist the appeal process. The Committee considered the syllabus, the
   principal text and the instructorâs notes and found that the
   instructorâs demands were not excessive and the instructorâs
   counterâreactions to the Student did not exceed permissible bounds. The
   Faculty recommended that the Committee order late withdrawal without
   academic penalty. The Committee found that the relief of deferred
   standing was not appropriate because the instructor had left the
   university, the course was not to be repeated in its original form, and
   the Student had requested to complete the course in a manner that was
   not consistent with the original course as offered or presented. The
   Committee found that the Student was convinced that a notation of
   âwithdrawal without academic penaltyâ stigmatised a student as badly as
   a notation of âfailâ. The Committee stated that this assumption was
   wrong.Â  The Committee ordered that the Student have thirty days to
   notify the Faculty that he desired to accept the relief of withdrawal
   without academic penalty from the course. If the Student accepted the
   relief then the appeal would be allowed and the grade of âFâ would be
   vacated, and a notation of WDR substituted. If the Student did not
   accept the relief then the appeal would be dismissed.
   [1]View Report

References

   1. file:///media/12658
