>
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
THE GOVERNING COUNCIL
REPORT NUMBER 300 OF THE ACADEMIC APPEALS COMMITTEE
June 27, 2005
To the Academic Board,
University of Toronto
Your Committee reports that it held a meeting on Wednesday, June 1,
2005, at which the following members were present:
Professor Ralph Scane (Chair)
Professor Yuki Johnson
Professor Joel Kirsh
Mr. Ari Kopolovic
Ms Maureen Somerville
Secretary: Mr. Anthony Gray, Judicial Affairs Officer
Appearances:
For the Appellant:
Mr. J.W.

(the Student)

For the Faculty of Arts and Science:
Professor Susan Howson, Vice Dean, Undergraduate
Education and Teaching
Ms Elaine Ishibashi, Associate Registrar
This is an appeal from a decision of the Academic Appeals Board of
the Faculty of Arts and Science, dated December 2, 2004, which
dismissed an appeal from a decision of the Committee on Standing,
dated November 26, 2003. The latter decision dismissed a petition
from the Student to be granted a deferred examination and an
extension of time to complete term work in the course SLA106Y
(Elementary Polish) taken in the academic year 2002-03. The Student
vecl
grade Of "F" Tri this cOui:'se.

recei

a

The Student enrolled in a B.A. prograrrh~e at Woodsworth College in the
Fall Term of 2000. By the end of the 2003 Winter Term he had
accumulated eight credits. His courses, apart from SLA106Y, have been
in Russian, Ukrainian and Old Church Slavonic languages, and Baltic
history.

2

There is no doubt that the 2002-03 academic year was a very difficult
one for the Student, both generally and with respect to the course
SLA106Y. Generally, the Student missed approximately three weeks of
classes in each of the terms due to treatment in a psychiatric
hospital for a chronic illness, Asperger's Syndrome.
With respect to SLA106Y, the Student believed that the expectations
of the instructor as to the amount of Polish he was expected to
master and as to her emphasis on grammatical rules were unreasonable,
and that, in her interchanges with him, she was abusive. The
instructor was an adjunct instructor, visiting from Poland, and
returned there after the term. She was thus unavailable to assist at
any stage of this appeal. The Chair of the Academic Appeals Board,
herself a professor in a language department (although not of Polish
or other Slavic languages) reviewed the syllabus, principal text and
instructor's notes for the course in question. She advised that the
instructor was using the Communicative Language Teaching Approach.
This approach stresses interaction in the classroom about commonplace
topics. It does not stress traditional translation exercises. The
instructor spoke only Polish in the classroom. In other language
courses, the Student had become accustomed to, and apparently enjoyed
doing translation exercises.
Your Committee does not believe that the instructor's demands were
excessive. It does believe that the combination of illness, the
resulting absence from classes, and the change to a teaching style
which the Student found incompatible, led to the Student feeling
overwhelmed, and reacting to this. The instructor's counter-reaction
in a difficult situation may have been less than perfect, but your
Committee is not convinced that it exceeded permissible bounds.
The Committee on Standing and the Academic Appeals Board both appear
to have considered that the Student was entitled to relief from his
failing grade. Your Committee puts the matter in this fashion
because, while both bodies refused the deferred standing which the
Student was seeking, they advised him to petition for late withdrawal
without academic penalty. The Faculty, in its responding submission
to your Committee, recommended that this relief should again be
offered. Your Committee agrees that such relief is appropriate.
Parenthetically, your Committee urges that appeal bodies who conclude
that a student is entitled to a form of relief other than that for
which the student has specifically asked should offer that relief,
and offer the student an opportunity to elect to accept it in lieu of
the relief originally asked and denied. There is no point in asking
the student to restart the petition or appeal process again to obtain

3

that which the reviewing body has determined is appropriate. This is
a waste of time and resources, both of the student and of the
University. In this case, however, it is doubtful if a more direct
approach would have made a difference.
Your Committee agrees that the relief of deferred standing is not
appropriate in this case. In the first place, the instructor had left
the University by the time the Committee on Standing considered the
petition, and the course was not being repeated in its original form
by the Department. Even more importantly, as the Student put the
matter in his appeal documentation to your Committee, the Student
wants to complete the course in "in a civilized way". He wants a
"fair" instructor, "preferably not from the Slavic department", who
will supervise him in a course emphasising translation. This is not
the original course as offered or presented, but one tailor-made to
the Student's preferences. That is not what deferred standing is
about.
Unfortunately, the Student is convinced that a notation on the
transcript that the Student has withdrawn from a course stigmatises a
student as badly as does a notation of "fail". He has been so advised
by some person or persons outside the University, and continues in
this belief notwithstanding many attempts by University and College
staff, including members of your Committee, to persuade him that a
withdrawal is a respectable notation, eagerly sought by many students
who find themselves in difficulty. He is adamant, to put it mildly,
that he will not accept the relief of withdrawal without academic
penalty in lieu of deferred standing, and will feel unable to
continue his academic career.
Your Committee's members, with, collectively, many decades of
experience at the University, make one last effort here to persuade
the Student that the advice upon which he is relying as to the
stigmatising effect of a notation of "withdrawal without academic
penalty" against a course is completely wrong.
The Student shall have thirty days from the date of this Report to
notify Vice Dean Howson, or if she is not available, whoever is
acting in her place, that he desires to accept the relief of
withdrawal without academic penalty from the course SLA106Y, taken in
2002-03.. lf h\'e doe£; so, his appeal is allowed, the grade of "F" in
that course is vacated, and a notation of withdrawal is substituted.
If he does not, the appeal is dismissed.

#34218 v2

4

Anthony Gray
Secretary

Raplh Scane
Senior Chair

