Report #401

   DATE: February 27, 2019
   PARTIES: N.M. (the âStudentâ) v.Â  Faculty of Medicine
   Hearing Date(s): n/a
   written submissions only
   Committee Members:
   Professor Hamish Stewart, Senior Chair
   Professor J. Mahrt-Smith, Faculty Governor
   Mr. T Sutherland, Student Governor
   For the Student Appellant:
   Mr. N.M. (the Student)
   Mr. Hatim Kheir, Downtown Legal Services
   For the Faculty of Medicine:
   Ms. Sari Springer, Littler LLP
   The Student appeals from a decision of the Faculty of Medicineâs
   Academic Appeal Committee (FMAAC) to dismiss as abandoned his appeal
   from a decision of the Facultyâs Board of Examiners (BoE) to dismiss
   him from the MD program.
   The Student went on a leave of absence from the M.D. program due to
   difficulties related to substance abuse.Â  He was readmitted to the
   program on conditions contained in a monitoring agreement with the
   Physician Health Program. The Student later revoked his consent to one
   of the conditions causing the BoE to dismiss him from the M.D. program.
   The Student sought to appeal the BoEâs decision to the FMAAC, but the
   FMAAC dismissed his appeal as abandoned because he failed to meet more
   than one deadline for the submission of his Statement of Appeal.
   The Academic Appeals Committee (AAC) determined that the applicable
   standard of review is whether the FMAACâs decision is a reasonable
   application of the Facultyâs appeal policy, and not whether the FMAACâs
   decision was âcapricious or arbitraryâ as submitted by the Faculty.Â
   Applying the appropriate standard of review, the AAC found some merit
   in the Studentâs explanation that the missed deadlines were due in part
   to a FIPPA request resulting in the production of almost 900 pages.Â
   The AAC reasoned that the right to freedom of information would be of
   little value in the context of an academic appeal if the time lines for
   appeals could not be adjusted to give students time to consider the
   material obtained. The AAC found there could be no doubt that the
   Student intended to pursue the appeal, and further stated that it had
   difficulty seeing what prejudice an additional brief extension would
   have caused to the Faculty.Â  While the ACC determined it would have
   been better if the Student had formally requested an additional
   extension in advance of the deadline rather than allowing the deadline
   to pass, it was nevertheless unreasonable for the FMAAC to treat the
   Studentâs appeal as abandoned.Â  The AAC allowed the appeal and
   returned the matter to the FMAAC.
   [1]View Report

References

   1. file:///media/12696
