THE UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO

IN THE MATTER OF charges of academic dishonesty made on December 9, 2009;
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto· Code of Behaviour on Academic
,'vfatters, 1995;

AND IN THE MATTER OF the University ofToronto Act, 1971, S.O. 1971, c. 56 as amended
s.o. 1978, c. 88

BETWEEN:
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO

- and -

y

M

Date of Hearing: December 20, 2010
Members of the Panel:

Ms Lisa Brownstone, Ban·iste1· and Solicitor, Chair
Professor Grneme Hirst, Faculty Panel Member
Mr. Albeit So, Student Panel Member
Appearances:
l'vlr. Robett Centa, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Barristers

Mr. Maurice Vaturi, Counsel for the Student, Campione and Vaturi Law Firm
In Attendance:

Ms Jane Alderice, Director, Quality Assessment and Governance, School of Graduate Studies
Mr. Y
M
, the Student
Ms. Natalie Ramtahal, Coordinator, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances

-2-

Preliminary

[!]

The Trial Division of the University Tribunal was convened on December 20, 2010 to
consider charges under the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic
}vlatfers, 1995 (the "Code") laid against the Student by letter dated December 9, 2009,
2010 from Professor Edith Hillan, Vice-Provost, Faculty & Academic Life.

Hearing on the Facts

[2]

The charges facing the student were as follows:
(!)

On or about April 20, 2009, you knowingly did or omitted to do something for the
purpose of assisting M
A
to obtain unauthorized assistance in
connection with the final examination in BIO304H5, contrary to sections B.I.l(b)
and B.II.l(a)(ii) of the Code.

(2)

In the altemative to Charge #1, on or about April 20, 2009, you did or omitted to
do something for the purpose assisting M
A
to engage in a form of
cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or misrepresentation not
otherwise described in the Code in order to obtain academic credit or other
academic advantage of any kind in cmmection with the final examination in
BIO304H5, contrary to section B.l.3(b) and B.Il. l(a)(ii).

Attempts

[3]

(3)

On or about April 20, 2009, having an intent to commit an offence under the
Code, you did or omitted to do something for the purpose of carrying out your
intention to assist M
A
to obtain unauthorized assistance in
connection with the final examination in B1O304H5, contrary to sections B.I.1 (b),
B.II.l(a)(ii), and B.Il.2 of the Code.

(4)

On or about April 20, 2009, having an intent to commit an offence under the
Code, you did or omitted to do something for the purpose of carrying out your
intention to assist M
A
to engage in a form of cheating, academic
dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or misrepresentation not otherwise described in
the Code in order to obtain academic credit or other academic advantage of any
kind in connection with the final examination in BIO304H5, contrary to section
B.I.3(b) B.Il.l(a)(ii), and B.II. 2 of the Code.

Particulars of the charges were set out as follows:
(!)

You were enrolled at the University at all material times.

(2)

The final examination in B1O304H5 ("Examination") was scheduled to be written
on April 20, 2009, between 4:00 and 6:00 p.m.

-3-

[4]

(3)

One student, who was registered with the AccessAbility Resource Centre, was
scheduled to write the Examination on April 20, in the South Building, Room
1104, between 1:40 p.m. to 6:40 p.m.

(4)

You were hired to act as an invigilator for the Examination that was to be written
in the AccessAbility Resource Centre. Your duties included keeping the
Examination confidential and secure. You were given the script of the
Examination, which you were to give to the student writing Examination in the
AccessAbility Resource Centre.

(5)

On April 20, you used a digital camera to take photographs of the Examination
script. You sent these digital photographs by e-mail to M,
A
, a
student registered in BlO304H5, who was scheduled to write the Examination
starting at 4:00 p.m., sometime before 2:15 p.m.

(6)

You sent the photographs to Mr. A
via an email account with the address
jason.catamar@gmail.com, which is an e-mail account that you control or to
which you have access. You did so for the purpose of assisting, or attempting to
assist, Mr. A
to obtain unauthorized assistance in the final examination.

(7)

You sent these photographs knowing that you were engaging in a form of
cheating, academic dishonesty, misconduct or fraud.

(8)

You sent these photographs knowing that you were assisting. or attempting to
assist Mr. A
to engage in a fo1m of cheating, academic dishonesty,
misconduct or fraud.

The parties provided the Panel with an Agreed Statement of Facts, which provided in
relevant part as follows:
(i)

In November 2008, the Student graduated from the University with an Honour
Bachelor of Science (with High Distinction). ln Fall 2008, the Student enrolled in
the Master of Management Innovation program, in the School of Graduate
Studies, The program is housed at the University of Toronto Mississauga
("UTM"). At all material times, the Student was a student member of the
University of Toronto, within the meaning of the Code of Behaviour on Academic

,'vfatters.
(ii)

The Student was a casual employee of the AccessAbility Resource Centre
("AARC"). He invigilated examinations for students registered with the AARC.
He had invigilated examinations for such students on many occasions and was
very familiar with the policies and procedures in place for ensuring that
examinations written in the AARC were written in a secure environment, These

-4-

policies and procedures are contained in a copy of the AARC Invigilator
Handbook.
(iii)

On April 13, 2009, Wynne Yeung, the Examination Coordinator for the AARC,
sent an e-mail message to the student. She offered him the opportunity to
invigilate an examination on April 20, 2009, His shift would nm from I: IO p.m.
to 6:00 p.m. The examination itself would start at 1:40 p.m. Ms Yeung did not
advise the Student which examination would be written at that time. Shortly after
receiving Ms. Yeung's message, the Student accepted her offer to invigilate on
April 20.

(iv)

On April 20, 2009, at approximately l: l Op.m., the Student arrived at the AARC,
which is located in Room 2047 of the South Building at UTM. He picked up the
examination package for the examination he was to invigilate. The package
consisted of an unsealed envelope with a cover sheet attached to it. The envelope
contained the following documents:
(a)

one copy of the final exam in the course BIO 304H5S, Physiology of
Neural Systems, which was taught by Prof. J, Koprich.

(b)

an Invigilator Checklist.

(c)

a Student Information Sheet.

(d)

a copy of the Test/Examination Policy: Electronic Devices.

(e)

an Invigilator Documentation Report.

(f)

a Forfeit Adjusted Time Sheet and Exam and Test Reminders for Students.

(g)

a Test in Progress sign to be placed on the door of the examination room.

(v)

The cover sheet incorrectly listed the examination room as Room 1140. The
examination was written in Room I l 04. The cover sheet also advised the Student
that he would be invigilating an examination for BIO304S.

(vi)

As set out on the information sheet, the rest of the students in BIO304S would
write the final examination later that day, April 20, 2009, from 4:00 to 6:00. The
student writing the examination in the AARC (the "Student with Special Needs")
would start his examination 2 hours and 20 minutes before the remainder of the
class. The two examinations would end at the same time.

"5 -

(vii)

The Student then took the examination envelope to Room 1104. He entered the
room alone and closed the door. Between l :31 and 1:35 p.m. The Student took
digital photographs of each page of the examination using the camera in his
cellular telephone, which was a Sony Ericsson WS l 0i ("Digital Photographs").

(viii)

When a photograph is taken using a digital camera, a file containing the digital
image and other data ("meta-data") is created in Exchangeable Image File Format
("EXIF"). The EXIF meta-data includes the date and time the digital image was
captured, and the make and model of the camera used to capture the data. The
meta-data can be extracted from the EXIF file using various software programs,
including a program called Ape11ure.

(ix)

The meta-data from the Digital Photographs confirm that the Digital Photographs
were taken between I :31 and 1:35 p.m. on April 20, 2009 using a Sony Ericsson
WS 10i camera phone.

(x)

After he took the Digital Photographs, the Student let the Student with Special
Needs into the classroom.

(xi)

The Student turned on a laptop computer that he had brought with him to the
examination. As explicitly stated on the Invigilator Checklist, which the Student
completed, he knew that he was not permitted to use a laptop computer while he
was invigilating the examination. He transferred the Digital Photographs from his
cell phone to his laptop computer.

(xii)

Using his laptop's modem, he collllected to UTM's wireless network,
UTORconnect, at l :41 p.m. He remained cotlllected to UTORconnect until 2:40
p.m. At that time Ms. Yeung arrived at the classroom to provide the Student with
a break. She ordered him to turn off his laptop, which he did.

(xiii)

While he was connected to UTORconncct, the Student accessed a web-based email account that he created and controlled.

(xiv)

At 2:01 p.m. the St11dent then sent e-mail messages attaching the Digital
Photographs to another University student who was registered in BlO204S and
was scheduled to write the examination later that afternoon. At 2:01 p.m. the
Student sent the photos knowing that he was providing the other student with
unauthorized assistance with the final examination in BIO204S. The St11dent sent
this message of his own volition and not at the request of the other student. At
2: 15 p.m. the other student forwarded the e-mail message he received to the
course instructor Dr. James Koprich and the Teaching Assistant, Chad Jankowski.

"6"

(xv)

Dr. Koprich immediately concluded that the final examination for B1O204S had
been compromised, At 2:32 p,111. the AARC Examination Centre stopped the
Student with Special Needs' examination because the examination had been
compromised.

(xvi)

Dr. Koprich decided to write a replacement examination. The start time of the
examination for most of the students in the class was delayed from 4:00 p.111. to
5:25 p.m., but was written the same day.

(xvii) At 5:00 p.m. the Student with Special Needs wrote the exam for the second time
that day. The Student supervised the second examination,
(xviii) On April 24, 2009, the Student met with Mark Ove11on, UTM Dean of Student
Affairs, to discuss his invigilator's duties in connection with the BIO204S final
examination, The Student denied taking photographs of the examination and
sending them to anyone. The Student admitted that the email account from which
the photographs were sent was his.

[5]

(xix)

On May 7, 2009, Dean Overton terminated the Student's employment.

(xx)

On July 20, 2009, Professor Berry Smith, School of Graduate Studies Vice-Dean,
Students, wrote to the Student to invite him to discuss the allegation that he had
violated the Code of Behaviour on Academic Mallers. On October 21, 2009, the
Student and counsel attended at the meeting with Vice-Dean Smith. The Student
declined to say anything at that meeting.

The Student pleaded guilty to Charge (1).

Decision of the Tribunal

[6]

On the basis of the Agreed Statement of Facts, the Tribunal accepted the Student's plea
and fotmd contraventions of the Code as set out in the principal Charge (1), Charges (2),
(3), and (4) were withdrawn by the University.

Penalty Phase

[7]

The Student made a statement advising that he was ashamed of his actions and had no
valid excuse for them. He had breached the trust placed in him by the University and
deserved punishment. He was not motivated by greed or gain, had had no previous
charges and was a hard working student. The act was not premeditated and he wished for
the chance to rehabilitate himself.

-7-

[8]

The parties submitted a Joint Submission on Penalty, in which the following sanctions
were jointly proposed:
(i)

a suspension from the University from December 20, 20 I 0, until Decelllbcr 20,
2015;

(ii)

a notation of the sanction on the Student's academic record and transcript from
the date of the Order until December 20, 2015; and

(iii)

this case shall be reported to the Provost for publication of a notice of the decision
of the Tribunal and the sanction or sanction imposed in the University
newspapers, with the nallle of the student withheld.

[9]

Discipline counsel reminded the Panel that there is a high threshold for refusing to accept
a joint submission. The Panel would have to be of the view that it would be contrary to
the public interest and the administration of justice would be brought into disrepute by
the acceptance of that joint submission in order to depart from it.

[ I OJ

Having regard to the facts of the case, including that this was an egregious breach of
trnst, but that it was a first offence not motivated by personal academic gain, the Panel
accepts that the proposed sanction foils within the appropriate range of sanction, and
accepts the joint submission.

Sanction

[ I IJ

The Panel therefore made the following order:
(i)

that the Student be suspended from the University commencing Decelllber 20,
2010, until December 20, 2015 with a notation of the sanction on his academic
record and transcript from the date of the Order until Decelllber 20, 2015; and

(ii)

that this case shall be reported to the Provost for publication of a notice of the
decision of the Tribunal and the sanctions imposed, with the name of the Student
withheld.

]/-{/,,v-•

Dated this

L

day of February, 2011.

' ..

row11sto1 e, Co-Chair

