Case #577

   DATE: February 17, 2011
   PARTIES: University of Toronto v. Y.M.
   Hearing Date(s): December 20, 2010
   Panel Members:
   Lisa Brownstone, Chair
   Professor Graeme Hirst, Faculty Member
   Albert So, Student Member
   Appearances:
   Robert Centa, Assistant Discipline Counsel for the University
   Maurice Vaturi, Counsel for the Student
   In Attendance:
   Jane Alderice, Quality Assessment and Governance, School o f Graduate
   Studies
   Y.M., the Student
   Trial Division â s. B.I.1(b); s. B.I.3(b); s. B.II.1(a)(ii) of Code â
   unauthorized assistance with a final examination â Agreed Statement of
   Facts â guilty plea â guilty plea accepted â Joint Submission on
   Penalty â first academic offense âÂ  not motivated by personal academic
   gain â Joint Submission on Penalty acceptedÂ  -Â  five-year suspension;
   five-year notation on transcript; and report to Provost
   Student charged under s. B.I.1(b), s. B.I.3(b), and s. B.II.1(a)(ii)Â
   of the Code. The charges related to the allegations that the Student
   used a digital camera to take photographs of an examination and sent
   the digital photographs to another student in an attempt to provide
   them with unauthorized assistance in connection with said examination.
   The Student was hired to act as an invigilator for another student who
   was registered with the AccessAbility Resource Centre to write the
   examination at an earlier time and, as such, had access to the
   examination. The matter proceeded on an Agreed Statement of Facts. The
   Student plead guilty to the charge under s. B.I.1(b). The remaining
   charges were withdrawn by the University. The matter then proceeded on
   a Joint Submission on Penalty. The Student made a statement advising he
   was ashamed of his actions and had no valid excuse for them, that he
   was not motivated by greed or gain, had had no previous charges, and
   was a hard working student. The Student further advised the act was not
   premeditated and that he wished for the chance to rehabilitate himself.
   Discipline Counsel reminded the Panel that there is a high threshold
   for refusing to accept a Joint Submission on Penalty. The Panel
   accepted the Joint Submission on Penalty and held that it fell within
   the appropriate range of sanctions. The Panel imposed a five-year
   suspension, a five-year notation on the Studentâs academic record, and
   that a report to the Provost be issued.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12758
