THE UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO

IN THE MATTER OF charges of academic dishonesty made on February 15, 2012.
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic
Matters, 1995.
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University o,f Toronto Act. 197 1, S.O. 1971 c. 56 as
amended S.O. 1978, c. 88.

BETWEEN:
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
- and-

Date of Hearing: October 22, 2012
Panel:
Mr. Bernard Fishbein, Barrister and Solicitor, Chair
Professor Andrea Litvack, Factor-Inwentash Faculty of Social Work, Faculty Panel
Member
Mr. Adam Found, Student Panel Member

Appearances:
Ms. Lily Harmer, Counsel for the University of Toronto, Paliare Roland Ban-isters
Dr. Tom Fairgrieve, Department of Computer Science
In Attendance:
Professor John Ca1ter, Dean' s Designate for Academic Integrity, Faculty of Applied
Science and Engineering
Ms. Betty-Ann Campbell, Law Clerk, Paliare Roland Barristers
Mr. Christopher Lang, Director, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances

Not in Attendance:
Mr. ~ ~' the Student

- 2 -

REASONS FOR DECISION

I.

The hearing of the Trial Division of the University Tribunal ("the Tribunal")

was convened on October 22, 2012 to consider charges under the Code of Behaviour on
Academic Matters, 1995 ("the Code") against the student.

The notice of hearing

indicated that the hearing would commence at 1:45 p.m..

By 2:05 p.m. neither the

student nor anyone on his behalf had appeared and the hearing commenced.

Whether the Hearing Should Proceed

2.

Discipline Counsel for the University presented the panel of the Tribunal with

the affidavit of Betty Ann Campbell, a law clerk in the office of counsel. As well, Ms.
Campbell was present at the hearing in the event that there were any questions or viva
voce evidence that was necessary arising from her affidavit. There were none.

3.

Counsel reviewed the University's Policy on Official Correspondence with

Students ("the Policy") which requires students to maintain current contact information
(current and valid postal addresses as well as addresses for University-issued electronic
mail accounts) in their ROSI records and to update their records when this information
changes. The policy further provides that:

"Students are expected to monitor and retrieve their mail,
including electronic messaging account(s) issued to them by the
University, on a frequent and consistent basis. Students have
the responsibility to recognize that certain communications may

-3 -

be time critical.

Students have the right to forward their

University-issued mail account to another electronic mail
service provider address but remain responsible for ensuring
that all University or electronic message communication sent to
the officially University-issued account is received and read."

4.

The student had been provided with a disclosure package (a summary of the

anticipated evidence of the University's witnesses, the University's disclosure brief and
the policy) which had been delivered by courier to 65 ~ Suite . , Toronto
("the Lilian Street address") which was listed in the student's ROSI contact infonnation.
The Disclosure package was accepted by an individual who identified herself as
"~

"- Another University of Toronto student named ~ •
Address in her ROSI contact information. Ms . •

also listed the

was the individual who

the student intended to accompany him to the academic offence meeting held on January
13, 2012 but had been advised that she would not be pennitted to attend as she may have
been involved in the offences. Ms. • had also posted messages from the student on
her Facebook page.

5.

In any event, the student had been sent an e-mail to the e-mail address listed in

his ROSI contact information suggesting possible hearing dates. The student failed to
respond.

As a result, an e-mail was sent to the Office of the Governing Council

requesting a hearing be scheduled for October 22, 2012 at 1:45 p.m.. A copy of that email was sent to the student.

That e-mail was acknowledged by the Office of the

- 4 -

Governing Council also with a copy to the student. On September 7, 2012, the Office of
the Governing Council sent the student a Notice of Hearing both by e-mail and by courier
to the IIIIIIIIIStreet address. The e-mail was successfully delivered to the e-mail address
- no transmission fai lure notifications were received and the courier package was
delivered to the

I..111111111 Address - it was not returned as undeliverable. A slightly

revised Notice of Hearing was again, sent by e-mail and courier on October 15, 20 12.
Again, the e-mail was successfull y delivered, in that no transmission fai lure notifications
were received .

However, that courier delivery was returned as undeliverable.

In

addition, counsel telephoned the student's telephone number listed in his ROSI contact
info1mation and left a voicemail requesting the student to return her call. The student did
not do so.

6.

In the circumstances, the University submitted that the hearing should still

proceed. The Statutory Powers Procedure Act , R.S.O. 1990. c. S. 22 (the "SPPA")
applies to proceedings before the Tribunal. Section 6 of the SPPA requires parties to a
proceeding to be given reasonable notice of the hearing, including not only a statement of
the time, place and purpose of the hearing but a statement that if the party notified does
not attend the hearing, the Tribunal may proceed in the party's absence and the party will
not be entitled to any further notice of the proceeding. Such a statement was contained in
the University's Notice of Hearing sent to the Student. Also, the SPPA allows in section
7 that when the notice of a proceeding has been in accordance with the SPP A and the
party does not attend the hearing, the tribunal may proceed in the absence of the patty
and the party is not entitled to any further notice of the proceeding. Moreover, the Rules

-5 -

of Practice and Procedure of the Tribunal ("the Rules") allow charges, notices of hearing,
disclosure to be served on a student both by courier to the student's mailing address
contained in ROSI or by e-mailing a copy to the student's e-mail address contained in
ROSI (see section 9 (b) and (c) of the Rules). Section 17 of the Rules also provide where
a notice of a hearing has been given in accordance with the Rules and the person fails to
attend at the hearing, the panel may proceed in the absence of that person.

7.

Accordingly, it was the unanimous ruling of the panel that compliance with

both the SPP A and the Rules had been established by the University and the hearing
should proceed in the absence of the student.

The Alleged Misconduct

8.

Essentially, the charges related to the unusual set of circumstances where it

was alleged that the student himself was the provider and seller of solutions to
assignments to other students who submitted them as their own work for credit. It was
alleged that this has been done for a number of assignments, in CSC 310, CSC 263 and

csc 108.

9.

The panel heard the evidence of Dr. Tom Fairgrieve who had been teaching at

the University since January of 2000 and was the Academic Offence Coordinator for the
Computer Science Department.

- 6 -

10.

Dr. Fairgrieve testified that the investigation that led to these charges first

started when he received an e-mail from Professor Robert Clarke of Binningham City
University in the United Kingdom who was conducting research into "Contract cheating"
(where students pay others to do assignments for them).

Professor Clarke advised

Dr. Fairgrieve that an assignment for CSC 263 was posted on Freelancer.com which is a
website that solicits bids to complete work that was posted. Dr. Fairgrieve checked the
website and found that not only that assignment but assignments for CSC 310 and 108
were posted as well.

11.

The postings disclosed who had posted them (who the bid for the work had to

be made to) and by cross-checking against ROSI records, it matched the student. Dr.
Fairgrieve then had an e-mail under an alias sent to the student inquiring about obtaining
work for one of the assignments and the student responded stipulating the price and a
subsequent e-mail stipulating a deadline, but the transaction could not be completed by
that deadline.

12.

Dr. Fairgrieve continued to monitor the Freelancer.com website. Ultimately,

he found a number of University CSC assignments posted:

CSC 310 - Theory Assignment No. 2
CSC 310 - Practical Assignment No. 1
CSC 310 - Theory Assignment No. 3
CSC 310 - Practical Assignments No. 2
CSC 263 - Homework Assignment No. 3
CSC 263 - Homework Assignment No. 4

-7-

CSC I 08 - Assignment No. 3

13.

The Freelancer.com website had not only directed Dr. Fairgrieve to the

student's name but also to a company, Complete Tutoring. Dr. Fairgrieve also went to

L-

the company's website which showed it provided an assignment service. Its "Contact
Us" page disclosed a location on

(only the location not the address was

shown) and an e-mail address that resembled, but was not identical, to the student's.

14.

In his monitoring of the Freelancer.com website, Dr. Fairgrieve noticed two

more University CSC assignments posted. Dr. Fairgrieve then created an alias g-mail
account of his own and completed a transaction with Complete Tutoring to obtain
responses to those assignments.

When he received these responses from Complete

Tutoring, Dr. Fairgrieve forwarded them to Professor Neal, the Instructor of CSC 310,
and advised Professor Neal that he had purchased this solution over the internet and
asked him to monitor whether any student handed in that solution (or a very similar one).

15.

A student, ~ -

met with -

( " - ' ) did. As a result, Professor Neal

and ultimately, so did Dr. Fairgrieve.

-

ultimately

provided Dr. Fairgrieve the copies of the e-mails between her and the student acquiring
the solution to the CSC 310 assignment. Further investigating also disclosed that the
Facebook page of the student also confitmed that she operated Complete Tutoring.

16.

The University also submitted a sworn affidavit of -

confirming she

had purchased the solutions to assignment in CSC 310 from Complete Tutoring and had

-8handed in that solution as her own work. ~ confirmed the e-mails between her
and the student forwarding the solution to the assignment in stages and her payment (at
each stage) for it. ~ admitted all this in a meeting with the Dean's Designate
and, for her part, received zero credit in the course and a one year suspension. The
University urged the panel to admit that affidavit pursuant to section 61 of the Tribunal's
Rules of Procedure as ~ was not in the country and not available for the
hearing.

17.

The panel then heard from Professor John Carter, the Dean's Designate for

Academic Integrity for the Faculty of Applied Science and Engineering. Professor Carter
testified to his meeting with the student (and Dr. Fairgrieve) on January 13, 2012. As
required under the Code, the student was advised that it was a fo1mal meeting where
notes would be taken, that he was entitled to be represented by counsel and what he said
could be used against him and form the basis of charges of academic misconduct under
the Code. Essentially, the student admitted to the offence of assisting in plagiarism and
being a pa1ty to the offence of plagiarism - i.e. admitted to providing solutions to other
students to hand in as their own work in the completion of the assignments for money.
Professor Carter advised the student that he would not impose sanction as he was entitled
to do under the Code. Rather because the matter was, in Professor Carter's view, such an
egregious offence that warranted greater sanction than he could impose under the Code,
he would therefore, refer the matter to the Provost and to the University Tribunal. That
was confirmed in a letter to the student dated January 16, 2012. Professor Carter also
testified notwithstanding the letter indicated that the student claimed "not to know that

-9your clients were students", the letter was inaccurate in that regard - by the end of the
interview, the student was no longer maintaining that position.

18.

The University reviewed the evidence before us and argued that it established

that the offences of the use of unauthorized aid or assistance in connection with academic
work, or the representation of work of another as one's own work ("plagiarism") contrary
to sections B. l. (1) (b) or (d) of the Code had been made out. Equally, the University
argued that it had established that the student was a party to those offences in that the
student had done things for the purpose of aiding or assisting another student to commit
the offences contrary to section B (ii) (1) a (ii) of the Code.

19.

In these circumstances, the panel had no difficulty in unanimously concluding

that the University had established that the student was a pai1y to the offence of academic
plagiarism contrary to sections B. 1. (1) (b) (d) of the Code and section B (ii) (1) a (ii) of
the Code. There could be no doubt that the student had sold at least to likely other students) material -

(and

had presented as her own academic work. In

the view of our conclusion in this regard, the University withdrew the other charges
against the student.

20.

We note that this would have been our conclusion regardless of admitting the

affidavit of -

· The evidence of Dr. Fairgrieve and Professor Clarke and the

admissions of the student (against his interest) would have been sufficient for us to reach
this conclusion. However, we were prepared to admit the affidavit of accordance with section 61 of the Tribunal's Rules of Procedure. -

in
was out of

-10-

the country and unavailable and, in our view, having chosen not to attend at the hearing
or to participate in the process, the student could not be considered to be objecting to the
admissibility of that evidence.

21.

The panel then heard the University's submissions with respect to penalty.

The University urged that the panel impose the greatest sanction available to it under the
Code, namely, the recommendation of expulsion of the student.

As well, since the

Tribunal can only recommend expulsion which recommendation might not be accepted,
the University urged that we also impose a five-year suspension.

22.

Again, the panel had no difficulty in unanimously accepting the submissions of

the University and recommending expulsion of the student.

Plagiarism has been

described as the most serious and egregious of academic offences at the University.
However, it is rare for the University and the Code to be able to reach the actual provider
of the plagiarism as opposed to an individual student submitting it. Here the student was
running a commercial company and providing academic content to students to
masquerade as their own work in exchange for money. In the best of circumstances (if
that phrase is appropriate to these kinds of circumstances), plagiarism is difficult to detect
and probably would have not been detected by the University in these circumstances if
not for the "tip" from Professor Clarke directing Dr. Fairgrieve to Freelancer.com. There
was no evidence of any mitigating circumstances in favour of the student. Although, he
did admit the offence to Professor Clarke at their meeting, the student did not attend or
cooperate with the University in these proceedings in any way requiring the University to

-11-

prosecute them as if no such admission had been made. In fact, if this is not a case that
waITants expulsion, this panel has difficulty conceiving of any case that would.
Accordingly, the panel has no difficulty in unanimously recommending the expulsion of
the student. In any event, and in the interim, the panel imposes a five-year suspension on

the student.

DATED at Toronto, December

fo , 2012.

Bernard l•ishbein,
Co-Chair

