Case #686

   DATE: December 6, 2012
   PARTIES: University of Toronto v. Y.L.
   Hearing Date(s): October 22, 2012
   Panel Members:
   Mr. Bernard Fishbein, Chair
   Prof. Andrea Litvack, Faculty Member
   Mr. Adam Found, Student Member
   Appearances:
   Ms. Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel for the University
   Dr. Tom Fairgrieve, Department of Computer Science
   In Attendance:
   Prof. John Carter, Deans' Designate
   Ms. Betty-Ann Campbell, Law Clerk
   Mr. Christopher Lang, Director, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty
   Grievances

   Trial Division â s. B.i.1(d) of Code â plagiarism â provided and sold
   assignments to students â hearing not attended â reasonable notice
   given â Student had been selling assignments through a commercial
   company called Complete Tutoring â Ms. S.âs affidavit that she had
   purchased her assignment from Student â affidavit admitted in her
   absence â Student admitted to charges at the meeting with the Deanâs
   Designate â finding of guilt â plagiarism is the most serious and
   egregious of academic offences and it is rare for the University to be
   able to get to the provider â recommendation that the Student be
   expelled; five-year suspension

   Student charged under s. B.i.1(d) and s. B.i.1(b) of the Code. The
   charges related to allegations that the Student provided and sold
   assignments to students through a commercial company. The Student did
   not attend the hearing. The Panel found that the Student had been given
   reasonable notice of the hearing in accordance with s. 22 of the SPPA
   and that the hearing should proceed. At the hearing, Dr. Fairgrieve
   testified how he discovered that the Student had been selling
   assignments through a commercial company called Complete Tutoring. He
   testified that during the course of his investigation, a student, Ms.
   S., submitted an assignment purchased from the Student. This was
   confirmed by a sworn affidavit of Ms. S. that she had purchased her
   assignment from Complete Tutoring and had handed it in as her own work.
   In the absence of Ms. S at the hearing, the Panel admitted the
   affidavit, in accordance with s. 61 of the Tribunalâs Rules of
   Procedure. The Panel stated that Ms. S. was out of the country and
   unavailable and could not be seen as objecting to the admission of her
   affidavit. Moreover, Prof. John Carter, the Deanâs Designate, testified
   that the Student admitted to providing solutions to other students to
   hand in as their own work for money. The Panel found the Student guilty
   under s. B.i.1(b) and (d) and noted that it would have reached the same
   conclusion even without the affidavit of Ms. S. In determining the
   penalty, the Panel emphasized that plagiarism has been described as the
   most serious and egregious of academic offences and that it is
   difficult to detect as well as to get to the actual provider of
   plagiarism. There were no mitigating circumstances, and the Student did
   not cooperate with the University. The Panel imposed a recommendation
   that the Student be expelled; and a five-year suspension.

   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12848
