Case 992

   DATE: December 16, 2019
   PARTIES: University of Toronto v. M.A.

   HEARING DATE: September 19, 2019

   Panel Members:
   Ms. Michelle Henry, Chair
   Professor Richard B. Day, Faculty Panel Member
   Mr. David Allens, Student Panel Member

   Appearances:
   Ms. Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg
   Rothstein LLP
   Ms. Kristy Wong, Representative for the Student, Downtown Legal
   Services
   The Student

   In Attendance:
   Ms. Jennifer Dent, AssociateÂ Director, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty
   Grievances

   The Student was charged withÂ four counts ofÂ academicÂ misconduct
   underÂ s. B.i.1(d) ofÂ theÂ Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters,
   1995Â (the âCodeâ) on the basis that he knowingly committed plagiarism
   inÂ submitting four assignmentsÂ for academic credit
   containingÂ anÂ ideaÂ orÂ expression ofÂ anÂ idea and/or the workÂ of
   anotherÂ without attribution.Â The Student was also charged withÂ two
   counts ofÂ knowingly usingÂ or possessingÂ an unauthorizedÂ aid or
   obtainingÂ unauthorized assistanceÂ in connection with two assignments,
   contrary to s. B.i.1(b) of the Code. In the alternative,Â the Student
   was chargedÂ under s. B.i.1(d) of the CodeÂ in connection
   withÂ anÂ assignment submitted forÂ partial completion of the
   requirements of a course.Â The Student was alsoÂ charged in the
   alternativeÂ under s. B.i.3(b) of the Code on the basis that
   heÂ knowingly engaged in a form ofÂ cheating, academic dishonesty or
   misconduct, fraud or misrepresentation not otherwiseÂ described in the
   CodeÂ in order toÂ obtain academic credit or other academic
   advantageÂ in connection with a mid-term and threeÂ assignments.

   The parties submitted an Agreed Statement of Facts (âASFâ), a Joint
   Submission on Penalty (âJSPâ) and a Joint Book of Documents (âJBDâ).
   Following deliberations and based on the ASF and JBD, the Panel was
   satisfied that the charges had been proven with clear and convincing
   evidence on a balance ofÂ probabilities andÂ accepted the guilty pleas
   of the Student in respect of theÂ charges. In addition to the
   penaltiesÂ recommended in the JSP, the Student also provided an
   undertaking to complete six academic writing workshops at the
   UniversityÂ within the first eight months following the date he next
   registers for a course. The StudentÂ acceptedÂ that he will not be
   eligible to graduate from the University until he fulfils the
   undertaking and the University may rely on this undertaking to deny him
   the ability to graduate until it is fulfilled.

   The Panel noted the following mitigating factors:Â theÂ Student
   admitted guilt to the offences,Â whichÂ admissionÂ wasÂ a demonstration
   of his insight; andÂ the Student cooperated in the process and accepted
   responsibility, which demonstrated ownershipÂ and responsibility
   forÂ hisÂ actions. The Panel also took into consideration the serious
   and deliberate nature of the offences and the detriment to the
   University. There was no evidence of prior offences or misconduct;
   however, despite having been caught, the Student still engaged in
   further offences.Â The Panel noted the high threshold required for it
   to deviate from the JSP and that onlyÂ truly unreasonable
   orÂ unconscionableÂ joint submissions should be rejected. In the
   Panelâs view,Â theÂ JSP submitted by the partiesÂ wasÂ reasonable.

   The Tribunal imposed the followingÂ sanctions:Â a grade of zeroÂ in the
   four courses; aÂ four-year suspension (less 19 days);Â aÂ five-year
   notation onÂ theÂ transcript; andÂ aÂ report to the Provost for
   publication.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/28847
