Case #982

   DATE: May 8, 2019
   PARTIES: University of Toronto v. P.H.Q.
   Hearing Date: March 21, 2019
   Panel Members:
   Mr. F. Paul Morrison, Chair
   Prof. Lynne Howarth, Faculty Member
   Mr. David Allens, Student Member
   Appearances:
   Mr. Robert Centa, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland
   Rosenberg Rothstein LLP
   Ms. Jodi Zhang, Representative for the Student, Downtown Legal Services
   In Attendance:
   Ms. Krista Osbourne, Administrative Clerk & Hearing Secretary, Appeals,
   Discipline and Faculty Grievances
   Trial Division â s. B.i.1(d) of Code â plagiarism â Student submitted a
   film review containing the work of others represented as her own â
   Agreed Statement of Facts â guilty plea â Joint Submission on Penalty
   accepted - prior academic offence â cooperation, remorse and other
   mitigating circumstances - final grade of zero in the course; five-year
   suspension; six-year notation on academic record; publication of notice
   of decision and sanction, with Studentâs name withheld.
   The Student was charged with one offence under s. B.i.1(d) of the Code
   of Behaviour on Academic Matters , 1995 (the â Code â) for knowingly
   representing the work of another as his own in a film review submitted
   for partial course credit. The Student was charged in the alternative
   with one academic offences under s. B.i.3(b) of the Code (cheating for
   academic advantage). The Student attended the hearing with a legal
   representative.
   The parties submitted an Agreed Statement of Facts (âASFâ) to the
   Panel, in which the Student admitted that she had purchased the film
   review for $200 from an online source and that she knowingly submitted
   it in essentially the same form as she had received it, contributing no
   meaningful academic work. The Student entered a plea of guilty to both
   charges. The University undertook to withdraw the alternative charge if
   the Student was found guilty of the first charge. The Panel accepted
   the Studentâs plea of guilty to the first charge and, in accordance
   with its undertaking, the University withdrew the alternative charge.
   The parties also submitted a Joint Statement on Penalty (âJSPâ) setting
   out the particulars of one prior academic offence of plagiarism. In
   considering whether to accept the JSP, the Panel noted that a JSP may
   be rejected only in circumstances where it is fundamentally offensive
   to the entrenched set of values and behaviours that members of the
   University community are expected to uphold. The Panel was particularly
   impressed with the extent of the Studentâs cooperation, her remorse,
   and her difficult personal circumstances.Â  The Panel found that these
   factors were of assistance in considering the JSP, particularly as the
   JSP recommended a penalty less severe than that of expulsion, which
   might otherwise have applied to an offence of this nature.Â  The Panel
   accepted the JSP and imposed the following sanctions: a final grade of
   zeroÂ  in the course; a five-year suspension from the University; a
   notation of this sanction on the Studentâs academic record and
   transcript for six years; and publication by the Provost of a notice of
   the decision and sanction imposed, with the name of the Student
   withheld.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/28400
