Case No.: 892
UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
IN THE MATTER OF charges of academic dishonesty filed October 12, 2016
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic
Matters, 1995
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Act, 1971, S.O. 1971, c. 56 as amended
s.o. 1978, c. 88
BETWEEN:
UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO (the "University")
-AND-

IIII ZIIIIII (the "Student")
REASONS FOR DECISION
Hearing Date: January 25, 2017
Panel Members:
Mr. Christopher Wirth, Barrister and Solicitor, Chair
Professor Pascal van Lieshout, University of Toronto, Department of Speech-Language
Pathology, Faculty Panel Member
Mr. Andrey Lapin, Student Panel Member
Appearances:
Ms. Tina Lie, Assistant Discipline Counsel for the University, Paliare Roland Rosenberg
Rothstein LLP
In Attendance:
Professor Eleanor Irwin, Dean's Designate, University of Toronto, Scarborough
Ms. Krista Osbourne, University of Toronto, Administrative Assistant, Office of Appeals,
Discipline and Faculty Grievances
Not in Attendance:
Ms.
the Student

LIi ~'

Charges and Appearances

1.

The Trial Division of the Tribunal heard this matter on January 25, 2017. The Student
was charged with the following academic offences filed with the Provost on October 12,
2016:
1.

On or about March 28, 2016, you knowingly represented the ideas of another, or
the expressions of the ideas of another as your own work in an essay titled "Alice
vs. The Queen of Heart" ("Essay") that you submitted in partial completion of the
course requirements in ENGB35 (2016) ("Course"), contrary to section B.I.1 (d)
of the Code.

2.

In the alternative, on or about March 28, 2016, by submitting the Essay, you
knowingly engaged in a form of cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct,
fraud or misrepresentation not otherwise described in the Code to obtain academic
credit or other academic advantage of any kind, contrary to section B.I.3(b) of the
Code.

The particulars for these charges are as follows:
(a)

At all material times you were a student registered at the University of Toronto
Scarborough.

(b)

On or about March 28, 2016, you submitted the Essay in partial completion of the
Course requirements.

(c)

You submitted the Essay:
(i)

to obtain academic credit;

(ii)

knowing that it contained verbatim or nearly verbatim text from another
source, which you did not place in quotation marks or properly attribute to
the original source of the text;

(iii)

knowing that it contained ideas that were not your own and which you did
not properly attribute to the source of the ideas;

2

(iv)

knowing that it contained ideas and the expression of ideas from two
articles located on the Wikipedia website;

(v)

with the intention that, when evaluating the Essay, the University of
Toronto would rely on the Essay as containing your own ideas that were
expressed in your own words.

2.

The Student did not attend the hearing. After waiting 15 minutes for her, the hearing
proceeded in her absence. Based upon the affidavit of service of Emily Home, sworn
January 4, 2017 (Exhibit 1, Tab 4) and the affidavit of Robert A. Centa, affirmed January
11, 2017 (Exhibit 2), the Panel was satisfied that the Student had been served with the
Charges and the Notice of Hearing in accordance with the University Tribunal's Rules of
Practice and Procedures.

THE EVIDENCE
Enrollment at the University of Toronto, Scarborough

3.

The Student was, at all material times, a registered student at the University of Toronto
Scarborough and was enrolled in ENGB35 in the Winter 2016 term as per the Student's
academic record dated January 5, 2017, a copy of which was found in Exhibit 1 at Tab 3.

ENGB35 (2016)

4.

The Affidavit of Natalie Rose sworn December 1, 2016 (Exhibit "1", Tab 5) provided the
following evidence:
"A.

Background

1.

I was a Sessional Lecturer and Undergraduate Instructor at the University of
Toronto Scarborough ("UTSC'J, in the Department of English from September
2006 -April 2016. During that time, I taught ENGB35, "Children's Literature"
eight times.

3

2.

I hold degrees in English Literature from both Trinity College Dublin (Bachelor
of Arts) and the University of Toronto (Ph.DJ.

My main research interest is

Victorian children's literature.
B.

The Course

3.

In the Winter 2016 academic term, !was the Instructor for ENGB35, "Children's
Literature. "

4.

The syllabus for ENGB35 included a section entitled ''Avoiding Plagiarism"
which warned students that if they presented someone else's ideas as their own,
they would be committing plagiarism, which is a serious academic offence.
Specifically, the section stated that "whether you incorporate the material
verbatim, you paraphrase it, or you rephrase it, you must give due credit to the
original author." I have attached a copy of the Winter 2016 syllabus for ENGB35
to this affidavit as Exhibit A.

5.

During class, I also verbally informed students about the University of Toronto
Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters, including the provisions on plagiarism.

6.

Students in ENGB35 were required to submit an essay worth 25% of their final
grades. The essay required students to write 5-7 pages (double-spaced) about
one of four assigned topics. Students were neither required nor advised to use
secondary sources.

7.

The essay topics were given to the students in the form of a handout entitled
"ENGB35 Essay Instructions and Topics".

This handout also had a section

entitled ''Avoiding Plagiarism", which instructed students to read the Code of
Behaviour on Academic Matters prior to consulting any secondary sources, if
they chose to use any secondary sources.

The handout also specifically told

students that "verbatim borrowings must be identified using quotation marks. " I
have attached a copy of the ENGB35 Essay Instructions and topics to this

affidavit as Exhibit B.

4

8.

Prior to the essay's due date, I provided the students in ENGB35 with a handout
entitled "Essay Guidelines. "

The handout provided, among other things,

information on formatting and citations, including a section entitled ''Avoiding
Plagiarism."

This was the third written warning against plagiarism that I

provided to my students.

I have attached a copy of the "Essay Guidelines"

handout to this affidavit as Exhibit C.
9.

The handout advised students that "if you paraphrase a secondary source, you
must still acknowledge the original author. This includes non-scholarly sources
such as SparkNotes.com, Wikipedia, etc." (emphasis in original)

10.

I also required students attach a signed statement to their essay submissions,
affirming that they had correctly cited any secondary sources, if they chose to use
secondary sources.

11.

I required this signed statement in all ofmy classes to ensure students who didn't
read my materials containing warnings about plagiarism or attend class to hear
me speak about plagiarism were still required to turn their minds to their
responsibilities regarding academic integrity, particularly plagiarism.

C.

The Essay

12.

On March 28, 2016, Ms. ~ submitted her essay, which was entitled ''Alice VS
the Queen of Heart (sic). "

13.

Ms. ~ included her required signed statement with her submission, in which
she affirmed that the ideas and language in the essay were her own or were
properly cited. I have attached a copy of Ms. ~ ' s signed statement in this
affidavit as Exhibit D.

14.

In her essay, Ms.

,a misattributed several passages. Footnotes were given, but

the references did not match the quotations. I have attached a copy of Ms. ~ ' s
essay with my annotations to this affidavit as Exhibit E.

5

15.

In her essay, Ms . . . . included numerous verbatim or nearly verbatim passages
from Wikipedia articles relating to Alice in Wonderland without any attribution. I
have attached printouts of the Wikipedia articles from which Ms . . . . repeated
verbatim material without citations to this affidavit as Exhibit F.

16.

When I became aware of the apparent plagiarism, I spoke with Ms. . . . and
requested that she email me so that we could meet to discuss her essay. She did
not email me. I also emailed her in an attempt to arrange a meeting and received
no reply.

17.

On May 10, 2016, I referred the offence to Professor Bolus-Reichart, the Chair of
the English Department. I have attached a copy of the letter I wrote to Professor
Bolus-Reichart to this affidavit as Exhibit G. 11

5.

In addition, Professor Eleanor Irwin ("Prof. Irwin") also testified in order to address the
issue as to whether any of the passages which the Student had provided in her essay
which appeared to have been taken verbatim or substantially verbatim from passages in
Wikipedia articles relating to Alice in Wonderland, could also be found in the
sourceworks identified in the footnotes in the Wikipedia articles and the footnotes
provided by the Student in her essay.

6.

Introduced into evidence, through Prof. Irwin, was a complete set of the Wikipedia pages
for "Alice's Adventures in Wonderland" as of January 25, 2017 (Exhibit "3"); a printout
from www.storymuseum.org.uk as of January 25, 2017 (Exhibit "4"); and a printout
entitled "Bedtime Story Classics - Alice in Wonderland Background (The Background
History of Alice in Wonderland)" as of January 25, 2017.

7.

Based upon exhibits 3, 4 and 5 and her internet search, Prof. Irwin testified that with
respect to footnotes #1, #2 and #4 in the Student's essay, those portions of her essay
which had been taken verbatim or substantially verbatim from passages in the Wikipedia
articles relating to Alice in Wonderland without any attribution were not found in the
source materials identified in the footnotes in the Wikipedia articles or the Student's
essay at that time.

6

8.

Further, Prof. Irwin testified that given that with respect to footnote #1, it referred to
being retrieved in April, 2010, and with respect to footnote #2, it referred to being
retrieved in January, 2007, it would appear highly unlikely that the Student would have 6
years and 9 years earlier respectively, gone to those websites, downloaded material from
them and saved them for use in an essay assignment which she would only be given 6
and 9 years later, respectively.

9.

With respect to footnote #3 in the Student's essay, Prof. Irwin was unable to determine
whether the source materials in the Wikipedia footnote might have also contained the
same passages as in the Wikipedia articles.

UNIVERSITY'S SUBMISSIONS

10.

In closing argument, counsel for the University submitted that the evidence clearly
established that the 4 passages in question were taken verbatim or nearly verbatim from
Wikipedia articles relating to Alice in Wonderland without any attribution and that 2 of
the 4 passages had not been identified in the essay in quotations and therefore were not
properly cited either.

11.

With respect to the first passage and the first footnote in the Student's essay, it was
argued that it clearly was taken from the Wikipedia articles and given that the source
material referred to in the Wikipedia footnotes did not presently contain this material, and
given that the Wikipedia footnote and the Student's footnote identified the material as
having been retrieved in April, 2010, 6 years prior to the Student being assigned the
essay, it was highly probable that the material even if existed at the time, was never
accessed by the Student.

12.

With respect to the second Wikipedia passage and the Student's second footnote, it was
argued that it also appeared to have been clearly taken verbatim or nearly verbatim from
the Wikipedia articles, and as of January 25, 2017, was not in the source materials
identified in the Wikipedia footnotes. Given this and given that the footnote from both
Wikipedia and the Student identify the materials as having been retrieved in January,
2007, some 9 years prior to the student being assigned the essay, it was highly probable
that the Student took the passages verbatim or nearly verbatim from the Wikipedia

7

articles relating to Alice in Wonderland without any attribution and did not retrieve them
from the source materials some 9 years earlier. It was also highly probable that they did
not contain those references in any event.
13.

With respect to the fourth passage, it was argued that it clearly was taken verbatim or
substantially verbatim from the Wikipedia articles relating to Alice in Wonderland
without any attribution and, as well, Prof. Irwin was able to confirm that it did not come
from the source material in the Wikipedia footnote as the passage in question did not
exist in it either.

14.

In the University's submission, given that all 4 of the passages from the Student's essay
had clearly come from the Wikipedia articles, and given the fact that 3 out of the 4
passages and footnotes did not come from the source documents referred to in the
Wikipedia footnotes, it was a reasonable inference on the balance of probabilities to
conclude that passage #3 and footnote #3 with respect to it, was also clearly taken from
the Wikipedia articles and was not taken by the Student from any source material referred
to in the Wikipedia footnote.

15.

Accordingly, in the University's submission, on the balance of probabilities, the totality
of the evidence demonstrated that all 4 passages in the essay had been plagiarized from
the Wikipedia articles relating to Alice in Wonderland without any attribution and, as
well, in two cases without being placed in quotations.

16.

Accordingly, the University asked the Panel to find the Student guilty on Charge 1 and
advised that if the Panel did so, it would withdraw Charge 2.

Standard of Proof

17.

The onus is on the University to establish based upon clear and convincing evidence on a
balance of probabilities that the academic offence charge has been committed.

Decision of the Tribunal

18.

Based on the evidence and the Panel's review of the plagiarized source material, the
Student was found guilty of plagiarism contrary to section B.I.1 (d) of the Code, namely
Charge 1 as set out above.
8

19.

The University then withdrew Charge 2.

Reasons for Findings

20.

Based upon the evidence, the Panel was satisfied that the University had established that
the 4 passages in question had been taken verbatim or substantially verbatim from the
Wikipedia articles relating to Alice in Wonderland without any attribution and that with
respect to footnotes #1, #2 and #4, that the passages in question also were not in the
Wikipedia referenced source materials. With respect to footnote #3, given the totality of
the evidence including the findings that the passages have been taken verbatim or
substantially verbatim from Wikipedia and that footnotes #1, #2 and #4 did not come
from any source materials, the Panel was prepared to draw the inference that footnote #3
also did not come from any referenced source materials. Accordingly, based upon the
totality of the evidence presented, the Student was found to have committed the offence
of plagiarism.

Penalty

21.

The University did not lead any additional evidence with respect to penalty and submitted
that the following penalty should be imposed:
(a)

a final grade of zero in ENGB35 (2016);

(b)

a two year suspension from the University to commence on the day the
Tribunal makes its order; and

(c)

a notation of the sanction on her academic record and transcript for three
years from the date the Tribunal makes its Order; and

(d)

that the Tribunal report this case to the Provost for publication of a notice
of the decision of the Tribunal and the sanction or sanctions imposed in
the University newspapers, with the name of the Student withheld.

22.

In the University's submission, given that this was a first offence, the foregoing penalty
accorded with other decisions of this Tribunal in similar circumstances.

9

23.

After deliberations, the Tribunal ordered as follows:
(a)

THAT the Student is guilty of one count of plagiarism contrary to section

B.I.l(d) of the Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters;
(b)

THAT the Student receive a final grade of zero in ENGB35 (2016);

(c)

THAT the Student be suspended from the University for a period of two years,

commencing on January 25, 2017;
(d)

THAT the sanction be recorded on the Student's academic record and transcript

to the effect that she was sanctioned for academic misconduct for a period of three
years, commencing on January 25, 2017; and
(e)

THAT this case shall be reported to the Provost for publication of a notice of the

decision of the Tribunal and the sanction or sanctions imposed in the University
Newspapers, with the name of the Student withheld.
24.

An Order was signed at the hearing by the Panel to this effect.

Reasons for Penalty

25.

The Panel was satisfied that given that this was a first offence, this penalty was
appropriate given the Mr. C factors (Case No. 1976/77-3, November 5, 1976), and was in
accordance with other decisions ofthis Tribunal in similar circumstances.

Dated at Toronto, this / .f ~ ay of February, 2017

10

