Case #892

   DATE: February 15, 2017
   PARTIES: University of Toronto v. L.Z. ("the Student")

   Hearing Date(s): January 25, 2017

   Panel Members:
   Mr. Christopher Wirth, Barrister and Solicitor, Chair
   Professor Pascal van Lieshout, University of Toronto, Department of
   Speech-Language
   Pathology, Faculty Panel Member
   Mr. Andrey Lapin, Student Panel Member

   Appearances:
   Ms. Tina Lie, Assistant Discipline Counsel for the University, Paliare
   Roland Rosenberg
   Rothstein LLP

   In Attendance:
   Professor Eleanor Irwin, Dean's Designate, University of Toronto,
   Scarborough
   Ms. Krista Osbourne, University of Toronto, Administrative Assistant,
   Office of Appeals,
   Discipline and Faculty Grievances

   Not in Attendance:
   The Student

   Trial Division - s. B.i.1(d) of Code - plagiarism - student submitted
   essay worth 25% with substantial unattributed copying - student did not
   attend hearing - finding of guilt - zero on course, two year
   suspension, three year notation,Â publication of the decision with the
   name of the Student withheld

   The Student was charged with plagiarism under s. B.i.1(d) of the Code,
   and in the alternative with academic dishonesty under s. B.i.3(b) of
   the Code. The Student submitted an essay in a course, worth 25% of the
   final grade, containing nearly verbatim passages from Wikipedia that
   were unattributed or misattributed. The Student had received specific
   instruction about plagiarism and proper citation in the course and
   submitted a signed statement with the essay to the effect that any
   secondary sources used had been properly cited.

   The Student did not appear at the hearing. The University had affidavit
   evidence showing that the Student had been served the relevant notices.
   The Student was found guilty of plagiarism on the basis of an affidavit
   from the course instructor and a comparison of the essay and the
   relevant Wikipedia pages and the sources they cited. The University
   withdrew the other charge.

   The University sought and obtained a mark of zero in the course, a two
   year suspension, a three year notation,Â and publication of the
   decision with the name of the Student withheld. The Tribunal found that
   this penalty was in accordance with other decisions of the Tribunal in
   similar circumstances, and was appropriate given the sentencing factors
   as outlined in the Tribunalâs leading case ( Mr C ) on sanctioning.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/13036
