Case 819

DATE:

   June 8, 2016

PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v S.M.

Hearing Date(s):

   May 10, 2016

Panel Members:

   Jeffrey S. Leon, Chair
   Louis Florence, Faculty Member
   Lu Zhao, Student Member

Appearances:

   Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel
   Deepak Paradkar, Counsel for the Student
   Naveen Batish, Counsel (Student-at-Law) for the Student
   Martha Harris, Office of Student Academic Integrity, Faculty of Arts
   and Science

In Attendance:

   Christopher Lang, Director, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances
   Mr. S.M., the Student
   Student charged under s. B.i.1(d) , s. B.i.1(b) and, in the
   alternative, s. B.i.3(b) of the Code . The charges related to
   allegations that the Student copied and used verbatim excerpts from
   another studentâs computer program in his assignment. The parties
   submitted an Agreed Statement of Facts and a Joint Submission on
   Penalty. The Student admitted that he located the other studentâs
   programs on a publicly accessible software program hosting service
   without the studentâs knowledge or permission. The Panel accepted the
   Studentâs guilty plea and found the student guilty of an academic
   offence of plagiarism and unauthorized aid. The Panel took into account
   the Studentâs prior charges of academic misconduct. The Panel
   emphasized that though the Student had already completed the course
   requirements for his degree at the time of the hearing, the University
   should still respond to serious misconduct. The effect of the proposed
   suspension would have a significant effect on the Student in that he
   would not receive his degree until after his suspension was over.
   Â While specific deterrence may be less of a factor in this case, the
   Panel expressed hope that as a graduate of the University the Student
   would henceforth conduct himself in an appropriate manner. The Panel
   accepted the Joint Submission on Penalty and imposed a grade assignment
   of zero in the Course; a 3-year suspension; a 4-year notation on the
   Studentâs academic record and transcript; and that the case be reported
   to the Provost for publication.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12906
