Case 644

DATE:

   July 11, 2012

PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v. Y.T.

Hearing Date(s):

   June 19, 2012

Panel Members:

   Ms. Lisa Brownstone, Chair
   Prof. Markus Bussmann, Faculty Member
   Ms. Alice Kim, Student Member

Appearances:

   Ms. Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel for the University
   Ms. Mary Phan, DLS for the Student
   Dr. Jingsong Ma, Course Instructor
   Ms.Â Trelani (Milburn) Chapman, Invigilator

In Attendance:

   Mr. Y.T., the Student
   Prof. Eleanor Irwin, Dean's Designate
   Mr. Christopher Lang, Director, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty
   Grievances

   Student charged under s. B.i.1(b) of the Code . The charges related to
   allegations that the Student possessed unauthorized notes during his
   exam. The Student pleaded not guilty. The point of dispute was whether
   the invigilator identified the right student. The University had to
   prove on a balance of probabilities that the Student was in fact the
   person who was found to possess the unauthorized aids. When the
   invigilator found that one of the students in the exam room possessed
   unauthorized notes, she confiscated the notes but did not write down
   the studentâs name. Instead, she went to the professor to ask for the
   next course of action and then âreturnedâ to the person, the Student,
   who she thought was found to possess the notes. When the invigilator
   was writing down his name, the Student did not engage by speaking to
   her or asking questions; he claimed that he was focused only on writing
   his exam. The Panel stated that because the invigilator did not check
   the studentâs identification at the time she took the aid, she had to
   be certain that she was going back to the same student when she walked
   away from him. There was a discrepancy between the testimony of the
   course instructor and the testimony of the invigilator. Also, neither
   the instructor nor the invigilator could identify the Student with
   certainty. Finally, the Panel stated that after the invigilatorâs
   testimony that the Student had his head down with eyes downcast, it
   could not conclude with certainty that it was more likely than not that
   the Student was the correct student. The Panel held that the University
   had not met the burden of proving that it was more likely than not he
   was the correct student. The Panel found the Student not guilty of the
   charges.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12788
