Case 1429

   DATE:

   November 3, 2023

   PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v. B.L. ("the Student")

   HEARING DATE:

   April 28, 2023, via Zoom

   PANEL MEMBERS:

   Dean F. Embry, Chair
   Professor Ian Crandall, Faculty Panel Member
   Brinda Batra, Student Panel Member

   APPEARANCES:
   Mr. William Webb, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland
   Rosenberg Rothstein LLP

   NOT IN ATTENDANCE:

   The Student

   HEARING SECRETARY:

   Carmelle Salomon-Labbe, Associate Director, Office of Appeals,
   Discipline and Faculty Grievances

   The Student was charged with respect to academic offences in two
   separate courses. With respect to the first course (the ‚ECO course‚),
   the Student was charged with two counts of knowingly obtaining and or
   providing unauthorized assistance in connection with two term tests in
   the ECO Course contrary to s. B.i.1(b). In the alternative, the Student
   was charged with two counts under s. B.i.1(d) for knowingly
   representing as her own an idea or expression of an idea or work of
   another in connection with two term tests in the ECO Course. In the
   further alternative, the Student was charged under s. B.i.3(b) with
   knowingly engaging in a form of cheating, academic dishonesty or
   misconduct, fraud or misrepresentation not otherwise described in the
   Code to obtain academic advantage in connection with two ECO Course
   term tests.

   With respect to the second course (the ‚MAT course‚), the Student was
   charged with one count of knowingly representing as her own an idea or
   expression of an idea or work of another on a final assessment,
   contrary to s. B.i.1(d) of the Code. In the alternative, the Student
   was charged with one count under s. B.i.1(b) of the Code for knowingly
   using or possessing an unauthorized assistance in connection with a
   final assessment.

   The Student did not attend the hearing and was not represented by
   counsel. The Panel heard evidence that the University had made
   concerted efforts to serve the Student with notice of the hearing to
   the Student‚s email address, as listed in ROSI. The Panel found that
   the Student was provide with reasonable notice and proper service as
   contemplated by rules 17 and 21 of the University Tribunal‚s Rules of
   Practice and Procedure (the ‚Rules‚). As such, the hearing proceeded in
   the absence of the students. With respect to the charge stemming from
   the MAT Course, the Panel granted the University‚s motion to hear the
   merits of the proceedings against the Student alongside those of
   another student, enrolled in the same course, charged with the same
   academic misconduct, contrary to ss. B.i.1(d) and B.i.1(b) of the Code.

   With respect to the MAT Course, the University provided evidence that
   the Student‚s answer shared several similarities to answers posted to
   Chegg.com, including non-standard notation and similar mistakes. The
   Panel found that this evidence demonstrated, on a balance of
   probabilities, that the Student copied the answers found on Chegg.com,
   though it did not find that either student had posted the questions on
   Chegg. Accordingly, the Panel found the student guilty of one count of
   using authorized assistance, contrary to B.i.1(b) of the Code in
   relation to the final assessment.

   With respect to the ECO Course, the Panel received affidavit evidence
   from the course Professor. The Professor deposed, among other things,
   that students enrolled in the course were required to write four term
   tests, and the syllabus made it clear that students were prohibited
   from collaborating on term tests. The term tests were administered
   online. After the second and third term test were administered, a
   teaching assistant in the course raised concerns that the Student‚s
   answers on each of these two tests were similar to the answers given by
   other students enrolled in the ECO Course. The Panel concluded that the
   similarities between the answers of the Student and other students on
   these term tests demonstrated that the Student had collaborated with
   other students in producing their answers. Accordingly, the Panel found
   the Student guilty of two additional counts of using unauthorized
   assistance, contrary to B.i.1(b) of the Code.

   In determining the appropriate sanction, the Panel considered several
   relevant sanctioning factors. First, the Panel considered the nature of
   the offence, and concluded that the use of unauthorized aids during
   test and assessments is a serious offence that strikes at the core of
   the academic process. The Panel also considered, as a minor aggravating
   factor, that the offence had a commercial aspect insofar as the Student
   had relied upon answers posted to Chegg.com ‚ a subscription-based,
   commercial website. The Student‚s absence from the hearing left the
   Panel with no evidence or mitigating factors to consider. Finally, the
   Panel considered the Student‚s prior history of academic misconduct and
   observed that the fact that the Student had previously been found
   guilty of using an unauthorized aid in a prior academic year was strong
   evidence of a real risk of a future re-offence. Accordingly, given each
   of these aggravating factors and the absence of any mitigating factors,
   the Panel concluded that the sanctions proposed by the University were
   appropriate.

   The Panel imposed the following sanctions: a final grade of zero in
   both courses; a suspension from the University for a period of four
   years; a notation of the sanction on the Student‚s academic record for
   a period of four years, and; a report to the Provost for publication.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/31371
