THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
THE GOVERNING COUNCIL
Report #315 of the Academic Appeals Committee
March 22, 2007

Your Committee reports that it held a hearing on Friday, March 16, 2007, at which the following
members were present:
Professor Emeritus Ralph Scane, Senior Chair
Professor Jan Angus
Professor Brian Corman
Ms. Estefania Toledo
Professor John Wedge
Dr. Anthony Gray, Judicial Affairs Officer
In Attendance:
the Student Appellant
For the University of Toronto at Mississauga (UTM): Professor G. J. Anderson

This is an appeal from the decision of the Academic Appeals Board of UTM, dated October 20,
2005, dismissing an appeal from a decision of the Committee on Standing. The latter decision
dismissed a petition by the Student to be permitted late withdrawal without academic penalty from
the courses, WRI203H5, STA220H5 and PSY220H5, taken in the Fall term of 2003. The Student
received grades of F in each of these courses. During that term, the Student was also taking a full
credit course.
The Student entered this University in 1999. He has never taken the maximum permitted course
load in any term. Following the 2000 Summer term, he was placed upon academic probation, and
following the 2001 Winter term, he was suspended for one year. He returned to the University in
the Fall term of 2002, and enrolled in two full courses, which were successfully completed in the
Winter term of 2003. However, he was placed on academic probation again. He continues to take
courses towards his degree.
During and for several years prior to the Fall term of 2003, the Student was under psychiatric
treatment. In a report dated March 8, 2004, Dr. Jeeva, the psychiatrist treating the Student since
February, 1998, stated that the Student was diagnosed with Adult Attention Deficit Disorder,
Major Depression and Impulse Control Disorder. The Adult Attention Deficit Disorder was
characterized as extreme. Dr. Jeeva stated,

38845

2

“He is unable to hold a job. His concentration is very poor and he has great difficulty
in remaining focused. He has difficulty waking up on time, and he forgets
appointments, he frustrates his employers, colleagues and customers. Therefore, he is
not a very good candidate for work. He is likely to require rehabilitation in the future.
[The Student] also experiences significant mood swings which affects his
temperament. As a result, he often loses his temper with his family and friends. This
is causing a great deal of conflict for him. He is not able to cope living on his own, so
he is totally dependant on his parents. This is extremely difficult for everyone
concerned.”
Your Committee accepts that the above report represents an accurate picture of the Student’s
mental health during the Fall term of 2003, during which the courses in question were taken.
The Student also gave evidence that he was badly distracted from his studies by other external
factors. In February, 2002, he was charged with a serious criminal offence, and preparation for
and concern about his trial preoccupied him. He was ultimately acquitted at a trial which took
place in middle or late October, 2003. The Student also stated that, after returning to University
following his suspension, he fell in with a “bad crowd”, which was a further distraction from his
studies.
Your Committee does not doubt that this Student’s mental health issues pose a serious handicap to
his academic success. He has been advised in 2005 by the UTM Committee on Standing to seek
counseling. It may be that the University’s Accessibility Services could offer useful assistance.
However, that is not the issue here. Your Committee was advised by UTM that the drop date for
the half – courses in question was sometime in early November, 2003. By that date, the Student
had been acquitted of the charges against him. There was no evidence of any change in his mental
health problems, of which he was fully aware, after the drop date from the state of affairs which
existed before that date. He stated that he felt under pressure from and duty to his parents to
continue to try to make a success of this term, especially after having undergone a suspension
from the University. Your Committee does not consider that this justifies a departure from the
University’s policy that drop dates will not be waived in the absence of some subsequent
significant change for the worse in the circumstances affecting a student’s performance, which
could not reasonably have been foreseen at the drop date. Here, your Committee can find no such
circumstances.
The appeal is dismissed.

Professor Emeritus Ralph Scane, Senior Chair

38845

