Case 1353

FILE:

   Case # 1353 (2022-2023)

DATE:

   June 23, 2023

PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v. Y.Y. (‚the Student‚)

HEARING DATE(S):

   April 11, 2023, via Zoom

PANEL MEMBERS:

   Sarah Whitmore, Chair

   Dr. Maria Rozakis, Faculty Panel Member

   Charles Buck, Student Panel Member

APPEARANCES:

   Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg
   Rothstein LLP

   Hillson Tse, Counsel for the Student

   The Student

HEARING SECRETARY:

   Christopher Lang, Director, Office of Appeals, Discipline and Faculty
   of Grievances

   The Student was charged in relation to two separate incidents. The
   first incident (‚Charge #1‚) occurred on June 6, 2021. The Student was
   charged under s. B.i.1(a) with knowingly altering or falsifying a
   document or evidence required by the University or making use of the
   falsified document, specifically a University of Toronto Verification
   of Student Illness or Injury Form (‚VOI‚) for STAB57H3. In the
   alternative to Charge #1, the Student was charged with knowingly
   engaging in a form of cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct,
   fraud, or misrepresentation to obtain academic credit contrary to s.
   B.i.3(b) of the Code.

   The second incident (‚Charge #3‚) occurred on November 29, 2021. The
   Student was charged with knowingly obtaining unauthorized assistance in
   connection with a research project submitted in MATD02H3 contrary to s.
   B.i.1(b) of the Code. In the alternative, the Student was charged with
   knowingly engaging in a form of cheating, academic dishonesty or
   misconduct, fraud, or misrepresentation to obtain academic credit or
   other academic advantage contrary to s. B.i.3(b) of the Code.

   The hearing proceeded on an Agreed Statement of Facts (‚ASF‚) and a
   Joint Book of Documents (‚JBD‚). The Student attended the hearing and
   had counsel present.

   The Student first petitioned to write a deferred exam for STAB57H on
   April 13, 2021, and submitted a VOI form. This petition was denied. The
   Student submitted another petition on June 6, 2021, and an accompanying
   VOI, which was stamped with information from Centenary Hospital with
   the doctor‚s name illegible. The Student was asked to clarify the
   illegible information, which she did over email, advising that the
   doctor‚s name was Adamantios Panagiotis Zoudis. The Petition Office
   determined that Dr. Zoudis did not have hospital privileges at
   Centenary Hospital and that the Student had not been seen by Dr.
   Zoudis.

   The Student was enrolled in MATD02H3 in Fall 2021. Students were
   required to complete a research project. The Student submitted a paper
   for the research paper requirement. When marking the Student‚s paper,
   the instructor became suspicious, as the paper covered very advanced
   topics beyond the course‚s scope and the Student‚s demonstrated
   familiarity with the course material.

   During the Dean‚s Designate meeting, the Student explained that when
   her first petition was rejected, she panicked and with the aid of
   friends, put together the forged VOI. The Student also acknowledged
   that when writing the research paper, her friend suggested which papers
   the Student should use. The Student admitted guilt under Charge 1 and
   Charge 3.

   The Panel deliberated on the ASF and JBD, concluding that Charges 1 and
   3 had been proven with clear and convincing evidence on a balance of
   probabilities. The Panel accepted the guilty plea of the Student, and
   the University withdrew the alternative charges.

   In determining the appropriate sanctions, the Panel considered the
   Joint Submission on Penalty (‚JSP‚) submitted by the University and the
   Student. The Panel considered the seriousness of the offences and that
   the Student had committed two prior offences. The Panel found that
   these prior offences indicated that the Student‚s likelihood of
   committing a further offence must be factored into the penalty. The
   Panel also considered that the offence pertaining to the VOI causes
   detriment to the University. The Panel also considered mitigating
   factors including the Student‚s cooperation in the process, the ASF,
   and JSP, which showed insight and responsibility. Based on these
   factors and a review of similar cases presented by counsel, the Panel
   accepted the JSP.

   The Panel imposed the following sanctions: a grade assignment of zero
   in both courses; a three-year and six-month suspension; a five-year
   notation on the Student‚s transcript; and a report to the Provost for
   publication.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/31248
