Case 1199

   DATE: January 26, 2022
   PARTIES: University of Toronto v. J.T.L. ("the Student")

   HEARING DATE: October 13, 2021, via Zoom

   Panel Members:
   Mr. Doug F. Harrison
   Dr. Wendy Rotenberg, Faculty Panel Member
   Ms. Alena Zelinka, Student Panel Member

   Appearances:
   Ms. Tina Lie, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg
   Rothstein LLP
   Mr. William Webb, Co-Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg Rothstein LLP

   Not in Attendance:
   The Student

   Hearing Secretary:
   Ms. Krista Kennedy, Administrative Clerk & Hearing Secretary, Office of
   Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances

   The Student was charged under s. B.i.1(d) of the‚ØCode of Behaviour on
   Academic Matters, 1995‚Ø(the ‚Code‚) on the basis that the Student
   knowingly represented as their own an idea or expression of an idea or
   work of another in the final exam. In the alternative, the Student was
   charged under s. B.i.1(b) of the Code on the basis that the Student
   knowingly obtained unauthorized assistance in connection with a final
   exam. In the further alternative, the Student was charged under s.
   B.i.3(b) of the Code on the basis that the Student knowingly engaged in
   a form of cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or
   misrepresentation not otherwise described in the Code in order to
   obtain academic credit or other academic advantage in connection with a
   final exam.

   The Panel convened the hearing at the scheduled time. The Panel then
   waited fifteen minutes to allow the Student or a representative of the
   Student to appear. Neither the Student nor a representative for the
   Student appeared. The Panel noted that in order to proceed in the
   Student‚s absence, it must determine if reasonable notice was provided
   to the Student as required by s. 6 of the Statutory Powers Procedure
   Act (‚SPPA‚) and rule 13 of the University Tribunal‚s Rules of Practice
   and Procedure (‚Rules‚). Regarding service, the Panel noted that
   pursuant to rule 9(c) of the Rules, delivery by email to a student‚s
   email address as recorded in ROSI is permitted and considered valid
   service. The University‚s Policy on Official Correspondence with
   Students (‚Policy‚) indicates that students are responsible for
   maintaining a current email address through ROSI. The University
   provided evidence that the Student was served with the charges and the
   notice of electronic hearing via email to the email address of the
   Student contained in ROSI. The Panel further noted that the Student‚s
   email account was accessed by someone after the charges and notice of
   electronic hearing were sent to the Student. The Panel also received
   evidence that the charges, a letter from Assistant Discipline Counsel,
   and the notice of electronic hearing were sent via courier to the
   address the Student provided in ROSI at their mailing address but were
   undeliverable because the building required an access code. In a
   further attempt to reach the Student, Assistant Discipline Counsel‚s
   assistant attempted to call the Student at the number the Student
   provided in ROSI but the call went to a voicemail box that was
   identified by the telephone number only. The assistant left a message
   letting the Student know that a hearing had been scheduled and the date
   and time of the hearing. She also indicated that the Student should
   check their email account. Based on the evidence and submissions of
   counsel for the University, the Panel concluded that the Student had
   received reasonable notice of the hearing and the charges in accordance
   with SPPA and the Rules. The Panel ordered the hearing to proceed in
   the absence of the Student.

   In support of the charges, the Panel received affidavit evidence from
   the course coordinator for the course in which the final exam in
   question was submitted. The course coordinator was present at the
   hearing and addressed questions from the Panel. The Panel noted that
   the final exam was administrated online as an open-book exam which was
   made available to the students for a 24-hour period. During the 24-hour
   period, the instructors and teaching assistants found a number of
   questions and answers from the final exam posted on Chegg.com. In
   marking the Student‚s exam, the course instructors determined that
   there were substantial similarities between the Student‚s answers and
   those that were posted on Chegg.com. The Panel further noted that upon
   further review the course coordinator came to the same determination as
   the instructors and teaching assistants because the answers to the
   problems took the same approach, with the same or very similar steps as
   the Chegg.com answers. It was unlikely that the number and degree of
   similarities, including unnecessary steps and wrong notations, were
   coincidental. It was evident to the Panel that the Student submitted
   answers that had originated from Chegg.com. Based on the foregoing, the
   Panel was satisfied that the Student, on a balance of probabilities,
   made use of the answers from Chegg.com to complete the final exam. The
   Panel concluded that the alternative charge, use of an unauthorized aid
   or obtaining unauthorized assistance, fit the circumstances. The Panel,
   therefore, found the Student guilty of using an unauthorized aid or
   obtaining unauthorized assistant in a final exam, contrary to s.
   B.i.1(b) of the Code. Given this finding, the University withdrew the
   charge made in the further alternative under s.B.i.3(b) of the Code.

   Regarding the appropriate sanction, the Panel noted that s. C.ii.(b) of
   the Code sets out that the Tribunal may impose a range of sanctions on
   a student who has been convicted under the Code. Furthermore, the Code
   contains the ‚Provost‚s Guidance on Sanctions‚ in Appendix ‚C‚, which
   outlines that, absent exceptional circumstances, the Provost will
   request a suspension of two years for a student‚s first offence. In
   determining sanction, the Panel considered the factors set out in
   University of Toronto and C. (Case 1976/77-3; dated November 5, 1976).
   With respect to the Student‚s character and extenuating circumstances,
   the Panel noted that there was no evidence with respect to either of
   these factors since the Student did not participate in the process at
   all. Furthermore, there was no evidence of remorse, insight or a
   willingness to take responsibility for their actions. With respect to
   the likelihood of repetition, the Panel considered that the Student was
   in first year at the time of the offence and has not enrolled in the
   University since. Additionally, there was no evidence of a pattern of
   misconduct but also no evidence to show that the Student appreciated
   the gravity of the misconduct. With respect to the nature of the
   offence, the detriment to the University, and the need for deterrence,
   the Panel considered this to be an extremely serious offence that harms
   the institution and the academic process. It is a serious breach of
   academic integrity and can be seen as an attempt to defraud the
   University. Thus, the associated penalty must act as a general
   deterrent against this type of behaviour. The Panel also considered
   various previous decisions of the Tribunal provided by Assistant
   Discipline Counsel. In reviewing the cases, the Panel noted that the
   sanction in a particular case is to be determined based on the
   circumstances of that case, however, students must be treated fairly
   and equitably when being sanctioned. Based on the foregoing, the Panel
   determined that the sanction requested by the Provost was reasonable
   and appropriate in the circumstances of this case. The Panel imposed
   the following sanctions: a final grade of zero in the course; a
   two-year suspension; a three-year notation on transcript; and a report
   to the Provost for publication.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/30194
