THE UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
THE UNlVERSITY OF TORONTO

IN THE MATTER OF charges of academic dishonesty made on June 14,201 l;
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour 011 Academic
lvfatters, 1995;
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Act, 1971, S,O. 1971, c. 56 as amended
s.o. 1978, c. 88

BETWEEN:
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
- AND -

Z

M

REASONS FOR DECISION

Hearing Date: October 19, 2011

Members of the Panel:
•
•
•

Mr. Clifford Lax, Q.C., Chair
Professor Markus Bussmann, Faculty of Mechanical and Industrial Engineering, Faculty
Panel Member
Ms. Alice Kim, Student Panel Member

Appearances:
• Ms. Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel for the University of Toronto, Paliare Roland
Barristers
• Kermeth Raddatz, Legal Case Worker, Downtown Legal Services
Attendance:
• Ms. Z
M
the Student
• Professor G. Scott Graham, Dean's Designate, Faculty of A1is and Science
• Ms. Natalie Ramtahal, Coordinator, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances

-2-

The Hearing
I.

The University Tribunal was convened on Wednesday, October 19, 20 I I to hear three
charges under the Code ofBehaviour 011 Academic Mallers, 1995 (the "Code") laid against
Z
M
by letter dated June 14, 2011 from Professor Edith Hillan, Vice Provost.
Faculty and Academic Life of the University (the "Charges").

2.

The Tribunal was advised that the matter would proceed upon an Agreed Statement of Facts
dated October 19, 2011.

3.

The Tribunal was advised that Ms. M
would admit guilt on Charge I and the Provost
would withdraw Charges 2 and 3 if the Tribunal, was prepared to accept the guilty plea,

The Charges

4,

Ms.M

(a)

pleaded guilty to the following Charge:
in or about November, 2010, you knowingly forged or in any other way altered or
falsified a document or evidence required by the University, or uttered, circulated
or made use of such forged, altered or falsified document, namely your mid-term
test in BI0205H5 contrary to Section B.1. l(a) of the Code,

Agreed Statement of Facts
M

personally and by Ms.

5.

The Agreed upon Statement of Facts was signed by Z
Harmer on behalf of the University.

6.

Ms. M
candidly admitted that on the term test of October 14, 20 I0, she received a grade
of8 (out ofa potential 24 marks), as well as a mark of zero (out ofa potential three marks)
for a bonus question. She then falsely claimed that there appeared to be a discrepancy,
between her exam mark posted on line and the mark allegedly noted on her exam paper. She
was sufiiciently convincing in this asse11ion, that the professor in charge of the course
responded that it appeared to him to be a typographical error, He requested that Ms. M
contact his Teaching Assistant about the discrepancy.

7.

On November 22,2010, Ms. M
submitted her term test to the Teaching Assistant. She
explained that the paper was "in bad condition because my lab partner spilled onto my
papers", The altered test that she submitted was smudged and discolored and had been
detached so that each page was separate. The falsified marks for the sho11 answer portion of
the exam totalled 20.5 plus three bonus marks for a total of23.5 out ofa possible 27 marks.

8.

Clearly, the Teaching Assistant did not believe that he was reviewing the same exam that had
been submitted to him for marking. As a result, Ms. M
was invited to attend a meeting
with the Dean's Designate on April 4, 2011. After offering a val'iety of explanations for
various inconsistencies and anomalies, Ms. M
admit(ed that she had altered the marks
on her test and had stained the exam paper in an attempt to avoid detection,

-3-

9.

In the Agreed Statement of Facts, Ms. M
candidly admits that she knowingly altered her
answers before resubmitting the term test by adding answers and by adding marks that hnd
not been on her term test on October 14, 20 I0.

I 0.

Before this Tribunal, Ms. M
acknowledged that the facts set out in the Agreed
Statement of Facts were true and that she had executed the Agreed Statement of Facts
voluntarily. Therefore, the Tribunal accepted the guilty plea and found that the facts
admitted suppo1ied the finding of guilt on the first Charge. As a result, counsel on behalf of
the University withdrew Charges 2 and 3.

Sanction

11.

While the parties agreed on the facts surrounding this Charge, they disagreed as to the
appropriate sanctions.

12.

Counsel for the University sought the following sanctions:

a. A final grade of zero in B1O205H5;
b. A stJspension of Ms. M
from the University of Toronto for three years
commencing September I, 201 I and ending Allgust 31, 2014;
c. The imposition of a notation on her academic record and transcript stating that she
had been found to have committed an academic offense, stJch notation to run for
four years from September I, 2011 until August 31, 2015, or tJntil she graduates,
whichever occurs first; and,
d. A report of this case to the Provost who may publish a notice of the Decision of
the University Tribunal and the sanctions imposed, with Ms. M
's name
withheld.
13.

Submissions on behalf of Ms. M
acknowledge that she should receive a final grade
of zero in course BIO205H5 and that this is an appropriate case to be reported to the
Provost for publication. However, the student submitted that an appropriate period of
suspension would be for two years, with the student being permitted to resume classes
aftel' one year, provided that her marks would be withheld until the two year suspension
had been completed.

14.

The student submitted that a suspension of greate,· than two years would amount to an
effective expulsion from the University because she expected to be married by the end of
two years, pursuant to an arranged mal'riage and once married, would be unlikely to
complete her studies and therefore unable to ever obtain hel' degree. She stated that in
her culture, it was extremely unlikely that her husband would permit her to continue to be
a student. She based this conclusion on what she had been told by her parents, the
experience of her sister and her knowledge of her community's expectation of married
women who had attained the age of 23 years.

15.

Counsel for the University drew to the attention of the Panel the fact that in 2009, Ms.
M
had admitted to have submitted falsified data in a formal laboratory report she
had turned in for credit in another course. At that time, she was given a mark of zero for

the laboratory report in question, cautioned in writing with a specific reference to the
importance of the University Code of Behaviou,· on Academic Matters and specifically
warned to not commit another academic offense,
16,

Counsel for the University submitted that the charges to which Ms. M
pleaded
guilty in this hearing should result in a two year suspension and that the prior academic
offense in 2009 constituted an aggravating factor, which justified the imposition of a
further year of suspension.

17,

This Panel considers the criteria for sanction set out in the Decision in the matter of the
appeal of Mr. C (November 5, 1976) and subsequently adopted by this Tribunal in the
matter of M.S., (Reasons for Decision - April 29, 2009) and in the Decision in the matter
ofS.M., (Reasons for Decision - October 6, 2008) as applicable to this case, In the latter
two cases, the Tribunal suspended the student for a period of three years and placed a
notation on the transcript for a period of four years.

18.

In this case as in the Tribunal Decision in the matter of S.M., the sanction was aggravated
by a prior academic offense, by the same student and of the same nature.

19,

While Ms. M
presented herself as a personable and reasonably contrite student, the
fact remains that she deliberately attempted to mislead her teachers by carefully
concocting an untruthful explanation as to why he1· exam papers had been marred by the
alleged spillage of liquid by her laboratory partner, In fact, it was Ms, M
who had
spilled liquid on her exam papers in an attempt to obliterate the original poor marks
which she had received and attempted to inse1i the correct answers in the hope of
misleading her teacher into Sllbstantially increasing the grades that she had received.
Regrettably, this was the second instance Ms. M
had been caught trying to obtain
higher test reslllts through improper means,

20.

Both the first offense and this ofiense were deliberate and carefully thought out attempts
to fraudulently obtain higher marks. Ms. M
only admitted her gllilt when she was
confronted with the evidence of her wrongdoing. She was caught trying to unfairly
advance her own position while at the same time undermining the academic standards of
the University.

21.

We arc unable to conclude with certainty that Ms, M
will be unable to complete her
studies once the period of suspension has ended. If in fact because of an intervening
marriage or any other external factor which adversely affects her return to the University,
she is unable to graduate, she has only herself to blame for the predicament that she finds
herself in. The Code is concerned with the responsibilities of all parties to the integrity of
the teaching and learning relationship. Ms. M
has failed to discharge her
responsibility to the integrity of the learning relationship,

22,

We are also unable to accept the submission that a student can be suspended, but still
attend classes at the University, Section C.ll.(b)l.(h) of the Code states that upon a
conviction, one of the possible sanctions is "(h) suspension from attendance in a course
or comses, a program, an academic division or unit, or the University for Sllch a period of
time up to five years as may be determined by the Tribunal." The language q11oted
clearly requires that the sllldent be suspended from any form of attendance at any type of
University course or program. Therefore, the suggestion that Ms. M
be permitted lo

-5-

atlend courses, while under suspension, with her marks withheld until the period of
suspension was completed, contravenes the Code and therefore must be rejected.
23.

The Panel was unanimously of the view that the sanctions sought by the University were
appropriate in the circumstances of this case.

2,1.

Therefore this Panel imposes the following penalty:
(a)

a final grade of zero in the course B1O2051-l.5 ~ Ecology;

(b)

a suspension from the University of Toronto for three years commencing
September I, 2011 and ending August 31, 2014;

(c)

a notation on Ms. M
's academic record and transcript stating that she has
been found guilty of an academic offense, such notation to nm from September I,
2011 until August 31, 2015, or until she graduates, whichever occurs first; and,

( cl)

a report to the Provost who may publish a notice of the Decision of the University
Tribunal and the sanctions imposed, with Ms. M
's name withheld.

Dated at Toronto, this /rih day of November, 2011.

Mr. Chlfor,

1 x, Q.C., Chair

