Case 632

DATE:

   November 10, 2011

PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v. Z.M.

Hearing Date(s):

   October 19, 2011

Panel Members:

   Mr. Clifford Lax, Chair
   Prof. Markus Bussmann, Faculty Member
   Ms. Alice Kim, Student Member

Appearances:

   Ms. Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel for the University
   Mr. Kenneth Raddatz, DLS for the Student

In Attendance:

   Ms. Z.M.,Â the Student
   Prof. G. Scott Graham, Dean's Designate
   Ms.Â Natalie Ramtahal, Coordinator, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty
   Grievances

   Student charged under s. B.i.1(a) of the Code . The charge related to
   allegations that the Student falsified marks on her mid-term test.
   After receiving her test back, the Student falsely claimed that there
   appeared to be a typographical error and asked her professor to contact
   the TA. The Student then submitted her test, smudged and discoloured,
   to the TA, claiming that her lab partner spilled onto her papers. The
   TA did not believe that he was reviewing the same test, and the
   Student, after offering a variety of explanations, admitted at the
   meeting with the Deanâs Designate altering the marks. The Student
   pleaded guilty to the charge, and the Panel found the Student guilty
   under s. B . i.1(a) . The Student submitted that she should be
   suspended for two-years with permission to attend classes after one
   year, provided that her marks would be withheld until the two year
   suspension had been completed. The Student also submitted that a
   suspension greater than two years would amount to an effective
   expulsion because she was to be married and in her culture, it was
   extremely unlikely that her husband would permit her to continue to be
   a student. The Panel stated that it was not convinced that the Student
   would be unable to complete her studies once the period of suspension
   has ended and that if the Student would be unable to resume because of
   external factors, she had only herself to blame. The Panel also stated
   that the language in the Code specifically required the Student to be
   suspended from any form of attendance. Therefore, a permission to
   attend classes while under suspension contravened the Code . In
   considering precedents, the Panel found M.S. (Case 542) and S.M. (Case
   478), in which the student was suspended for three-years, to be
   applicable to this case. In both S.M. and this case, the sanction was
   aggravated by a prior academic offense of the same nature. The Student
   had previously been cautioned in writing for falsifying data in her lab
   report in another course. The Panel imposed a grade assignment of zero
   in the course; a three-year suspension; a four-year notation on
   transcript or until graduation, whichever was to occur first; and a
   report be issued to the Provost.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12778
