Case #659

   DATE: February 6, 2012
   PARTIES: University of Toronto v. R.M.
   Hearing Date(s): June 27, 2011
   Panel Members:
   Mr. Andrew Pinto, Chair
   Dr. Annette Sanger, Faculty Member
   Ms. Alice Kim, Student Member
   Appearances:
   Mr. Robert Centa, Assistant Discipline Counsel for the University
   In Attendance:
   Prof. Eleanor Irwin, Dean's Designate
   Ms. Natalie Ramtahal, Coordinator, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty
   Grievances

   Trial Division â s. B.i.1(d) of Code â plagiarism â passages from essay
   taken verbatim from secondary sources without attribution â hearing not
   attended â Student submitted a Consent to the hearing proceeding in her
   absence â Agreed Statement of Facts - guilty plea â finding of guiltÂ
   â Joint Submission on Penalty â Panel reviewed JSP and found that it
   reflected an appropriate penalty â grade assignment of zero for course;
   two-year suspension; two-year notation on transcript; report to Provost

   Student charged under s. B.i.1(d) of the Code. The charges related to
   allegations that the Student submitted an essay containing passages
   taken verbatim or nearly verbatim without attribution. The Student did
   not attend the hearing but submitted a Consent to the hearing
   proceeding in her absence. The parties submitted an Agreed Statement of
   Facts, and the Student pleaded guilty to the charges. Accordingly, the
   panel found the Student guilty under s. B.i.1(d).Â  The parties also
   submitted a Joint Submission on Penalty. After reviewing previous
   decisions presented by the University, the Panel concluded that a
   two-year suspension reflected an appropriate penalty for a first
   offence of plagiarism. The Panel also agreed that there were no
   compelling reasons in this case for departing from the sanction jointly
   suggested in the Joint Submission on Penalty. The Panel imposed a grade
   assignment of zero in the course, a two-year suspension; a two-year
   notation of the Student's transcript; and a report be issued to the
   Provost.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/13017
