UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
TRIAL DIVISION

IN THE MATTER OF charges of academic misconduct made on May 11, 2011 ;
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on

Academic Matters, 1995;
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Act, 1971 , S.O. 1971, c. 56
as amended S.O. 1978, c. 88.

BETWEEN:
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
-AND-

REASONS FOR DECISION

Hearing Date: June 27, 2011
Members of the Panel:
Mr. Andrew Pinto, Barrister and Solicitor, Chair
Dr. Annette Sanger, Faculty Panel Member
Ms. Alice Kim, Student Panel Member

Appearances:
Mr. Robert Centa, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Barristers

In Attendance:
Professor Eleanor Irwin, Dean's Designate, University of Toronto Scarborough
Ms. Natalie Ramtahal , Coordinator, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances

Preliminary

[1]

The Trial Division of the University Tribunal was convened on June 27,
2011 to consider charges under the University of Toronto Code of
Behaviour on Academic Matters, 1995 (the "Code") laid against the
Student by letter dated May 11, 2011 from Professor Edith Hillan, ViceProvost, Faculty and Academic Life.

[2]

The Student and the University entered into an Agreed Statement of Facts
("ASF") and a Joint Submission on Penalty ("JSP"), copies of which are
attached to these Reasons as Appendix "A" and "B" respectively. The
Tribunal noted that, although the versions of the ASF and JSP provided to
the panel were signed and dated by the University on June 7, 2011, they
were signed but left undated by the Student. The Tribunal requested and
the University provided satisfactory documentation, entered as Exhibit #7
at the hearing, that the Student had, in fact, signed and dated the ASF and
JSP on June 6, 2011.

Hearing on the Facts

[3)

The charges against the Student were as follows:
1.
On or about April 5, 2010, you knowingly represented as your own an
idea or expression of an idea, and/or the work of another in an essay that you
submitted for academic credit in ANT A02 - Introduction to Anthropology:
Society, Culture and Language (the "Course"), contrary to section B.l.1(d) of
the Code.
2.
In the alternative, on or about April 5, 2010, you knowingly engaged in
a form of cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or
misrepresentation not otherwise described in the Code in order to obtain
academic credit or other academic advantage of any kind in connection to an
essay you submitted for academic credit in the Course, contrary to section
B.l.3(b) of the Code.

Particulars

3.
At all material times, you were a registered student at the University of
Toronto. In Winter 2010, you enrolled in the Course, which was taught by
Professor Maggie Cummings.
4.
Students in the Course were required to submit a writing assignment of
In Search of Respect which was worth 15% of the final grade in the Course
("Assignment").

2

5.
On or about April 5, 2010, you submitted an essay in completion of the
Assignment, and to obtain academic credit in the Course ("Essay").
6.

In your Essay you knowingly:
a.
b.

Represented the work of another as your own work; and
Included in the Essay ideas, and expressions of ideas, that were
not your own, but were the ideas and expressions of others, which
you did not acknowledge in the Essay.

7. For the purposes of obtaining academic credit and/or other academic
advantage, you knowingly committed plagiarism in the Essay.

[4]

The Student did not attend the hearing but submitted a Consent to the
hearing proceeding in her absence. The Consent confirmed that the
Student understood that, in her absence, the University Tribunal may find
that she had committed an act or acts of academic misconduct, and may
impose sanctions against her as set out in the Code.

[5]

Discipline counsel provided an overview of the ASF.

[6]

The Student, via the ASF, entered a guilty plea to charges 1 and 2. The
University agreed that if the Tribunal convicted the Student of charge 1,
the University would withdraw charge 2.

Decision of the Tribunal on Charges

[7]

Following deliberation, based on the facts set out in the ASF and a review
of the documents contained in a Joint Book of Documents ("JBD"), the
Tribunal accepted the Student's guilty plea on charges 1 and 2.
Consequently, the University withdrew charge 2, and the Student stood
convicted on charge 1.

Penalty

[8)

The matter then continued with a hearing into the appropriate sanction.
As noted above, the University and the Student filed a JSP attached to
these Reasons as Appendix B.

[9]

The panel also reviewed a number of Tribunal decisions presented by the
University. The panel noted that the Tribunal in Re M.H.H. (July 12, 2009;
Case Number 521) relied on a previous decision, Re A.K. (November 9,
2007; Case Number 509), in holding that "the consistent minimum penalty
3

appears to be a two year suspension" for students convicted of plagiarism.
Similarly, in Re Y-L.O. (November 8, 2010; Case Number 592), the
Tribunal stated, "the principles that have emerged from the cases over the
years are certainly clear, that a commission of a first offence of plagiarism
usually carries with it a suspension of at least two years." [para. 15)
[1 OJ

The Tribunal concluded that a 2-year suspension proposed in the present
JSP is consistent with the Tribunal's established jurisprudence concerning
a first offence for plagiarism. The Tribunal also agreed that there were no
compelling reasons in this case for departing from the sanction jointly
suggested by the parties in the JSP.

[11)

In light of the facts of this case, the admission of guilt by the Student, and
the joint submission regarding penalty, the Tribunal accepts the JSP and
imposes the following sanction:
1.

THAT the following sanctions shall be imposed on the Student:
(a)

a final grade of zero in the course ANT A02H;

(b)

a suspension from the University commencing June 3, 2011,
for a period of two years, ending on June 2, 2013; and

(c)

the sanction be recorded on her academic record and
transcript from the date of the order until June 2, 2013;

2.
THAT this case shall be reported to the Provost for publication of a
notice of the decision of the Tribunal and the sanctions imposed, with the
name of the student withheld.

Dated at Toronto, this 6th day of February, 2012.

Andrew Pinto, Co-Chair

4

SCHEDULE A

I

N0. 3

THE UNIVERSITY TRJBUNAL
UNIVC;ASrrv OF TOBONYO
(.I r•.ll')

'"'
\,{N IYCl'',>.>
THE UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL OF THE UNIVERSITY OmiOORONT.Q.
. ... ..........
. .... . . . I..T'l
. . . .... . ....... .

lnis

21 dayot <11.,1tJt::.

, 20.l.l ... .

C.\I ; f
..~ ........... .
AND IN THE MATTER OF !he University of Toronlo Code of Bellaviour on Academic Mailers, fM>~, ''
IN THE MATTER OF charges or academic dishonesty filed Oil May 11, 2011,

, , ,~ ,

ANO IN THE MATTER OF lhe University of Toronto Act, 1971, S.O. 1971, c. 56 as amended

s.o. 1978, c. 88

BETWEEN:
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO

- AND-

AGREED STATEMENT OF FACTS

1.

This hearing arises out of charges of academic misconduct filed by the Provost of the

University of Toronto (the "Provost") under the Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters

(" Coc/e"). For the purpose of this hearing, the Provost and ~ ~ ('Ms. ~

") have

prepared this Agreed Statement of Facts ("ASF") and a joint book of documents ("JBD''). The
Provost and Ms. ~ agree that:
(a)

each document contained in the JBD may be admitted into evidence at the
Tribunal for all purposes, including for the truth of the document's contents,
without furth er need to prove the document; and

(b)

if a document indicates that it was sent or received by someone, that is prima

facie proof that the document was sent and received as indicated.
2.

Ms.

790771 _ I.DOC

NIIIIIIII waives notice of this hearing.

2

A.

Charges and g11llty plea

3.

Ms. ~ admits that she received a copy of the charges filed by the Provost. The

charges are included in the JBD at Tab 1.

4.

Ms. ~ waives the reading of the charges filed against her, and pleads guilty to both

charges.

5.

The Provost agrees that if the Tribunal convicts Ms. ~ on charge 1, the Provost will

withdraw charge 2.

6.

At all material limes, Ms. ~ was a registered student at the University of Toronto. A

copy of Ms. ~ s academic record is included in the JBD at Tab 2.

B.

ENGB17

7.

In the 2010 Winter tenn, Ms. ~ enrolled in ANT A024 -

Introduction to

Anthropology, Society, Culture and Language, which was taught by Prof. Maggie Cummings
("Course").

8.

A copy of the syllabus for the Course ("Syllabus") is included in the JBD at Tab 3. Ms.

~ admits that she received a copy of the Syllabus. The Syllabus stated, in part, as follows:
Academic Integrity: Academic dishonesty (for instance, plagiarism) is a serious offence.
Issues of academic dishonesty will be discussed further in your tutorials; please see the
document Academic Integrity, posted on the inlranel, for more detailed information and
university policies.
9.

The academic requirements for the Course included an essay that was due on April 1,

2010. On April 5, Ms. ~ submitted an essay tilled "In Search of Respect Writing
Assignment" in partial completion of the Course requirements ("Essay"). A copy of the Essay is
included in the JBD at Tab 4.

10.

The teaching assistant in the Course graded the Essay and noted that several of the

passages were reproduced verbatim or nearly verbatim from secondary sources, some of which
were not listed in the Essay's endnotes. In addition, several passages were not identified

790771_1.DOC

3

through the use of quotation marks or any other method of Indicating that they were verbatim or
nearly verbatim quotes.

11.

The teaching assistant in the Course brought the Contemporary Essay to Prof.

Cummings' attention. Prof. Cummings reviewed it and concluded that large portions of the
essay closely or exactly resembled passages from websites. A copy of these sources is
included in the JBD at Tab 5.

12.

Ms. ~ admits that she knowingly:

(a)

represented in the Essay the ideas of another person, the expression of the
ideas of another person, and the work of another person as her own;

(b)

committed plagiarism in the Essay contrary to section B.1.1 (d) of the Code; and

(c)

engaged in a form of cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or

misrepresentation in order to obtain academic credit, contrary to section B.l.3(b)
of the Code.

C.

The meeting with the Dean's Designate

13.

Ms. ~ did not meet with the Dean's Designate for Academic Integrity, to discuss

the two offences.

D.

Acknowledgments

14.

Ms. ~ acknowledges that:
(a)

the Provost of the University of Toronto has advised Ms.
obtain legal counsel and that Ms.

(b)

rvtlllllll of her right lo

rvtlllllll has done so; and

she is signing this ASF freely and voluntarily, knowing of the potential
consequences she faces, and does so with the advice of counsel.

790771_1 .DOC

4

Signed on June

, 2011.

Signed on June 7 , 2011.

Robert A. Centa
Assistant Discipline Counsel
University of Toronto

790771_1.DOC

SCHEDULED

1

THE UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO

IN THE MATTER OF charges or academic dishonesty made on May 11, 2011,

AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters, 1995,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Act, 1971, S.O. ·1971 , c. 56 as amended
S.0 . 1978, C. 88

BETWEEN:
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO

-AND-

JOINT SUBMISSION ON PENALTY

1.

For the purposes of the sanction phase of this hearing under the Code of Behaviour on

Academic Matters ("Code"), the University of Toronto (the ''University") and ~ ~
("Ms.~'') have prepared this Joint Submission on Penally.

2.

The Provost and Ms. ~ submit that the appropriate penally in all the circumstances

of the case is that the University Tribunal impose the following sanctions on M s . ~:

(a)

a final grade of zero in the following course: ANT A02H.

(b}

a suspension from the University from June 3, 2011, until June 2, 2013;

(c)

a notation of the sanction on her academic record and transcript from the date of

the Order until June 2, 2013;
3.

The parties agree that this case shall be reported to the Provost for publication of a

notice of the decision of the Tribunal and the sanction or sanction imposed in the University
newspapers. with the name of the student withheld.

790770_ 1.OOC

2

Signed on June _ , 2011.

Signed on June

7. 2011 .
Robert A. Centa
Assistant Discipline Counsel
University of Toronto

w

THE UNfVERStTI' TRH3UNAl

UNIVERSITY ()F TORONTO
AND

. . . ~IIIIMr-

•

the ....L.l.NJ~([.;¥..?.!1.1. ...........................
this
790770_1.DOC

7-r day of (1 C

I

20. ll ... .

..........-,. .Ii-T{
.................. .
;

