THE UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO

IN THE MATIER of charges of academic dishonesty made on January 7, 20 11
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic 1\llatters,

1995,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Act, 1971, S.O. 1971 , c. 56 as amended
S.O. 1978, C. 88

BETWEEN:
UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO (the "University")

- and~ . (the "Student")
Hearing Date: May 9, 2012

Panel Members:
Ms. Roslyn M. Tsao, Banister and Solicitor, Chair
Professor Graeme Hirst, Department of Computer Science, Faculty Panel Member
Ms.Vy Nguyen, Student Panel Member
Appearances:
Mr. Danny Kastner, Associate, Paliare Roland Barristers
Ms. Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel for the University, Paliare Roland Barristers
Mr. Edward F. Hung, Barrister and Solicitor, Counsel for the Student
Ms. ~ . the Student

In Attendance:
Dr. Kristi Gourlay, Manager of Office of Academic Integrity
Mr. Christopher Lang, Director, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances

WRITTEN REASONS

On May 9th, 2012, we heard submissions regarding penalty in this matter. We rendered the
following penalty:
l.

That the Student receive a zero in the course PSY240Hl F;

2.

That the Student be suspended from attendance at the University of Toronto for a period
four (4) months, commencing September 1, 2012 and ending December 31, 2012.

3.

That a notation be placed on the Student's transcript for a period of three (3) years [from
May 9, 2012] to the effect that the Student was suspended from the University for
academic misconduct; and

4.

That a report of the decision be made to the Provost for publication in the University1s
newspaper with the Student1s name withheld.

We also indicated that we would likely provide supplemental written reasons at a later date.
These are those reasons.
The Student was in her second year at the University at the time of the offence.

This was the

Student's first offence.
In considering all the evidence, we view the Student's alteration of her scantron answer card
during the TA review session to have been a deliberate act of academic dishonesty but also an
inexplicable lapse in judgment by the Student. The email which the Student sent to the TA was
an attempt, on second thought, to try to reverse her request for a review of her results. However,
we agree with the University that, at some point, after the allegations were brought to the
Student's attention, she could have taken steps to acknowledge her error in judgment.
We also accept that the one and a half year process has taken a significant toll on the Student and
her family. Although, it may be said that the prolonged nature of this case has been due to the
Student's refusal to acknowledge any wrongdoing, she has indicated her acceptance and respect
of our findings. The goal of specific deterrence has been addressed by the ordeal of the process

on the Student.

The University has fai rl y stated that general deterrence m this case is a

secondary concern.
With respect to the term of suspension, we were not conv inced by the University that we were
bound by other decisions of this tribunal to impose a minimum two year suspension for this type
of offence. There still remains a discretion to consider the Student's personal circumstances and
the other Che/;11 factors. Though pleading guilty may be a mitigati ng factor on penalty, the
converse --- that pleading "not gui lty" is an aggravating factor, in and of itself --- is not
necessarily true.
The Student was enrolled in an exchange program for the summer 2012. Accordingly, we have
decided to structure the four month suspension to commence on September 1st to allow the
Student to complete this exchange program.

(l

I"

Dated at Toronto, this]O day of ✓c-~ , 2012.

Co-Chair

