Case 862

DATE:

   August 23, 2016

PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v Z.Z.

Hearing Date(s):

   July 14, 2016

Panel Members:

   Paul Schabas, Chair
   Chris Koenig-Woodyward, Faculty Member
   Sue Mazzatto, Student Member

Appearances:

   Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Barristers
   Thomas Kierstead, Instructor of the Course
   Kristi Gourlay, Manager, Office of Academic Integrity

In Attendance:

   Christopher Lang, Director, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances

   Student charged with two offences under s. B.i.1(d) , two offences
   under s. B.i.1(b) and, in the alternative, two offences under s.
   B.i.3(b) of the Code . The charges related to allegations that the
   Student submitted two essays for the Course containing many elements of
   plagiarism and unauthorized aid. The Student was not present at the
   hearing. The Panel found that reasonable notice of the hearing had been
   provided, and the hearing continued in the absence of the Student.

   The Student was found guilty of the plagiarism charges under s.
   B.i.1(d) . The Panel accepted evidence regarding the improper
   citations, unattributed sources, and the disparity between the level of
   English between the two essays and between the essays and the Studentâs
   in class work. The second essay appeared to be purchased from a
   commercial provider of essays given the level of professionalism in
   which it was written. The Panel concluded that, on a balance of
   probabilities the essays were not the work of the Student. Having found
   the student guilty of plagiarism, the Panel did not make findings on
   the charges under s. B.i.1(b) and s. B.i.3(b) .

   Though the Panel made no explicit finding that the second essay was
   purchased, the evidence clearly showed that it was a custom written
   essay not written by the Student, and it was therefore reasonable to
   infer that it was purchased. The Panel therefore concluded that it was
   appropriate to consider the jurisprudence on purchased essays in this
   case. The Panel noted that the purchase of essays is among the most
   serious of offences that can be committed in a University setting, and
   that the sanction is generally expulsion. There mitigating factors to
   suggest a lesser penalty; the Student was already aware of concerns
   with the academic integrity of his first essay when the second essay
   was handed in, and the Student was aware of this discipline process but
   chose not to engage. The Panel imposed a grade assignment of zero in
   the Course; a recommendation of expulsion; a permanent notation of the
   expulsion on the Studentâs academic record if the recommendation is
   accepted; a 5-year suspension and notation on the Studentâs academic
   record and transcript pending the Governing Councilâs decision on
   expulsion; and that the case be reported to the Provost for
   publication.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12913
