Case #1023

   DATE : October 21, 2019

   PARTIES : University of Toronto v. D.A-S.

   HEARING DATES : June 24, 2019, July 5, 2019 and July 22, 2019

   Panel Members :
   Mr. Shaun Laubman, Chair
   Professor Dionne Aleman, Faculty Panel Member
   Ms. Elizabeth Frangos, Student Panel Member

   Appearances :
   Ms. Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg
   Rothstein LLP
   Ms. Meg Cormack, Downtown Legal Services

   In Attendance :
   The Student
   Mr. Christopher Lang, Director, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty
   Grievances

   The Student was charged in connection with three separate offences
   under the Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters, 1995 (the â Code â) on
   the basis that she knowingly committed plagiarism in submitting for
   academic credit a lab report and two book reports containing an idea or
   an expression of an idea or the work of another as her own.
   Specifically, the Student was charged with plagiarism under s. B.i.1(d)
   of the Code , and in the alternative, unauthorized assistance under s.
   B.i.1(b) of the Code .

   Regarding the charge of plagiarism in respect of the lab report, the
   Panel heard evidence that the report submitted by the Student received
   a result of 0% when checked using Turnitin.com. The course instructor
   noted that the Studentâs report had been submitted in PDF format and
   had not been read properly. The Student was asked to resubmit the
   report in a readable Word format. This time the report yielded a high
   degree of similarity to a report submitted by a different student for
   the same class the previous year. The course instructor gave evidence
   that he had never seen the extent of overlap that existed between the
   Studentâs report and the one submitted the previous year by a different
   student. The course instructor also compared the original PDF report
   submitted by the Student and the Word version subsequently submitted,
   and noted a number of changes between the two documents. The Tribunal
   accepted that it was reasonable to draw the inference from the evidence
   that the Student made changes to her report in an effort to avoid
   detection. The Student denied that she had plagiarized the report but
   had no credible explanation for the extensive and obvious similarities
   between her lab report and the earlier report that she was accused of
   plagiarizing. The Panel found the Student guilty of plagiarism in
   respect of the lab report.

   Regarding the charge of plagiarism in respect of the first book report,
   the course Professor testified that he had been struck by the
   sophistication of the language used by the Student and the bizarre word
   selection throughout. The Professor did a Google search for reviews of
   the book in question and discovered two reviews on-line with a number
   of passages that were identical to the review submitted by the Student
   except for apparent selective word changes. The Student denied she had
   seen the on-line reviews but had no credible explanation for the
   similarities between those two reviews and her own. The Panel found the
   Student guilty of plagiarism in respect of the first book review.

   For the second book report no source material was presented. The
   Professor gave evidence that he found that the second report used very
   sophisticated terminology. He had searched for a source for the content
   but could not find any. The Student denied any plagiarism. On the
   limited evidence submitted by the University, the Tribunal was not
   satisfied that the charges in respect of the second book report were
   made out. The Student was acquitted of this charge.

   In determining the appropriate sanction, the PanelÂ refused to find the
   fact that the lab report and first book report were worth a relatively
   low percentage of the overall grade in the respective courses to be a
   persuasive factor, in light of the Universityâs submissions regarding
   the seriousness of plagiarism and its impact on the University.Â  The
   Panel noted the following aggravating factors: there were multiple
   offences; the Student deliberately and repeatedly took steps to prevent
   her plagiarism from being detected; the Student exhibited a lack of
   remorse and responsibility for her actions; finally, the Tribunal took
   the view that a penalty of the same or less duration than the Studentâs
   current academic suspension would not have any deterrent effect, and
   anything longer would be unduly harsh and prejudicial

   The Tribunal imposed the following sanctions: a final grade of zero in
   the two affected courses; a four year suspension from the University
   commencing July 22, 2019 and running concurrently with an academic
   suspension; and a notation of the sanction on the Studentâs academic
   record and transcript for a period of five years, commencing July 22,
   2019. The Tribunal also ordered that the case be reported to the
   Provost for publication of a notice of the decision and the sanctions
   imposed, with the name of the Student withheld.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/28692
