THE UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
IN THE MATTER OF charges of academic dishonesty made in June 25, 2005,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on
Academic Matters, 1995,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Act, 1971, S.O. 1971, c. 56 as
amended S.O. 1978, c. 88
B E T W E E N:
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
- and –
The Student

Members of the panel:
•
Mr. Ronald G. Slaght, Q.C., Chair
•
Professor Melanie Woodin, Faculty Panel Member
•
Ms Sujata Pokhrel, Student Panel Member
Appearances:
•
Ms Lily Harmer for the University of Toronto
•

The Student, did not appear

Preliminary
[1]
The Trial Division of the University Tribunal was convened on November 29,
2006 to consider charges under the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on
Academic Matters, 1995 (the “Code”) laid against the student by letter dated May 1,
2006 from Professor Edith Hillan, Vice-Provost, Academic.
[2]
The panel of the Tribunal was made up of Sujata Pokhrel, a student; Melanie
Woodin, a professor; and Ronald G. Slaght, outside legal counsel. Counsel for the
University was Lily Harmer. The student was not represented and did not attend the
hearing.
[3]
Thirty minutes after the time at which the hearing was scheduled to begin, the
student had still failed to appear. The University proposed to proceed in the Student’s
absence and the Tribunal heard submissions.
[4]
Ms Harmer presented the panel with the affidavits of Ms Betty-Ann Campbell, a
Law Clerk in the firm Paliare Roland Rosenberg Rothstein representing the University,
and Ms Lucy Gaspini, Executive Assistant in the Office of the Dean at the University of

38216

-2Toronto at Mississauga. The affidavits describe variously efforts to communicate with
the student, to advise her of the seriousness of the charges and the proceedings of the
Tribunal, to provide her with disclosure, and to provide her with notice of the hearing.
[5]
After considering the University’s proposal, the evidence of the affidavits and the
submissions of counsel, the panel was satisfied that the provisions in the Code and in the
Statutory Powers Procedure Act (“SPPA”) had been met and that the University could
proceed with the hearing in the Student’s absence.
[6]
In arriving at this decision, the panel judged that the content of the Notice and the
timing of its attempted service were reasonable. The question for the panel was: were the
University’s attempts to provide the student with notice reasonable and did they meet the
requirements set out in the Code and in the SPPA?
[7]
In the panel’s judgement, the University’s efforts were reasonable and met the
requirements in the Code and the SPPA. In particular, the panel wishes to note that the
University went beyond the records provided in ROSI (the Repository of Student Information)
including the use of an investigation service and additional postal and email addresses.
[8]
The panel considered the evidence of Ms Campbell’s affidavit concerning a blog
attributed to the student and an email address associated with that blog and is prepared to draw
the inference that the charges and notice emailed to the student were brought to her attention.
In the circumstances, the panel is satisfied that the use of the email address was a reasonable
way to communicate with the student.
[9]
The panel notes that the University might have attempted to find the student’s address
through Ballarat University in Australia where the student was allegedly studying or perhaps
by placing some sign on her blog. However, these considerations ought not to detract from the
reasonable efforts made by the University.
Hearing on the Facts
[10]

38216

The charges are as follows:
(1)

In the winter of 2005, you knowingly represented as your own an idea or
expression of an idea or work of another in connection with your essay
entitled “Roosevelt and The New Deal” submitted for academic credit in
POL478Y5, contrary to section B.I.1(d) of the Code.

(2)

In the winter of 2005, you knowingly submitted your essay entitled
“Roosevelt and The New Deal” containing a purported statement of fact or
reference to a source which has been concocted, contrary to section
B.I.1(f) of the Code.

(3)

In the alternative, in the winter of 2005, you knowingly engaged in a form
of cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or
misrepresentation not otherwise described in the Code in order to obtain
academic credit or other academic advantage of any kind, in connection

-3with your essay entitled “Roosevelt and The New Deal” submitted for
academic credit in POL478Y5, contrary to section B.I.3(b) of the Code.
(4)

In the winter of 2005, you knowingly represented as your own an idea or
expression of an idea or work of another in connection with your
assignment entitled “Globalization and its Discontents – Seminar
Summary” dated March 31, 2005, submitted for academic credit in
POL478Y5, contrary to section B.I.1(d) of the Code.

(5)

In the alternative, in the winter of 2005, you knowingly engaged in a form
of cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or
misrepresentation not otherwise described in the Code in order to obtain
academic credit or other academic advantage of any kind, in connection
with your assignment entitled “Globalization and its Discontents –
Seminar Summary” dated March 31, 2005, submitted for academic credit
in POL478Y5, contrary to section B.I.3(b) of the Code.

(6)

In the winter of 2005, you knowingly represented as your own an idea or
expression of an idea or work of another in connection with your
assignment entitled “Post-War Japan Corporatism – Summary” dated
March 24, 2005, submitted for academic credit in POL478Y5, contrary to
section B.I.1(d) of the Code.

(7)

In the alternative, in the winter of 2005, you knowingly engaged in a form
of cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or
misrepresentation not otherwise described in the Code in order to obtain
academic credit or other academic advantage of any kind, in connection
with your assignment entitled “Post-War Japan Corporatism – Summary”
dated March 24, 2005, submitted for academic credit in POL478Y5,
contrary to section B.I.3(b) of the Code.

(8)

In the winter of 2005, you knowingly represented as your own an idea or
expression of an idea or work of another in connection with your
assignment entitled “‘Keynesianism’ – Summary” dated March 3, 2005,
submitted for academic credit in POL478Y5, contrary to section B.I.1(d)
of the Code.

(9)

In the alternative, in the winter of 2005, you knowingly engaged in a form
of cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or
misrepresentation not otherwise described in the Code in order to obtain
academic credit or other academic advantage of any kind, in connection
with your assignment entitled “‘Keynesianism’ – Summary” dated March
3, 2005, submitted for academic credit in POL478Y5, contrary to section
B.I.3(b) of the Code.

(10) In the winter of 2005, you knowingly represented as your own an idea or
expression of an idea or work of another in connection with your

38216

-4assignment entitled “Hayek and The Fatal Conceit – Summary” dated
January 27, 2005, submitted for academic credit in POL478Y5, contrary
to section B.I.1(d) of the Code.
(11) In the alternative, in the winter of 2005, you knowingly engaged in a form
of cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or
misrepresentation not otherwise described in the Code in order to obtain
academic credit or other academic advantage of any kind, in connection
with your assignment entitled “Hayek and The Fatal Conceit – Summary”
dated January 27, 2005, submitted for academic credit in POL478Y5,
contrary to section B.I.3(b) of the Code.
(12) In the winter of 2005, you knowingly represented as your own an idea or
expression of an idea or work of another in connection with your
assignment entitled “Jurgen Habermas – Lecture Summary” dated
February 10, 2005, submitted for academic credit in POL478Y5, contrary
to section B.I.1(d) of the Code.
(13) In the alternative, in the winter of 2005, you knowingly engaged in a form
of cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or
misrepresentation not otherwise described in the Code in order to obtain
academic credit or other academic advantage of any kind, in connection
with your assignment entitled “Jurgen Habermas – Lecture Summary”
dated February 10, 2005, submitted for academic credit in POL478Y5,
contrary to section B.I.3(b) of the Code.
(14) In the winter of 2005, you knowingly represented as your own an idea or
expression of an idea or work of another in connection with your
assignment entitled “Summary – A Theory of Justice by John Rawls”
dated February 3, 2005, submitted for academic credit in POL478Y5,
contrary to section B.I.1(d) of the Code.
(15) In the alternative, in the winter of 2005, you knowingly engaged in a form
of cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or
misrepresentation not otherwise described in the Code in order to obtain
academic credit or other academic advantage of any kind, in connection
with your assignment entitled “Summary – A Theory of Justice by John
Rawls” dated February 3, 2005, submitted for academic credit in
POL478Y5, contrary to section B.I.3(b) of the Code.
(16) In or about June, 2005, you knowingly engaged in a form of cheating,
academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or misrepresentation not
otherwise described in the Code in order to obtain academic credit or other
academic advantage of any kind in connection with convocation wherein
you claimed to be entitled to graduate with a degree from the University,
when you were not.

38216

-5[11]

Particulars of the charges are as follows:
(1)

You were, at all material times, a student in POL478Y5Y taught by
Professor Day in the fall of 2004 and winter of 2005.

(2)

On or about April 1, 2005 you submitted an essay entitled “Roosevelt and
The New Deal” that contained excerpts and passages that were not written
by you, but were copied without attribution from an internet website found
at: www.grolier.com/wwii/wwii_roosevelt.html.

(3)

Some or all of the citations and references used by you in the essay were
falsified and/or concocted.

(4)

On or about March 31, 2005 you submitted an assignment entitled
“Globalization and its Discontents – Seminar Summary” that contained
excerpts and passages that were not written by you, but were copied
without attribution from an internet website found at:

(5)

www.debunkingeconomics.com/Talks/KeenStiglitzGlobalisation20020928.html.

(6)

On or about March 24, 2005 you submitted an assignment entitled “PostWar Japan Corporatism – Summary” that contained excerpts and passages
that were not written by you, but were copied without attribution from an
internet website found at: sp.mt.tama.hosei.ac.jp/users/aki/chap1.html.

(7)

On or about March 3, 2005 you submitted an assignment entitled
“‘Keynesianism’ – Summary” that contained excerpts and passages that
were not written by you, but were copied without attribution from internet
websites found at:
www.gocities.com/ecocorner/intelarea/mf1.html
www.j-bradforddelong.net/Econ_Articles/Reviews/skidelsky3.html.

38216

(8)

On or about January 27, 2005 you submitted an assignment entitled
“Hayek and The Fatal Conceit – Summary” that contained excerpts and
passages that were not written by you, but were copied without attribution
from
an
internet
website
found
at:
fcpp.org/main/publication_detailed.php?PubID=299.

(9)

On or about February 10, 2005 you submitted an assignment entitled
“Jurgen Habermas – Lecture Summary” that contained excerpts and
passages that were not written by you, but were copied without attribution
from
an
internet
website
found
at:
home.cwru.edu/~ngb2/Authors/habermas.html

-6(10) On or about February 3, 2005 you submitted an assignment entitled
“Summary – A Theory of Justice by John Rawls” that contained excerpts
and passages that were not written by you, but were copied without
attribution
from
an
internet
website
found
at:
www.faithnet.org.uk/A2%20Subjects/Ethics/rawlsjustice.htm.
(11) On or about June 13, 2005 you attended at convocation and made
statements to the University concerning your academic status that were
untrue and which were a form of cheating, academic dishonesty or
misconduct, fraud or misrepresentation in order to obtain an academic
advantage.
(12) In particular, you told the University that you had met with the course
instructor for POL478Y5 on or about June 10, 2005, that the instructor had
given you a mark of 50% in that course, and that you were therefore
eligible to graduate.
(13) Those statements were untrue, academically dishonest, and were
misrepresentations designed to obtain academic advantage, inter alia, by
misleading the University regarding your eligibility to convocate and
obtain a degree from the University. You intended that the University rely
on these statements in order that you might obtain an academic advantage.
[12] The University called three witnesses, Ms Virginia Boon, Professor Richard Day
and Ms Lucy Gaspini.
[13] Ms Boon’s testimony concerned charge #16 and particulars #26, #27 and #28.
The panel heard of the student’s efforts to deceive convocation officials into allowing her
to graduate despite her ineligibility to do so because of outstanding disciplinary charges
against her. These efforts included an attempt to implicate Professor Day in the
deception. The panel also heard that, when those efforts failed, the student attempted to
persuade convocation officials to let her “walk across the stage” as if she were
graduating.
[14] Professor Day’s testimony concerned the balance of the charges and particulars.
The panel heard of Professor Day’s efforts to inform his classes of what constitutes
plagiarism, the elements of proper citation and the consequences of failing to citate
properly.
[15] The panel was presented with a book of documents that included copies of the
student’s allegedly plagiarized essays and assignments together with copies of the
internet sources from which the student had allegedly plagiarized. The panel was invited
to compare the documents as counsel for the University led Professor Day through the
evidence.
[16] Lastly, Ms Gaspini’s testimony addressed several questions the panel had raised
regarding charge #16.

38216

-7Decision of the Tribunal
[17] After deliberation, the panel was satisfied that counsel for the University had
proved all charges on clear and compelling evidence. The panel was also satisfied that the
student had received fair instruction and warning on plagiarism and citation.
[18] The panel notes that the essay which was the subject of charges #1, #2 and #3
represents a clear and very serious case of plagiarism and concoction.
[19] The panel is also satisfied that the small assignments that were the subject of
charges #4 to #15 were also plagiarised.
[20] Similarly, the panel is satisfied on the evidence regarding charge #16 and
accordingly finds the student guilty of the charges before her.
Penalty Phase
[21]

The University submitted that the appropriate penalty in the circumstances is:

(1)
That the Tribunal recommend to the President of the University of
Toronto that the student be expelled from the University; and
(2)
That the Student be suspended from the University for a period of five
years pending the decision of the President.
[22] In addition, the University requests that a report of the decision be made to the
Provost for publication in the University’s newspapers with the Student’s name withheld.
[23] The University called one witness, Professor Roger Beck, Dean’s Designate for
Academic Discipline at the University of Toronto, Mississauga.
[24] Through Professor Beck’s testimony the panel learned of a prior plagiarism
offence to which the student had pleaded guilty in June of 2004. For this offence, the
student had received a zero on the assignment in question and a stern warning that any
future offences would be dealt with more severely.
[25] The University placed a Book of Authorities before the panel so that they might
have an opportunity to review several decisions of other panels of the University Tribunal
in similar cases. In particular, the panel reviewed the criteria for sanction first proposed
by the late and former Mr. Justice Sopinka in the matter of the appeal of Mr. C.(
November 5, 1976). According to these guidelines, the Tribunal should consider the
following six criteria when deciding on an appropriate sanction:

38216

(1)

the character of the person charged;

(2)

the likelihood of a repetition of the offence;

(3)

the nature of the offence committed;

-8(4)

any extenuating circumstances surrounding the commission of the offence;

(5)

the detriment to the university occasioned by the offence;

(6)

the need to deter others from committing a similar offence.

[26] In addition, the University highlighted the importance, in its opinion, of students
showing insight and remorse as part of the University’s efforts to rehabilitate academic
relationships. Counsel for the University argued that the student had failed to exhibit
either of these qualities and instead had ignored and walked away from the process.
Counsel also noted that the student was not present at the hearing to help the panel with
their questions or to explain her behaviour and present any mitigating evidence.
Sanction and Reasons
[27]

The panel imposes the following sanction and offers the following reasons:

At the conclusion of the hearing in this matter on November 29, 2006 we found
the student, The Student, guilty of the charges brought against her by the
University. The student had not appeared at the hearing, and after evidence,
submission and deliberations we had found the student had been provided with
reasonable notice of the hearing. We then heard evidence from witnesses and
reviewed the documents in issue and concluded that The Student had been
guilty of 7 acts of plagiarism and one further act, essentially a fraud, in
attempting to convocate and mislead those officials responsible for the
convocation exercise.
Following submissions about penalty including a review of Tribunal Decisions
about sanctions, we deliberated and decided that the student should be expelled
from the University. We determined to give reasons for that decision on
penalty following additional consideration. These are those reasons.
Our findings and conclusions on the issue of guilt or innocence of the student
are found in our reasons on that aspect of this matter. In short, The Student,
who was a fourth year student, committed serious acts of plagiarism in a major
essay and a series of short papers.
Although the student’s actions remained under review and procedures had been
instituted under the University Code, the student had subsequently attended at
convocation and advised that she had met with the course instructor about the
issues and that the instructor had given her a pass, and she was therefore
entitled to graduate. As a result of various last minute checks, these statements
were determined to be untrue, and the student did not participate in
convocation.
We were advised at the outset of submissions on penalty that this was in fact a
second offence, in that in 2004 the student had committed an act of plagiarism
in a third year course and had been assigned a mark of zero. In the course of

38216

-9the hearing into the issue of notice we reviewed the attempts by the University
to provide The Student with notice of these proceedings. We had been
provided with evidence from a “blog” which we are satisfied was that of The
Student, on which the student commented on her earlier acknowledgement of
plagiarism, that plagiarism was relatively easy to accomplish and the only issue
was whether one got caught.
Of course of interest to us was that the student did not attend the hearing,
completely ignored the process, has taken no responsibility for any of the
actions that were proved in the evidence, is not here to provide us with any
evidence or submissions that might be taken into account by the panel in
mitigation of what appeared to us to be purposeful, frequent and blatant acts of
plagiarism and a final act of fraud, destructive of University values.
It was apparent to the panel that taking all matters into account, the appropriate
penalty was either that of the lengthiest suspension from the University that the
panel has jurisdiction to impose, a five year suspension, or the ultimate penalty,
a recommendation that the student be expelled from the University. We did
consider that the student was in her fourth year, and although she had
committed an act of plagiarism in her third year, and as outlined above, very
serious acts of academic dishonesty in her fourth year, nonetheless, if expelled,
she would be deprived of any opportunity to obtain her degree after several
years of attendance at the institution.
At the same time however having regard to the student’s failure to attend,
apparent disdain for the values of the University as represented by her
comments on her blog, and the fact that she appeared impervious to the
influences of University life, the core values of the University and the need for
honesty in student life during her years at this institution, our ultimate
conclusion was that the matter of the student’s seniority should count against
her rather than be taken into account in amelioration of any penalty.
The Tribunal has long considered a number of criteria in assessing penalty in
its cases, including whatever evidence there may be attesting to the character of
the person who is charged with the offence, the nature of the offence,
deterrence, harm to the University and any surrounding circumstances that
could be considered in mitigation or aggravation of the offence.
Taking these factors into account in this case, the panel concluded that the
appropriate penalty is in fact expulsion of this student from the University
community.
Nothing was provided to us in mitigation, the acts which we found to have
been committed were systematic, calculated and carried out over a period of
time. This was the second offence. The student ultimately attempted to
graduate under a further series of false statements and subterfuge.

38216

- 10 In the result, the penalty in this matter will be:
a) The student will be assigned a mark of zero for the course.
b) There will be publication of the sanction and decision in the University
publication with The Student’s name withheld.
c) A recommendation shall be forwarded to the Governing Council for The
Student’s expulsion from the University of Toronto.

February 15, 2007
Date

38216

“Mr. Ronald G. Slaght”__
Chair

