Case #439

   DATE: February 15, 2007
   PARTIES: University of Toronto v. The Student
   Hearing Date(s): November 29, 2006
   Panel Members:
   Mr. Ronald G. Slaght, Q.C., Chair
   Professor Melanie Woodin, Faculty Panel Member
   Ms. Sujata Pokhrel, Student Panel Member
   Appearances:
   Ms. Lily Harmer for the University of Toronto
   The Student, did not appear
   Trial Division - s. B.i.1(d) and s. B.i.1(f) of Code - plagiarism and
   concoction - course work - fraud in attempting to convocate â hearing
   not attended â reasonable notice of hearing â see Code and the
   Statutory Powers Procedure Act â finding of guilt - second academic
   offence â blog demonstrated distain for university values â academic
   status counted against rather than ameliorated penalty â no evidence of
   extenuating circumstances â systematic and calculated acts over a
   period of time - attempt to graduate under false statements and
   subterfuge â grade assignment of zero for course; recommendation that
   the Student be expelled as per s. C.ii.(b)(i) of Code; and report to
   Provost
   Student charged with seven offences under s. B.i.1(d), one offence
   under s. B.i.1(f), and alternatively, with seven offences under s.
   B.i.3(b) of the Code. The charges related to allegations that the
   Student committed acts of plagiarism and concoction in a major essay,
   and plagiarism in a series of short papers, and that she committed a
   fraud by attempting to convocate and mislead convocation officials. The
   Student did not attend and was not represented at the hearing. The
   Panel considered whether the Universityâs attempts to provide the
   Student with notice was reasonable and whether they met the
   requirements set out in the Code and the Statutory Powers Procedure
   Act. The Panel noted that the University went beyond the records
   provided in ROSI and found that that the charges and notice emailed to
   the Student were brought to her attention and that the use of the email
   address was a reasonable way to communicate with her. The Panel noted
   that the University might have attempted to find the Studentâs address
   through the foreign university where she was studying or through her
   blog. The Panel considered evidence from witnesses and reviewed the
   documents in issue and found that the Student had been guilty of the 7
   acts of plagiarism and of fraudulently attempting to convocate. The
   Student had previously been sanctioned for an act of plagiarism. The
   Panel considered evidence from a âblogâ and found that the Student had
   written the blog, on which she had commented on her earlier
   acknowledgement of plagiarism and the ease with which it was
   accomplished. The Panel considered the Studentâs academic status and
   found that her seniority should count against her rather than
   ameliorate any penalty because she had failed to attend the hearing,
   demonstrated disdain for the values of the University, and appeared
   impervious to the influences of University life, the core values of the
   University and the need for honesty in student life. The Panel found
   that there was nothing provided in mitigation; the acts committed were
   systematic, calculated and carried out over a period of time; the
   offence was the Studentâs second; and she attempted to graduate under a
   further series of false statements and subterfuge. The Panel imposed a
   recommendation to the President, further to s. C.ii.(b)(i) of the Code,
   that the Student be expelled from the University; a grade of zero in
   the course; and that a report be issued to the Provost.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/28431
