UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
GOVERNING COUNCIL

Rep01i #342 of the Academic Appeals Committee
August 3, 2010
The Academic Appeals Committee reports that it held a hearing on Wednesday, June 23, 2010,
at which the following were present:
Assistant Dean Kate Hilton, Chair
Professor William Gough
Professor Faye Mishna
Professor Sarita Verma
Mr. Olivier Sorin
Ms. Natalie Ramtahal, Coordinator, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances
In attendance:
For the Student Appellant:

Mr. M■ za (the "Student")
Mr. Daniel Goldbloom, Downtown Legal Services (counsel for the Student)
For the University of Toronto, Faculty of Applied Science and Engineering:

Professor Tom Coyle
Mr. Adam Fox
I.

Preliminary Motion

The Faculty of Applied Science and Engineering ("Engineering") made a preliminary motion
requesting that the names of any staff members from Engineering be removed from this decision,
and replaced with position titles or by "the Faculty", in recognition of the fact that all such staff
would have been acting in their capacity as representatives of the Faculty and not as individuals.
The motion was granted.
II.

The Appeal

The Student is appealing the decision of the Academic Appeals Board ("AAB") at Engineering,
dated August 13, 2009, which denied his petition for late withdrawal without academic penalty
from ECE530 and his request for aegrotat standing in ECE417, ECE422, ECE496 and SOCIO!,
courses taken in the 2009 Winter session.

III.

Facts

The Student commenced his studies at Engineering in the 2004 Fall session. In 2004-05, the
Student obtained an annual GP A of 3 .62, earning honours standing in the fall and winter tern1s.
In 2005-06, the Student obtained an annual GPA of3.33, earning honours standing in the winter
tern1. In 2006-07, the Student obtained an annual GPA of2.84.
In 2007-08, the Student did not enroll in any courses, as he was participating in a Professional
Experience Year Internship Program. During this year, the Student began to struggle with his
mental health, and in the spring of 2008, he was diagnosed as suffering from anxiety and
depression. In July 2008, the Student began taking medication (Sertraline) to control his
symptoms.
The Student completed his internship and returned to Engineering in the 2008 Fall session.
Despite the medication, the Student continued to struggle with the symptoms of his anxiety and
depression, which included insomnia, loss of appetite, anxiety attacks and poor concentration.
I-le also experienced significant side effects from his medication, including nausea, dizziness,
headaches and diarrhea. I-le stopped taking his medication in October 2008.
The Student's mental health problems significantly affected his academic performance. After
the December 2008 examination period, the Student petitioned the Examinations Committee for
aegrotat standing based on medical grounds. The petition was successful and the Student
received aegrotat standing in three courses (ECE316, ECE345 and ECE4 l 0). The remaining two
courses in which the Shident had been enrolled in the 2008 Fall session were full-year courses
(ECE496 and SOC l 0 l ), and did not yet have final grades assigned.
In the 2009 Winter session, the Stndent continued to take courses, but his health problems
persisted. The Sh1dent's anxiety was particularly acute during the examination period, and he
did not perform well. The Student's sessional GPA for the 2009 Winter session was 1.71, which
lowered his cumulative GPA from 3.26 to 2.97.
Despite his difficulties, the Student continued with his shidies. Over the course of the 2009-10
academic year, he was much more successful in managing his illness, and his academic
performance stabilized. At the end of the 2010 Winter session, the Student obtained an ammal
GPA of 3.5, and earned honours standing.
IV.

Previous Decisions

In May 2009, the Student petitioned the Examinations Committee seeking relief in the five
courses that he had completed in the 2009 Winter session. I-le requested late withdrawal without
academic penalty for ECE530 (in which he had received a failing grade) and aegrotat standing in
ECE417, ECE422, ECE496 and SOCIO!.
On June 2, 2009, the Examinations Committee rejected the Student's requests for late
withdrawal without academic penalty and for aegrotat standing. Instead, the Examinations
Committee decided to waive the 60% rule, which states that students may only advance to the

2

next year of the program if they have achieved an annual average of 60% or higher. The decision
read:
Your petition has been reviewed and you have been given accommodation by the
Committee on Examinations. The less than 60% rule has been waived and you
have been given permission to continue to the next term in order to complete your
degree requirements.
No additional reasons for the decision were given. However, in its response to this appeal,
Engineering stated that the Examinations Committee had waived the promotional requirement in
recognition of the fact that the student had "experienced encumbrance during the academic
session".
The Student appealed the decision of the Examinations Committee to the Academic Appeals
Board at Engineering. On August 17, 2009, the Academic Appeals Board upheld the decision of
the Examinations Committee. The decision, in its entirety, read as follows:
The Faculty of Applied Science and Engineering's Academic Appeals Board met
on August 13, 2009 to review the appeal that you submitted to the Office of the
Registrar. While the Academic Appeals Board acknowledges your request for
special consideration and is sympathetic towards your difficult circumstances, the
Board decided to uphold the Committee on Examinations' earlier decision and
recommends no change be made to your academic record.
On November 12, 2009, the Student appealed to the Academic Appeals Committee of the
Governing Council.

V.

Decision

The main issue in this case is whether or not Engineering applied its policy on aegrotat standing
appropriately, in light of the Student's medical issues.
The University of Toronto policy on Grading Practices defines aegrotat as follows:

AEG: Aegrotat standing granted on the basis of term work and medical or similar
evidence.
AEG is assigned by a divisional committee upon approval of a student's petition.
It carries credit for the course but is not considered for averaging purposes.
Engineering uses the University's definition of aegrotat in its Academic Regulations.
There was considerable discussion during the course of the hearing about Engineering's practice
with respect to granting aegrotat. To summarize, Engineering regards aegrotat as an
extraordinary remedy, used most appropriately in situations where a student experiences a
radical change in academic performance as a result of an unforeseen event, such as an illness.

3

Typically, Engineering regards such events as taking place within a defined and limited time
period. Therefore, while a student might obtain aegrotat standing in two successive semesters,
this would occur only in very rare circumstances. Chronic illnesses, in Engineering's view, do
not merit the remedy of aegrotat standing since the symptoms are foreseeable and can be
managed with appropriate planning and effort.
In this case, Engineering was prepared to grant aegrotat standing in the 2008 Fall term, in
recognition of the fact that the Student's symptoms intensified unexpectedly during this period
(particularly in reaction to his medication) and that he struggled to fulfill his academic
requirements while managing his new illness. However, by the 2009 Winter term, Engineering
was no longer prepared to grant aegrotat standing because it viewed the Student's symptoms as
chronic. The Faculty expressed the concern that the Student's request for aegrotat standing in
the 2009 Winter term indicated the Student's belief that a remedy of aegrotat would be available
"in perpetuity".
This Committee is of the view that Engineering's policy on aegrotat was applied incorrectly in
this case. First, while this Committee accepts Engineering's position that aegrotat is intended to
address the academic consequences of unexpected events, it does not accept that such events will
always fall neatly into a single academic term. Second, this Committee does not accept
Engineering's interpretation that aegrotat standing should be available in cases of acute but not
chronic illness. This interpretation is not supported by Engineering's policy, and if adopted,
would disadvantage students suffering from chronic illnesses; such illnesses may flare up
unexpectedly and cause disruptions in academic performance that should attract a remedy of
aegrotat. Finally, this Committee recommends that Engineering's practice with respect to
granting aegrotat standing should be incorporated into Engineering's policy and printed in the
Academic Regulations so that it is available to all students.
In this case, the onset of the Student's depression and anxiety occurred over a number of months
and affected his perfotmance for an entire academic year. To extend the remedy of aegrotat for
the first tenn and withhold it in the second term seems arbitrary and unfair, pmiicularly in the
case ofECE496 and SOCIO, the Student's two full-year courses. Moreover, this Committee has
the advantage of additional evidence that was not before the Academic Appeals Board: the
Student's updated transcript, which clearly demonstrates the impact of the Student's illness over
the course of a full academic year, and also his subsequent success in managing his symptoms
and returning to expected levels of academic performance.
The Student also raised the argument that he had been denied procedural fairness by the
Academic Appeals Board by their failure to give reasons for their decision. While it was not
necessary to decide this issue, this Committee was struck by the complete absence of reasons in
the Academic Appeals Board's decision, also in the decision of the Examinations Committee.
This Committee notes that students have a reasonable expectation that they will be provided with
reasons for such decisions, and that the failure to provide reasons can taint decisions with the
appearance of unfairness.

4

For all of these reasons, this Committee is of the view that it would have been appropriate to
grant the Student's request for late withdrawal without academic penalty for ECE530 and
aegrotat standing in ECE417, ECE422, ECE496 and SOCIO!.
The appeal is allowed.

5

