Report #342

   DATE: August 3, 2010
   PARTIES: M.Z.Â  (the Student) v. UTSC
   Hearing Date(s): June 23, 2010
   Committee Members:
   Kate Hilton, Chair
   Professor William Gough
   Professor Faye Mishna
   Sarita Verma
   Dr. Olivier Sorin
   Appearances:
   For the Student Appellant:
   M.Z. (the Student)
   Daniel Goldbloom, DLS for the Student
   For the University of Toronto, Faculty of Applied Science and
   Engineering:
   Professor Tom Coyle
   Adam Fox
   University of Toronto, Faculty of Applied Science and Engineering â
   late withdrawal without academic penalty â aegrotat standing â medical
   grounds â mental health problems â anxiety â depression â examination
   period â Examination Committee â 60% rule â Academic Appeals Board â
   academic history â chronic illness â foreseeability of illness â
   aegrotat standing in cases of chronic illness â aegrotat standing
   granted previously â Faculty policy â policy applied incorrectly â
   unfair and arbitrary application of policy â impact of the Studentâs
   illness â procedural fairness â reasonable expectation to be provided
   with reasons for decision â appearance of unfairness â appeal allowed
   Appeal of a decision of the Academic Appeals Board to deny the Student
   his petition for late withdrawal without academic penalty for a course
   and to deny his request for aegrotat standing in four courses. The
   Studentâs petition to the Examinations Committee seeking late
   withdrawal without academic penalty and aegrotat standing was denied.
   The Examinations Committee instead waived the 60% rule, a rule that
   stated students may only advance to the next year of their program if
   they had achieved an annual average of 60% or higher. No additional
   reasons were given. The Studentâs appeal to the Academic Appeals Board
   was further denied. The appeal to the Academic Appeals Committee
   related to the issue of whether or not the Faculty of Applied Science
   and Engineering applied its policy on aegrotat standing appropriately
   in light of the Studentâs medical issues. The Committee reviewed the
   Studentâs academic and medical history, including symptoms from the
   Studentâs documented diagnoses of anxiety and depression and the side
   effects the Student experienced from medication. The Committee further
   reviewed previous instances of the Student receiving aegrotat standing
   in courses based on medical grounds. The Committee then considered the
   University of Toronto policy on Grading Practices and aegrotat
   standing. The Faculty of Applied Science and Engineering submitted that
   aegrotat is an extraordinary remedy used appropriately in situations
   where a student experiences a radical change in academic performance as
   a result of an unforeseen event. The Faculty did not view chronic
   illnesses as meriting the remedy of aegrotat standing as, in the
   Facultyâs view, the symptoms of chronic illness are foreseeable and can
   be managed with planning and effort. The Faculty had previously granted
   aegrotat standing in a previous term in recognition of the fact the
   Studentâs symptoms intensified unexpectedly during the previous period.
   The Faculty expressed the concern that granting aegortat standing would
   support the Studentâs belief that the remedy of aegrotat would be
   always available. The Committee found the Faculty applied the policy on
   aegrotat incorrectly. The Committee accepted the Facultyâs position
   that aegrotat is intended to address consequences of unexpected events.
   The Committee did not, though, accept that the Facultyâs interpretation
   that aegrotat should be available in cases of acute but not chronic
   illness. The Committee recommended that the Facultyâs practices with
   respect to granting aegrotat standing should be incorporated into the
   Facultyâs policy and printed in the Academic Regulations so it would be
   available to all students. The Committee reviewed the case and found
   the Studentâs medical issues occurred over a number of months and
   affected the Studentâs performance for an entire academic year. The
   Committee found the Facultyâs denial unfair and arbitrary. The
   Committee took into account the Studentâs updated transcript, which was
   unavailable at the time of the Academic Appeals Boardâs decision. This
   transcript, in the Committeeâs view, demonstrated the impact of the
   Studentâs illness. The Committee further reviewed the Studentâs
   argument that he had been denied procedural fairness by the Academic
   Appeal Boardâs failure to give reasons for their decision. The
   Committee found it unnecessary to decide on this issue, but noted the
   complete absence of reasons in both the Examinations Committeeâs and
   Academic Appeals Boardâs decisions. The Committee further noted that
   students have a reasonable expectation to be provided with reasons for
   decisions and that a failure to provide reasons could taint decisions
   with the appearance of unfairness. The Committee found it appropriate
   to grant the Student his request for late withdrawal without academic
   penalty and aegrotat standing for the requested courses. Appeal
   allowed.
   [1]View Report

References

   1. file:///media/12669
