Report #356

   DATE: July 26, 2011
   PARTIES: R.J.,Â  (the Student) v. the Faculty of Arts and Science
   Hearing Date(s): June 24, 2011
   Committee Members:
   Prof. Markus Dubber, Chair
   Prof. Elizabeth Smyth
   Mr. james Park
   Appearances:
   For the Student Appellant:
   Ms. R.J. (the Student)
   For the University:
   Ms. Cheryl Shook
   Prof. Anne-Marie Brousseau

   Faculty of Arts and Science â request to re-write final examination â
   claimed disruptive condition at the exam â WC attempted to address the
   Studentâs concern on the day of the exam â Committee satisfied with the
   effort and found no evidence of disruptive condition â medical
   certificates did not indicate a sufficiently severe medical condition â
   Student had the option to take a different course that would allow her
   to later join FAS programs â Committee encouraged the Student to seek
   academic support â appeal dismissed

   Request to re-write a final examination. The Student made the request
   on various grounds, primarily focusing on the âunregulated environmentâ
   of the exam including loud noises and the âunmannerlyâ conduct of other
   students. Woodsworth College attempted to address the Studentâs concern
   on the day of the exam and suggested that the Student petition for
   deferral if she found their efforts unsatisfactory. No other student
   among the 150 who wrote the exam made a complaint. The Committee was
   satisfied by the great care exercised by Woodsworth College in
   addressing her case and found that there was no evidence of the
   disruptive condition claimed by the Student. The Committee also found
   that the medical certificates submitted by the Student did not indicate
   a medical condition of sufficient severity that would have allowed her
   to defer the exam on medical grounds. The Committee noted that the
   Academic Bridging Program was designed to prepare students to function
   within the regular curriculum in the Faculty of Arts & Science; even
   though the Student failed the course and was not permitted to retake
   the course, the Student had the option to take another course which
   would allow her to demonstrate the requisite academic maturity and
   skills to join FAS programs. The Committee stated its sympathy for the
   Studentâs case and strongly encouraged the Student to avail herself to
   the academic support at the Academic Bridging Program. Appeal
   dismissed.
   [1]View Report

References

   1. file:///media/12600
