THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
THE GOVERNING COUNCIL
Repmi #356 of the Academic Appeals Committee
July 26, 2011
To the Academic Board
University of Toronto
Your Committee reports that it held a hearing on Friday, June 24,201 l, at which the
following members were present:
Professor Marln1s Dubber, Chair
Professor Elizabeth Smyth
Mr. James Park
Secretary: Christopher Lang, Director, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty
Grievances
Appearances:
For the Student Appellant:
Ms.R

J

, ("the Student")

For the University of Toronto:
Ms. Cheryl Shook, Registrar, Woodsworth College, University of Toronto
Professor Anne-Marie Brousseau, Associate Dean, Undergraduate Academic Programs,
Faculty of Arts & Science, University of Toronto

I.

Appeal

The Student appeals a decision of the Faculty of Arts & Science Appeals Committee,
dated October 18, 2010, denying her appeal from a decision by the Principal of
Woodsworth College of September 28, 2009, which in turn had confinned the decision
by the Academic Bridging Special Considerations Committee at Woodsworth College of
June 30, 2009, not to allow her to rewrite the final examination in ENG185YlIntroduction to the Study of Literature (June 9, 2009).
The Student seeks the remedy of being petmitted to rewrite sections B and C of the exam.

1

II,

Facts

The Student was enrolled in the Woodsworth College Academic Bridging Program. The
exam in question was the final examination in the Bridging Program course ENG l 85Y 1.
The exam consisted of three parts (A, B, C); the Student completed only part A, worth
one-third of the final mark of the exam, receiving a mark of 16 out of 33, or 48%. The
Student's rewrite request, at various stages, has been based on four grounds: (1) the exam
tested materials not covered in the class, (2) the "unregulated environment" of the exam,
including loud noises and the "unmam1erly" cond11ct of other students, (3) unspecified
security reasons, and (4) her status as an overachiever.
At the hearing before your Committee, the Student primarily addressed her second
argument. In support, the Student has produced three University of Tornnto Medical
Certificates, dated October 22, 2009 (#!), November 2, 2009 (#2), and October 4, 2010
(#3), respectively. None of these certificates was available to the persons and c.ommittees
who considered the case previously, including most recently the Faculty of Arts &
Science Academic Appeals Board; the third and final medical certificate was entered into
the record at the oral hearing before the Academic Appeal Committee.

III.

Decision

This case was considered with great care by the Academic Bridging Prngram at
Woodsworth College, the Principal ofWoodsworth College, and eventually the Faculty
of Atis & Science Academic Appeals Board. We see no reason to disturb the findings
and conclusions reached by those who already have so ably and sympathetically weighed
the merits of this matter. Woodsworth College attempted to address the Student's
concerns on the day of the exam, and suggested that she petition for a deferral of the
exam in the event she found their efforts unsatisfactory at the time. No other student
among the 150 or so taking the exam on that day lodged a complaint about exam
conditions. A subsequent investigation into the circumstances sunounding the exam did
not produce evidence of inappropriately disruptive conditions.
The medical certificates, all submitted since the decision of the Fac11lty of Arts & Science
Academic Appeals Board, do not affect our decision. As the Student herself repeatedly
emphasized during the oral hearing, they do not indicate a medical condition of sufficient
severity that was either present at the beginning of the exam or developed during the
exam that would have wananted a deferral on medical grnunds. They document
diagnoses of headaches in 2004, 2005, 2006, 2007 (#1), in 2005 (#2), and in 2004 (#3),
respectively, significantly before the exam in question.
The Academic Bridging Program is designed to prepare students to function within the
regular cuniculum in the Faculty of Alis & Science, The Student has been offered the
option of taking an additional course in the Academic Bridging Program to qualify for
admission in the Faculty of A11s & Science, While students in the Academic Bridging
Program are not permitted to retake a course, the Registrar of Woodswo11h College
suggested that the Student instead email in another course, which would allow her to

2

explore her interest in literature. Her performance in that course, then, would allow her
to demonstrate the requisite academic maturity and skills to join FAS programs.
While we dismiss the Student's appeal, we are extremely sympathetic to her case and
strongly encourage her to avail herself of the support offered by the excellent academic
suppmi staff of the Academic Bridging Program at Woodsworih College. In this way,
she will have an opportunity to continue on her journey to maximizing and fulfilling her
potential.

3

