Case 488

DATE:

   November 14, 2007

PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v. Mr. S.B.

Hearing Date(s):

   September 6, 2007

Panel Members:

   Mr. Raj Anand, Chair
   Prof. Bruno Magliocchetti, Faculty Panel Member
   Mr. Christopher Oates, Student Panel Member

Appearances:

   Ms. Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel for the University
   Mr. Steve Frankel, Law Student, Counsel for the Student
   Mr. S.B., the Student

In Attendance:

   Dr. Kristina Gourlay, Manager, Office of Student Academic Integrity
   Mr. Mike Nicholson, Office of Student Academic Integrity

   Student charged under s. B.i.1(d), s. B.i.1(f), and alternatively,
   under s. B.i.3(b) of the Code. The charges related to allegations that
   the Student submitted a plagiarized research paper, portions of which
   were reproduced verbatim from unacknowledged internet sources, and
   which contained a personal interview which had been concocted as a
   source of research. The Student pleaded not guilty to the charges. The
   Student did not submit a required signed declaration attesting to his
   knowledge and compliance with plagiarism guidelines. The Panel
   considered the testimony of the course professor and found that there
   were extensive similarities between the Studentâs research paper and
   several internet websites, and that many citations to print material
   contained within the paper did not correspond with the actual texts
   cited. At a Deanâs meeting, the Student originally denied any
   misconduct but offered to plead guilty if the University would agree to
   resolve the issue at the decanal level. The University argued that the
   extensive similarity between the internet source and the Studentâs
   paper established that the personal interview had been concocted. The
   Student testified that he had interviewed a Buddhist monk as part of
   his research and that the monk had memorized the internet source and
   then repeated the words to the Student during the interview. The
   Student also claimed that the monk had read text from a piece of paper
   which was taken from the internet. The Student claimed that he did not
   think it was necessary to submit the required signed declaration
   regarding plagiarism because it should have been obvious to the course
   professor that he had not plagiarized. The Student claimed that he had
   been prepared to plead guilty at a Deanâs meeting because he perceived
   the Deanâs Designate to be a holy man who would bless him through
   punishment and because he wanted to avoid the shame of going before the
   Tribunal. The Panel found that staffing issues may have contributed to
   the delay between the date that the offence was committed and the date
   of the Deanâs meeting with the Student regarding the allegations. The
   Panel found that the Studentâs explanations for the similarities
   between the paper and internet sources were not credible and that the
   sources were concocted because the citations did not match up to the
   sources cited. The Panel found the Student guilty of the charges under
   s. B.i.1(d) and s. B.i.1(f). The Student had committed two prior
   plagiarism offences. The Panel found that the Student provided
   inadequate responses to all previous and present charges against him
   and that apart from the Studentâs personal circumstances, there was no
   evidence in favour of his character. The Panel found that the offence
   was the third of the same kind, and was committed while the notation on
   the Studentâs transcript from the second offence was still outstanding
   and after he had received instructions on how to avoid repeating the
   offence. The Panel found that the offences went to the heart of the
   Universityâs trust relationship and were increasingly prevalent and
   more easily detected with the availability of the internet. The Panel
   found that there was a gap in causation between the Studentâs
   responsibilities as a parent of two disabled children and the
   commission of the dishonest acts as a student. There was no evidence of
   the impact of the Studentâs personal situation on the Student himself,
   or which tied his situation to a propensity for dishonest or irrational
   behaviour. The Panel found that the four-and-a-half-year delay in
   prosecuting the charges were not significant in terms of penalty. There
   was no evidence as to why the Student was not in class for a period of
   time. The Panel, as per the case of Mr. S. (August 24, 2007), attached
   no significance to the voluntary absence during the time span of the
   charges. There was no motion to dismiss the charges and no protest or
   warning of reliance on delay by the Student until the penalty phase of
   the hearing. The Panel considered the case of Mr. S. and the case of
   Mr. L. (August 13, 2007) and found that despite the charges pending
   against the Student for at least two years, the penalty should not be
   back dated. The Panel found that the Universityâs credibility, academic
   mission and degrees could be harmed by the commission of plagiarism and
   concoction. The Panel found that Tribunal decisions should send the
   message that academic cheating would be met with signification
   sanctions. The Panel found that the Universityâs submission on should
   be accepted. The Panel considered previous Tribunal cases and found
   that a serious breach of trust such as plagiarism and/or concoction
   should evoke a response of at least a two-year suspension for a first
   offence and a three year or longer suspension on a subsequent finding.
   The Panel considered the Studentâs academic status relative to
   graduation and found that no evidence was called regarding the academic
   consequences of different potential penalties. The Panel observed that
   greater assistance, in the form of an agreed chart or statement
   concerning the implications of penalties, would help the Tribunal. The
   Panel imposed a grade of zero in the course; a three-year suspension; a
   four-year notation on the Studentâs academic record and transcript (or
   until graduation, whichever was to occur first); and that a report be
   issued to the Provost.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12710
