Case #478

   DATE: October 6, 2008
   PARTIES: University of Toronto v. Mr. S.M.
   Hearing Date(s): September 24, 2008
   Panel Members:
   John A. Keefe, Chair
   Professor Bruno Magliochetti, Faculty Member
   Ms. Marisa Maharaj, Student Panel Member
   Appearances:
   Jennifer Murdock and Michael Hamilton from DLS for Mr. S.M., the
   Student (not in attendance)
   Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel for the University
   Trial Division â s. B.i.1.(a) of CodeÂ  â forgery of documents â
   altered Scantron form submitted for re-grading â Agreed Statement of
   Facts â guilty plea â wrongdoing acknowledged when confronted with
   allegation â third academic offence â cooperation with discipline
   process - psychological condition and family distress â sentencing
   principle â see R. v. Michael Tsicos â Joint Submission on Penalty
   accepted â grade assignment of zero for the course; three-year
   suspension; four-year notation on transcript or until graduation; and
   report to Provost
   Student charged with two offences under s. B.i.1.(a) of the Code. The
   charges related to allegations that the Student altered or falsified a
   mid-term Scantron answer form and re-submitted the altered or falsified
   mid-term test for academic credit. The matter proceeded based on an
   Agreed Statement of Facts and a Joint Submission on Penalty. The
   Student pleaded guilty to the first offence under s. B.i.1.(a)Â  of the
   Code. The Panel found that the facts supported the finding of a
   contravention of the Code as set out in the charge. The Panel found
   that the Student acknowledged his wrongdoing at an early opportunity
   when confronted with the allegation. The Student was represented by
   counsel but did not attend the hearing due to his psychological
   condition and no witnesses were called to present character evidence.
   The Panel considered the fact that the offence was the Studentâs third
   involving similar schemes of academic dishonesty, as well as the
   Studentâs guilty plea and his cooperation with the proceedings. The
   Panel accepted the principle set out in R. v. Michael Tsicos and found
   that the agreed sanction was appropriate. The Committee noted that but
   for the mitigating circumstances, including the guilty plea, the
   Studentâs psychological condition and family distress, the penalty
   would have been more severe. The Panel imposed a grade of zero in the
   course; a three-year suspension; a four-year notation on the Studentâs
   academic record and transcript (or until graduation, whichever was to
   occur first); and that a report be issued to the Provost.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12705
