Cases 734 & 735

DATE:

   October 2, 2014

PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v Z.G., M.S.

Hearing Date(s):

   July 18, 2014

Panel Members:

   Bernard Fishbein, Chair
   Kathi Wilson, Faculty Member
   Michael Dick, Student Member

Appearances:

   Tina Lie, Assistant Discipline Counsel
   Samuel Greene, DLS, for the Student
   Lucy Gaspini, Manager, Academic Integrity and Affairs, University of
   Toronto Mississauga
   Mircea Voda, Course Instructor
   Yvette Ye, Undergraduate Counsellor

In Attendance:

   Christopher Lang, Director, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances

Not in Attendance:

   Student 1 (ZG)
   Student 2 (MS)
   The Panel first addressed whether to proceed in the Studentsâ absence
   and whether to hear the matters together. Panel was satisfied that the
   Students had reasonable notice of the hearing and had been served, in
   accordance with the Rules of Practice and Procedure of the University
   Tribunal. The University did briefly make contact with each student.
   The Panel also ruled that if the matters proceed together as the
   allegations involved the same parties, witnesses, evidence, and
   transaction. The Panel ruled there would be no unfairness, prejudice,
   or complication hearing them together.
   The charges related to a quiz that ZG allegedly took for MS. ZG was
   charged with personating a student contrary to s. B.i.1(c) and, in the
   alternative, aiding to provide unauthorized assistance contrary to s.
   B.i.1(a)(ii) of the Code . MS was charged with having another person
   personate her contrary to s. B.i.1(c) , in the alternative, obtaining
   unauthorized assistance contrary to s. B.i.1(b) , in the further
   alternative, academic misconduct not otherwise described in the Code
   contrary to s. B.i.3(b) of the Code .
   The University called the instructor of the course to testify. He
   testified that he was waiting for MS to hand in her paper on the day of
   the quiz and, while he noticed her at the start of the quiz, he did not
   see her at the end of the quiz. GZ handed in a quiz claiming to be MS
   and did not have his student ID. GZ then claimed he was handing in MSâs
   quiz for her. The instructor recognized GZ as he had told MS not to sit
   near him on an earlier quiz as he suspected she was copying from him.
   The instructor compared the test handed in by GZ to an earlier test
   taken by MS and noticed different writing as well as notations that had
   not been taught in his class. The instructor was able to identify GZ
   who later enrolled in a class taught by the instructor.
   A second witness was called who had taken notes during a meeting with
   MS and the Deanâs Designate. MS initially denied having cheated but
   eventually signed a formal Admission of Guilt admitting her offense
   under s. B.i.1(a)(i) of the Code .
   The Panel found MS and GZ had violated s. B.i.1(c) of the Code and the
   University withdrew the alternative charge.
   MS had a previous offence which had been settled at the departmental
   level. The University sought a recommendation of expulsion, a
   suspension of up to five years and, in MSâs case, a grade of zero in
   the course.
   The Panel then considered the penalty factors from the Mr. C case,
   namely the character of the Students, likelihood of repetition, nature
   of the offence, detriment to the University, and the need for
   deterrence. The Panel considered like cases and found that expulsions
   have been ordered even for first time offenders and that when five-year
   suspensions were issued it was only in cases where remorse was
   expressed and the student participated in the process, not the scenario
   in this case.
   The Panel recommended expulsion for both students, imposed a suspension
   of up to five years or until expulsion, whichever comes first, a
   notation be placed on their transcripts, and a grade of zero in the
   course in question for MS.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12860
