Case 1075

   DATE: January 13, 2022
   PARTIES: University of Toronto v. M.D.M.B. ("the Student")

   HEARING DATE(S): February 16, 2021; August 24, 2021; and September 21,
   2021, via Zoom

   Panel Members:
   Mr. F. Paul Morrison, Chair
   Professor Georges Farhat, Faculty Panel Member
   Ms. Lauren Membreno, Student Panel Member

   Appearances:
   Ms.â¯Lily Harmer,â¯Assistant Discipline Counsel,â¯Paliareâ¯Roland
   Rosenberg Rothsteinâ¯LLP
   Mr. Domenic Saverino, Counsel for the Student, Weston Law Chambers
   Theâ¯Student

   Hearing Secretary:
   Ms. Krista Kennedy, Administrative Clerk & Hearing Secretary, Office of
   Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances

   Theâ¯ Studentâ¯was charged underâ¯s.â¯B.i.1(b)â¯of theâ¯Code of
   Behaviour on Academic Matters, 1995â¯(the âCodeâ) on the basis
   thatâ¯theâ¯Studentâ¯knowingly used of possessed an unauthorized aid in
   a midterm exam. The Student was also charged under ss. B.ii.2 and
   B.i.1(b) of the Code on the basis that the Student knowingly had an
   intent to attempt to use or possess an unauthorized aid, or to obtain
   unauthorized assistance, in a midterm exam. In the alternative,
   theâ¯Studentâ¯was chargedâ¯under s. B.i.3(b) of theâ¯Codeâ¯on the basis
   that sheâ¯knowingly engaged in a form of cheating, academic dishonesty
   or misconduct, fraud or misrepresentation not otherwise described in
   the Codeâ¯in order toâ¯obtainÂ  academic advantage.

   The Professor who taught the course in which the academic offence
   alleged to have occurred and four students in the same course testified
   at the hearing. The Panel heard that the Professor did not observe the
   Student using her cellphone during the exam. However, the Professor
   testified that the following week, two students approached her and
   advised her that they both observed the Student using her cellphone
   during the midterm exam. Once the Professor received this information,
   she contacted the student who sat next to the Student during the
   midterm exam. This third student advised the Professor that she had
   seen the Student using her cellphone during the midterm exam. The
   Professor subsequently met with the Student concerning the academic
   offence. The Professor admitted that she told the Student she had
   personally seen her use her cellphone during the midterm exam in order
   to protect the identity of the students who alerted her to the
   Studentâs improper use of her cellphone. Three out of the four students
   that testified at the hearing testified that they saw the Student
   looking at her cellphone in her lap. The fourth student testified that
   he was seated near the back of the classroom and the Student was seated
   toward the front of the classroom. Because he was facing the computer
   screen, he could see the Student during the midterm exam, but she was
   not in his direct line of sight. It was his evidence that he did not
   see anything unusual about the Studentâs behaviour nor did he see her
   with her cellphone in her hand. The Student and the Studentâs brother
   both testified at the hearing. The Studentâs brother testified that he
   was enrolled at the University at the time the alleged offence
   occurred. He further testified that they would often drive to campus
   together and at times, he would walk with her to the class for the
   course in which the charges are related. The Panel noted that the
   Studentâs brother recalled that on the day of the midterm, he walked
   with her to the class and that she was a bit late in arriving for the
   midterm exam. The Student testified that she was late getting to class
   for the midterm exam and that, when she arrived, all the other students
   were already seated. She testified that she took her regular seat at
   the front of the class and the Professor was about to begin the
   examination. The Student further testified that she put her papers and
   her phone in her bag underneath the desk. The Student denied that she
   ever accessed her cellphone during the midterm exam as it was in her
   bag for the duration of the midterm. She also denied speaking to any
   other student during the midterm. The Panel considered the evidence
   given by all the witnesses and preferred the evidence of the witnesses
   for the University over that of the witnesses for the defence, where
   there was a conflict. The Panel noted that the three student witnesses
   all gave evidence to the effect that they observed the Student using
   her cellphone in a surreptitious way during the midterm exam and that
   they were all in a position to make those observations. The Panel
   further noted that the charge does not require that there be evidence
   that the Student actually utilized the device but rather the charge is
   established if the Student had her phone on her lap or in her hand. In
   this case, the Panel outlined that the evidence established that the
   Student had her cellphone on her lap and in her hand, in use, during
   the midterm exam. Based on the foregoing, the Panel found that the
   Student was guilty of the first and second charges. Based on this
   finding, the University withdrew the third charge.

   In determining sanction,â¯the Panel considered the submissions of
   counsel for the University and for the Student. Counsel for the Student
   emphasized that the Student had no prior offences or disciplinary
   issues while attending the University. He further outlined that a
   suspension from the University of two years and a notation of the
   conviction on her record for three years was harsh and should be
   mitigated. Furthermore, counsel for the Student submitted that the
   Student should be permitted to graduate prior to the effective date of
   any sanction imposed. The University opposed this request. The Panel
   recognized and accepted that the offence in question is very serious in
   nature and causes detriment to the University and to its student body.
   Furthermore, there is a need to deter others from committing a similar
   offence. The use of unauthorized aids during an exam is a threat to the
   integrity of the Universityâs processes for evaluating students, is
   unfair to other students, and jeopardizes the Universityâs reputation.
   The Panel noted that as reflected in case law, conviction for a first
   offence generally results in a suspension of at least two years. The
   Panel recognized that this is the Studentâs first offence and that it
   is important to send a clear message that such offences will be
   regarded as very serious and treated accordingly. The Panel imposed the
   following sanctions: a final grade of zero in the course;
   aâ¯two-yearâ¯suspension; aâ¯three-yearâ¯notation of the sanction on the
   transcript; and aâ¯report to theâ¯Provostâ¯for aâ¯publication.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/30175
