Report #343

   DATE: August 11, 2010
   PARTIES: S.S.A.,Â  (the Student) v. UTSC
   Hearing Date(s): June 24, 2010
   Committee Members:
   Professor Andrew Green, Chair
   Dr. Joel Kirsh
   Dr. Cindy Woodland
   Ken Davy
   Ryan Campbell
   Appearances:
   For the Student Appellant:
   S.S.A. (the Student)
   Camille Labchuk, DLS for the Student
   Kristin Marshall, DLS for the Student
   For the UTSC:
   Professor John Scherk
   UTSC â write deferred examinations â initial deferral obtainedÂ  â
   additional deferral â medical injury â skateboarding injury â UTSC
   Medical CertificateÂ  â chiropractor â nature of the activity giving
   rise to injury â anticipated or prevented â inadequacy of medical
   certificateÂ  â all evidence needed provided â UTSC policy on Special
   Considerations, Petitions and AppealsÂ  â appeal allowed
   Appeal of a decision to deny the Student permission to extend time to
   write deferred examinations in two courses. The Student had previous
   been placed on academic probation and academic suspension. The Student
   had enrolled in three courses, but obtained a deferral of examinations
   in two courses due to the death of his grandmother. The Student then
   petitioned to further defer writing these examinations as a result of
   an injury sustained skateboarding. The Student obtained a UTSC Student
   Medical Certificate from a chiropractor. The petition for deferral was
   denied by the Academic Appeals Board which said that the accident could
   have been anticipated and prevented. Before the Committee, UTSC did not
   rely upon its written submissions or on the discussion of the nature of
   the activity giving rise to the injury relied on in the Academic Appeal
   Boardâs reasons, but instead argued that the Medical Certificate was
   inadequate. The Student argued that he had provided all the evidence
   that was required of him and that it was unfair to visit the concerns
   about the practitioner on the Student. The Committee reviewed UTSCâs
   policy on Special Considerations, Petitions and Appeals containing
   UTSCâs requirements relating to examination deferrals. The Committee
   agreed that the Student had provided all of the evidence that was
   required. The Committee noted that if UTSC was concerned about the
   generality of the information provided on the Medical Certificate, it
   should revise the Certificate and if concerned about a particular
   practitioner, it should speak with the appropriate regulatory body for
   that profession. Appeal allowed.
   [1]View Report

References

   1. file:///media/12670
