Case 1249

FILE:

   Case # 1249 (2022-2023)

DATE:

   September 14, 2022

PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v. D.L. (âthe Studentâ)

HEARING DATE(S):

   April 1, 2022, via Zoom

PANEL MEMBERS:

   Johanna Braden, Chair

   Professor Joseph Clarke, Faculty Panel Member

   David Tieu, Student Panel Member

APPEARANCES:

   Tina Lie, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg
   Rothstein LLP

   William Webb, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg
   Rothstein LLP

   The Student

HEARING SECRETARY:

   Carmelle Salomon-Labbe, Director, Office of Appeals, Discipline and
   Faculty Grievances

   The Student was charged with one offence under section B.i.1(b) of the
   Code for knowingly using or possessing an unauthorized aid or obtaining
   unauthorized assistance in a midterm test.Â  They were also charged
   with one offence under section B.i.1(d) of the Code for knowingly
   representing as their own an idea or expression of an idea, and/or the
   work of another in a midterm test. Alternatively, they were charged for
   knowingly engaging in a form of cheating, academic dishonesty or
   misconduct, fraud or misrepresentation not otherwise described in the
   Code to obtain academic credit or other academic advantage of any kind
   in connection with the midterm, contrary to section B.i.3(b) of the
   Code.

   At the hearing, the Student admitted to the charge under section
   B.i.1(b) of the Code and also agreed that they understood the charge
   and the nature and effect of their plea. According to the Panel, the
   evidence contained in the affidavits submitted by the University
   clearly and thoroughly proved that the Student had collaborated with
   other students when writing their midterm test, which was expressly
   prohibited. The evidence revealed that solutions provided by the
   Student were similar to answers submitted by three other students. By
   the time of the hearing, the other students involved had admitted to
   collaborating during the test. The Panel found the Student guilty of
   contravening section B.i.1(b) of the Code. The University withdrew the
   second charge (being largely duplicative) and the third charge (being
   in the alternative) .

   In determining sanction, the Panel considered the partiesâ evidence
   that the Student had committed two prior academic misconduct offences
   and their joint submission on penalty. The Panel recognized that the
   Student had shown some insight and remorse, but it also found it
   troubling that this was the Studentâs third offence. It observed that
   collaboration on on-line tests can be very hard to detect, and that the
   Student was only caught because of idiosyncratic errors made by the
   Student and their friends. By cheating on their test, the Panel noted,
   the Student undermined the grades-based system of evaluation and broke
   the honour code that is essential to modern learning. It also stated
   that it is all too easy for students to find new outlets for
   unauthorized assistance in todayâs online world. Students must
   understand that this kind of misconduct will have serious
   repercussions, so that they will be dissuaded from the temptation to
   cheat when they are under pressure and when cheating seems to be the
   easy way out. According to the Panel, the joint submission was squarely
   within the range of sanctions imposed in similar cases; it did not
   bring the administration of justice into disrepute; it was not
   otherwise contrary to the public interest; it struck a fair balance
   between the mitigating and aggravating factors; and it was a meaningful
   but fair sanction.

   The Panel imposed the following sanctions: a grade of zero in the
   course; a three-year suspension; a notation on the Student's transcript
   until their graduation; and a report to the Provost for publication.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/30674
