Case #858 - Tribunal 2

   [1]Case 858 - Appeal 2
   [2]Case 858 - Appeal 1
   [3]Case 858 - TribunalÂ 1
   DATE: January 15, 2018
   PARTIES: University of Toronto v. A.S. (âthe Studentâ)
   Hearing Date(s): August 22, 2017 and October 17, 2017
   Panel Members:
   Ms. Amanda Heale, Chair
   Professor Dionne Aleman, Faculty Panel Member
   Mr. Harvey Lim, Student Panel Member
   Appearances:
   Mr. Robert Centa, Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg
   Rothstein LLP
   Ms. Emily Home, Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg Rothstein LLP
   (October 17, 2017)
   Mr. R.S., the Student's Representative
   Ms. Lucy Gaspini, Manager, Academic Success and Integrity, Office of
   the Dean, UTM
   Professor Divya Maharajh, (Course Instructor) UTM (August 22, 2017)
   In Attendance:
   Mr. Christopher Lang, Director, Appeals, Discipline, Faculty Grievances
   (August 22, 2017)
   Ms. Tracey Gameiro, Associate Director, Appeals, Discipline, Faculty
   Grievances (October 17, 2017)
   Ms. Sandra Nishikawa, Tribunal Co-Chair (Observer, August 22, 2017))
   The Student
   The Student's Mother
   Ms. Alexandra Di Blasio, Academic Integrity Assistant, Office of the
   Dean, UTM
   Mr. Sean Lourim, IT Support, Office of the Governing Council
   Mr. Anwar Kazimi, Office of the Governing Council (Observer, October
   17, 2017)
   Trial Division â s. B.i.1(f) of the CodeÂ  â concoction of sources âÂ
   s. B.i.3(a) of the Code - falsifying an academic record - student
   concocted references in an essayÂ  âÂ  s. B.i.1(a) of the Code â
   forged/falsified documentÂ  - student also falsified a letter,
   purporting to be written by the Vice Dean, Undergraduate Studies âÂ
   prior offence - recommendation of expulsion, suspension for a period of
   up to 5 years from the date of the order or until Governing Council
   makes its decision on expulsion, corresponding notation on the
   Studentâs transcript, and report to the Provost with the Studentâs name
   withheld.
   The Student was charged with one count of concocting sources contrary
   to section B.i.1(f) of the Code, or in the alterative, engaging in a
   form of academic dishonesty or misconduct not otherwise described
   contrary to section B.i.3(b) of the Code .Â  The Student was also
   charged with falsifying an academic record contrary to s. B.i.3(a) of
   the Code , falsifying evidence or circulating a falsified document
   contrary to section B.i.1(a) of the Code ; or in the alternative,
   academic dishonesty not otherwise described contrary to section
   B.i.3(b) of the Code . The charges relating to the concoction of
   sources were laid in connection to an essay that the Student had
   submitted that contained references to two sources that did not
   exist.Â  The charges concerning the falsification of evidence and
   falsification of an academic record stemmed from a letter that the
   Student submitted in an appeal of an academic sanction to the Provost.
   This letter, purportedly written by the Vice Dean, Undergraduate
   Studies, was an altered version of a letter that was originally
   provided to the Student.Â  The Panel found the student guilty of one
   count of falsifying any document or evidence required by the
   University, or uttering, circulating or making use of any such
   document, contrary to section B.i.1(a) of the Code and one count of
   knowingly submitting academic work that contained references to one or
   more concocted sources contrary to section B.i.1(f) of the Code . The
   Panel ordered a final grade of zero in the affected course; suspension
   from the University for up to 5 years from the date of the order;
   recommendation of expulsion; and that the case be reported to the
   Provost for publication.
   [4]View Case

References

   1. https://live-the-office-of-the-governing-council.pantheonsite.io/media/28403
   2. https://live-the-office-of-the-governing-council.pantheonsite.io/media/13076
   3. https://live-the-office-of-the-governing-council.pantheonsite.io/media/28402
   4. file:///media/12947
