Case 1372 and 1373

DATE:

   March 7, 2023

PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v. Y.C. and L.F. ("the Students")

HEARING DATE:

   December 16, 2022, via Zoom

PANEL MEMBERS:

   Simon Clements, Chair
   Professor Alexander Koo, Faculty Panel Member
   Charles Buck, Student Panel Member

APPEARANCES:

   Tina Lie, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg
   Rothstein LLP
   Joseph Berger, Co-Counsel,Â Paliare Roland Rosenberg Rothstein LLP

HEARING SECRETARY:

   Samanthe Huang, Quasi-Judicial Administrative Assistant, Office of
   Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances

   Both Students were charged with one count of knowingly obtaining
   unauthorized assistance in connection with a midterm exam, contrary to
   section B.i.1(b) of the Code. In the alternative, they were charged
   with knowingly representing as their own an idea or expression of an
   idea or work of another in the midterm exam, contrary to section
   B.i.1(d) of the Code. In the further alternative, they were also
   charged with one count of knowingly engaging in a form of cheating,
   academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or misrepresentation not
   otherwise described in the Code in order to obtain academic credit or
   other academic advantage of any kind in connection with the midterm
   exam, contrary to section B.i.3(b) of the Code.

   The Panel granted the Universityâs motion for these two matters to be
   heard together because the matters shared questions of fact, law and/or
   mixed fact and law in common, involved the same parties, and arose out
   of the same transaction or occurrence. The Students did not attend the
   hearing. The University informed the Panel that neither of the Students
   nor a representative of the Students had responded to the Notice of
   Electronic Hearing. The University submitted affidavit evidence
   outlining the various attempts to contact both Students. The Panel
   discussed the notice requirements under the Statutory Powers and
   Procedures Act (âSPPAâ) and the University Tribunalâs Rules of Practice
   and Procedure (âRulesâ). Relying on the Universityâs Policy on Official
   Correspondence with Students , the SPPA, and the Rules, the Panel found
   that the University had provided reasonable notice to the Students. The
   Panel proceeded with the hearing in their absence.

   The Panel heard evidence that the Students, who were enrolled in the
   same course, had provided answers that were virtually identical.
   Additionally, the Students had both referred to a question number in
   their midterm when there was no such question on the midterm. According
   to the Panel, this suggested that the Students had collaborated on
   their answers. The Panel found the Students guilty of obtaining
   unauthorized assistance, contrary to section B.i.1(b) of the Code. The
   University withdrew the remaining charges.

   In determining the sanction, the Panel discussed Appendix âCâ to the
   Code, which provides the Provostâs Guidance on Sanctions. Having heard
   submissions from the University, the Panel indicated that since the
   Students had not attended before the Panel and had submitted no
   evidence, there was no evidence of exceptional circumstances that would
   cause the Panel to depart from the Provostâs guidance. It also noted,
   among other things, that general deterrence is even more important in
   cases that arose during the pandemic. The Panel stressed the importance
   of prosecuting cases of academic dishonesty. It indicated that the
   University must deter this conduct and not incentivize students to sit
   out the discipline process, hoping that the University will eventually
   drop the case. Without prosecuting the case and obtaining a finding of
   guilt where warranted, there will be no notation on a studentâs
   transcript indicating they have engaged in academic misconduct. That
   would enable students to further mislead anyone to whom their
   transcript might be shown in the future.

   The Panel imposed the following sanctions on both Students: a grade of
   zero in the course; a two-year suspension; a three-year notation on
   their transcripts;Â and a report to the Provost for publication.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/30983
