Case 634 - Appeal

   [1]Case 634 - Finding
   [2]Case 634 - Sanction

DATE:

   October 4, 2012

PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v. M.K.

Hearing Date(s):

   October 3, 2012

Panel Members:

   Patricia D.S. Jackson, Chair
   Faye Mishna, Faculty Member
   Graeme Norval, Faculty Member
   Yuchao Niu, Student Member

Appearances:

   Robert Centa, Assistant Discipline Counsel for the University

   Appeal by the Student from a Tribunal decision in which he was found
   guilty of deliberately falsifying research results in his Ph.D.
   program, contrary to s. B.i.1(f) of the Code , and sentenced to a
   recommendation that the Student be expelled. The Student only appealed
   the Panelâs recommendation that he be expelled and did not appeal the
   finding of academic misconduct and other sanctions. Before the hearing,
   the Student had sought and received accommodations regarding scheduling
   of the hearing. The Board allowed an extension of time to appeal the
   Trial Panelâs decision and scheduled the hearing on a date to
   accommodate the Studentâs situation and wish to order the transcript of
   the tribunal hearing. After a number of correspondences with the
   University, which included contradicting reasons he provided for his
   non-attendance, the Student did not attend the hearing. No one on the
   Studentâs behalf appeared at the hearing to explain his absence.
   Therefore, the hearing proceeded in his absence. In his submissions,
   the Student asserted that he had made every effort to address his
   mistakes and did not attempt to deceive anyone. He also claimed that
   the prosecution was motivated by the supervisorâs concern that if he
   left, the supervisor would lose grant funding. The Board found that
   this attempt to introduce new evidence did not meet the criteria for
   the admission of fresh evidence. Furthermore, the Studentâs allegations
   were entirely contrary to the factual findings made by the Trial Panel.
   On the issue of deference, the Board stated that as noted in the CHK
   appeal decision (Case 596, 597 & 598), Appeal Boards had been reluctant
   to embrace the broad powers authorized by the Code and instead had
   generally analyzed decisions under appeal to examine whether the Trial
   Panel made an error in: the application of general administrative law;
   the interpretation and application of the large body of University
   Tribunal and Appeals Board cases; or fact finding, particularly where
   the findings are unsupported by any evidence. The Board further stated
   that deference was particularly appropriate in cases such as this where
   credibility was at the heart of the Panelâs decision. However, the
   Board stated that it would have reached the same conclusion as the
   Trial Panel even if it was not for deference: the sanction was not
   overly punitive in light of the Chelin factors. The Board agreed with
   the Panel that the deliberate falsification of research results by the
   Student in a Ph.D. program was a serious and inexcusable offence and
   found that it clearly supported the sanction imposed. Moreover, the
   detriment to the University was clear and exacerbated by the inclusion
   of fabricated data in a grant proposal from the University. As for
   extenuating circumstances, the Board found that the Student had not
   demonstrated any remorse or insight and offered no prospect of
   rehabilitation, which was demonstrated in his submissions as well as
   his attempt to engage the appellate process to delay the result. Also,
   there was a likelihood of a repetition of the offence as the Student
   chose to disregard the warning given previously by an academic journal
   that had expressed concern about data fabrication. As for the
   character, the Board stated that the evidence suggested that the
   Student misled the participants in the discipline process, shifted and
   fabricated evidence, and attempted to blame others; this was not
   evidence of good character. Finally, deterring the misrepresentation of
   research results must be a significant priority. Appeal dismissed.
   [3]View Case

References

   1. http://live-the-office-of-the-governing-council.pantheonsite.io/media/12803
   2. http://live-the-office-of-the-governing-council.pantheonsite.io/media/12804
   3. file:///media/12809
