THE UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
IN THE MATTER OF charges of academic dishonesty made on November 6, 2013
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code ofBehaviour on Academic
Matters, 1995,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Act, 1971, S.O. 1971, c. 56 as
amended S.O. 1978, c. 88

BETWEEN:
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO

-AND-

Date of Hearing: October 20, 2014
Members of the panel:
Mr. John A. Keefe, Banister and Solicitor, Chair
Professor Michael Evans, Department of Computer and Mathematical Sciences, Faculty Panel
Member
Mr. Michael Dick, Student Panel Member
Appearances:
Ms. Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland, Barristers
Ms.~the Student
Professor Michelle Neely, Instructor for ENG208: Critical Approaches to Literature:
Introduction to Literary and Cultural Theory

Al,

In Attendance:
Professor John Britton, Dean's Designate, Faculty of Arts and Science
Ms. Natalie Ramtahal, Coordinator, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances

2

NOTICE OF HEARING

[I]

The Trial Division of the University Tribunal was convened on Monday, October 20,
2014 to consider charges brought by the University of Toronto (the "University") against
Ms. ~ -

Al, (the "Student"), under the University of Toronto Code of

Behaviour on Academic Matters, 1995 (the "Code").

THE CHARGES

[2]

The Student stands charged with the following charges:

1.

On or about February 28, 2013, you knowingly used or possessed an unauthorized
aid or obtained unauthorized assistance in connection with a mid-term test in
ENG280H1S, contrary to section B.l.l(b) of the Code.

2.

In addition or in the alternative, on or about February 28, 2013, you knowingly
engaged in a form a cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or
misrepresentation not otherwise described in the Code in order to obtain academic
credit or other academic advantage of any kind, contrary to section B.I.3(b) of the

Code, in connection with a mid-term test in ENG280Hl S.

BACKGROUND

(3]

The Student was emolled in the winter term 2013 in ENG280H1S. As part of the course
requirements, the Student was required to write a mid-term test on February 28, 2013
which was worth 30% of her final grade.

[4]

Professor Michelle Neely was the course instructor. At the time of the hearing, she had
moved from the University of Toronto and was a Professor at Connecticut College. She
testified by video link. Her evidence was that, at the outset of the course, the Student

3
introduced herself to the Professor, but she did not attend any further classes until the
mid-term test. On February 28, 2013, the Student came at the designated time for the test
and advised Professor Neely that she had been in an accident in the washroom, as a result
of which, she had cut her hand on broken glass. She had a large bandage on her hand.
The Student's iajury has been confirmed as legitimate by the University.

[5]

Professor Neely volunteered to allow the Student to type the exam on Professor Neely's
Apple computer as the Student did not have her own computer with her. In the course of
the written test, Professor Neely observed the Student typing words into the computer.
Professor Neely reminded the Student to save her work. At one point, Professor Neely,
went to the Student's computer and saved the work for the Student.

[6]

During the test, Professor Neely's computer was connected to the internet. At some point
during the test, Professor Neely noticed that the Student had a screen open that was not
the screen the Student was using to type her answers on the test. When Professor Neely
approached her, the Student closed the screen and began typing again. Professor Neely
then watched the Student more closely. She noticed that the Student was typing content
into the computer. Professor Neely watched the Student save her work and she saw that
the Student continued typing.

[7]

Towards the end of the test, while the other students were handing in their tests, the
Student called Professor Neely over to her computer and told Professor Neely that all her
work had disappeared. Only the Student's name appeared on the document. Professor
Neely felt uncomfortable. Professor Neely could not understand how this could have
happened.

[8]

Although Professor Neely thought that it was somewhat susp1c10us that all of the
Student's work had disappeared, other than her name, she offered the Student the
opportunity to come the next day and do another handwritten test. The Student declined.

4

[9]

At the time that Professor Neely saw what she thought was the browser window open she
did not mention anything to the Student about what she had seen.

[ 1O]

Professor Neely then went to the Jackman Building and spoke to one of her colleagues.
She was told to check the browser on her computer. When Professor Neely accessed the
computer she looked at the history and noted that there were two entries in the history
that were specifically linked to the questions on the test. This would indicate that the
Student had used Professor Neely's computer, which was then linked to the internet, to
attempt to obtain the answers to the test questions from the internet. Professor Neely
took a screen shot of the history on the computer. She also took a screen shot of the text
of the sites shown on the history. There were no date or time stamps on the searches that
were performed by Professor Neely.

[11]

Professor Neely's evidence was that her computer was set up so that it auto-saved every
ten minutes. Professor Neely also indicated in her evidence that she had herself saved the
content of the Student's work twice and she observed the Student saving the contents
three times. Professor Neely could not offer any explanation for why the computer did
not have any of the Student's saved information in the computer, other than her name.

[12]

Professor Neely then reported the incident to the Dean's Office.

[13]

During the hearing, the Student questioned Professor Neely on the fact that she had left
her computer connected to the internet with one of the windows open that appeared in the
browser window.

The Student suggested the possibility that the entries that were

identified in the history of the computer could have been created after the test was
completed. Professor Neely was able to explain very clearly that it was not possible for
her to have made those entries after the test. Professor Neely testified that she had never
lost work on her computer and that it had never malfunctioned resulting in lost work.
Professor Neely testified in a straightforward and direct manner. The Tribunal accepts
her evidence as credible.

5
[ 14]

The Student attended the hearing. She described the incident where she had cut her hand
after tripping on some water in the washroom that was near where the test was being held
at University College. She did not go to Medical Services, but instead she attended at the
test site to write the test. She described how, in the course of the test, the screen showed
a bunch of clocks and, as a result of this apparent malfunction, a lot of the work that she
had done had been accidently deleted. The Student indicated that she was not entirely
familiar with Apple computers, although she had used an Apple computer in the past.
The Student could not offer any plausible explanation as to what happened to the text,
other than her name, or why the history on the computer showed that she had tried to
access the test questions from the internet.

[15]

The only explanation offered by the Student to explain why the test was deleted was that
the computer had certain glitches in it that caused the clocks to appear and that this was
somehow linked to the disappearance of the text she had typed into the computer. The
Student indicated that she was saving the material regularly not as a "save as" but as a
simple save. Her evidence was unreasonable and lacking in credibility.

[16]

The University must satisfy us, on a balance of probabilities with clear and cogent
evidence that the Student attempted to obtain unauthorized assistance in connection with
the mid-term test by accessing the internet to attempt to answer certain of the questions.
See University of Toronto v. X, (Case No. 497) a decision of the Discipline Appeal Board
March 25, 2009 and F.H v. McDougall, 2008 S.C.C. 53.

[17]

If the Student did use the computer which was provided by Professor Neely to attempt to
obtain the answers to the questions on the test, an offence would be made out under
section B.I.l(b) of the Code which provides as follows:

B.Il. It shall be an offence for a student knowingly:
(b) to use or possess an unauthorized aid or aids or obtain unauthorized

assistance in any academic examination or term test or in connection with
any other form of academic work;

6

FINDINGS AND CONCLUSION BASED ON THE EVIDENCE

[18]

On the basis of all the evidence, we find that the Student did use Professor Neely's
computer to access the internet to attempt to answer the questions presented on the test.
There was no other possible explanation for how the history on Professor Neely's
computer would indicate the entries other than that the Student accessed those sites using
the professor's computer.

The Student offered various speculative theories about how

the entries could have been shown on the history of the computer, but none of these were
plausible. We also find that the Student intentionally deleted the text that she had typed
in the computer other than her name, to avoid detection. The only possible inference or
explanation is that the student intentionally deleted the content of what she had typed into
the computer, other than her name.

Although this was not a necessary finding with

respect to Count 1, it is corroborative in the sense that it indicates a guilty intention on the
part of the Student rather than some accidental or unintentional conduct. Although the
evidence is indirect and circumstantial, we find that the University has provided clear and
convincing evidence that the Student violated the Code. We find her guilty of the offence
set out in Count 1.

[19]

The University indicated that its intention would be to withdraw Count 2 upon a finding
of guilt on Count 1.

PENALTY PHASE

[20]

No additional evidence was led at the Sanction Phase of the hearing. The University
sought the following penalty:
(a)

A mark of zero in course ENG280H1S

(b)

A suspension of the Student from a period of two years

(c)

A notation on the Student's academic record and transcript for a period of three
years and,

(d)

that the case be reported to the Provost for publication of the notice of the
decision of the Tribunal and the sanctions imposed, with the name of the Student

7

withheld.

[21]

Counsel to the University submitted several cases to the Tribunal, the essence of which
was that, for a first offence of plagiarism, a two year suspension is normal, subject to
aggravating or mitigating circumstances. The University sought that suspension from the
date of the hearing which as noted above was October 20, 2014.

GUIDELINES ON PENALTY

[22]

[23]

The Factors to be considered when determining penalty are well established:
(a)

the character of the person charged;

(b)

the likelihood of a repetition of the offence;

(c)

the nature of the offence committed;

(d)

any extenuating circumstances surrounding commission of the offence;

(e)

the detriment to the University occasioned by the offence;

(f)

the need to deter others from committing a similar offence.

The Tribunal, in determining the appropriate penalty, should consider various factors in
order to find a fit sentence for this offender and for this offence in this community. In
doing so, fairness and proportion must be balanced.

[24]

There should be some measure of uniformity or proportionality so that similar penalties
are imposed for offences committed in similar circumstances. The sentencing should
preserve and ensure fairness by avoiding disproportionate sentences among similar
sentencing processes so that there are not wide swings or inconsistencies between like
offences and like offenders, recognizing that there is never a like offence or like offender.

[25]

There should be a range of sentences for offences such as plagiarism with sentences
within that range moving up or down within that range depending on aggravating or

8

mitigating circumstances.

[26]

Applying these principles to this case, the Tribunal considered the following factors. The
Student attended the hearing. There were no prior offences on the Student's academic
record.

The circumstances of this offence are somewhat unique in that the Student did

attempt to cheat on a test when provided with the opportunity to do so by being allowed
to use the professor's computer which was linked to the internet during the test. This
may have been an insurmountable temptation to the Student, but nonetheless, clearly, the
Student attempted to access the internet.

There is no way of knowing whether she

actually used what she obtained from the internet because the text that she had written
was ultimately deleted. The deletion of the work that had been typed into the computer
has to be viewed as an attempt to avoid detection or to create the impression that the
computer was malfunctioning. The Student did not offer any good explanation for her
conduct and did not appear to be particularly remorseful or appreciative of the
seriousness or significance of her conduct.

The Student did express an interest in

continuing her academic career and expressed a concern as to the length of the
suspension.

[27]

The Tribunal noted that, as the date of the hearing was October 20, 2014, a two year
suspension from the date of the hearing would effectively mean that the Student would be
suspended from the University until after the commencement of the fall term in 2016, as
most full year courses start in the fall. The offence was committed in February, 2013 and
although there is no basis for any suggestion of undue delay on the part of the University
or the Student in terms of the scheduling of the hearing, the Tribunal considered that it
would be reasonable in the circumstances to commence the period of suspension prior to
September 1, 2014, or alternatively, to provide for a somewhat shorter period of
suspension so that the Student could recommence her studies in the Fall term of 2016 if
she chose to do so.

ORDER

9
[28]

Accordingly, the Tribunal has determined that the appropriate penalty in the
circumstances is as follows:
(a)

impose a final grade of zero in the course ENG280Hl S;

(b)

suspend the Student from the University commencing October 20, 2014, until
August 20, 2016;

(c)

impose a notation on the Student's academic record and transcript from the date
of the Order until August 20, 2017; and

(d)

report this case to the Provost for publication of the nature of decision, with the
name of the Student withheld.

Dated at Toronto, this , f'Jay of January, 2015.

