Case 738

DATE:

   January 15, 2015

PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v R.A.

Hearing Date(s):

   October 20, 2014

Panel Members:

   John Keefe, Chair
   Michael Evans, Faculty Member
   Michael Dick, Student Member

Appearances:

   Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel
   The Student
   Michelle Neely, Course Instructor

In Attendance:

   Natalie Ramtahal, Coordinator, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty
   Grievances
   John Britton, Deanâs Designate
   Student charged with an offence under s. B.i.1(b) , and in the
   alternative, an offense under s. B.i.3(b) of the Code . The charges
   related to the use of an unauthorized aid during an exam.
   The instructor testified by video link that the Student had injured her
   hand before the exam and was unable to write. The instructor offered
   her computer for the Studentâs use and saved her work at one point. The
   computer was connected to the internet and the instructor noticed that
   the Student had an extra screen open. When she approached the Student
   she noticed that she closed the window and began typing and saved her
   work. At the end of the exam the Student called over the instructor and
   informed her that all of the work, save for the Studentâs name, had
   disappeared. The instructor was suspicious and offered the Student the
   opportunity to take another exam the following day which the Student
   declined. The instructor found two links in the bowser history related
   to the exam. She took screenshots of both the browser history and the
   text of the sites in the history. The instructor further testified that
   her computer auto-saved every 10 minutes and had saved the Studentâs
   work herself. She could not explain how only the Studentâ answers were
   deleted and not her name and reported the incident to the office of the
   Dean. The Student suggested that the instructor had created the entries
   after the exam but the instructor was able to explain how that was not
   possible. The Panel accepted the instructorâs evidence as credible.
   The Student testified regarding her injury and was unable to explain
   how her exam answers were deleted from the computer. She was unfamiliar
   with Apple computers and indicated that she was saving regularly. The
   Panel found her evidence unreasonable and lacking credibility.
   The Panel found that the Student used the instructorâs computer to
   answer test questions and intentionally deleted her exam answers.
   Although the deletion finding is not necessary for the first count it
   corroborates a guilty intention rather than accidental conduct. The
   Panel found the Student guilty of the first charge and the University
   withdrew the alternative charge.
   The University sought a penalty including a grade of zero in the
   course, a two year suspension from the date of the hearing, a notation
   on the Studentâs transcript for three years, and that the case be
   reported for publication. The University submitted cases demonstrating
   that a two year suspension was the ordinary sanction in similar
   circumstances.
   The Panel considered the principles in establishing penalty, including
   that it was the Studentâs first offense, the lack of a good explanation
   for the activity, and the lack of remorse on the Studentâs part. Â The
   Panel imposed a grade of zero in the course, a suspension commencing
   October 20, 2014 until August 20, 2017, a notation on the Studentâs
   transcript from the date of the order until August 20, 2017, and that
   the case be reported to the Provost for publication.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12866
