Case 860

DATE:

   November 30, 2016

PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v. Q.Y. (âthe Studentâ)

Hearing Date(s):

   August 23, 2016

Panel Members:

   Mr. Andrew Pinto, Barrister and Solicitor, Chair Professor Ato Quayson,
   Professor of English and Director of the Centre for Diaspora and
   Transnational Studies, University of Toronto, Faculty Panel Member
   Mr. Sean McGowan, Student Panel Member

Appearances:

   Mr. Robert Centa, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland
   Barristers
   Ms. Emily Home, Student-at-Law, Paliare Roland Barristers
   Mr. Daniel Walker, Counsel for the Student, Bobila Walker Law LLP

In Attendance:

   Ms. Q.Y., âthe Studentâ
   Professor John Carter, Deanâs Designate for Academic Integrity
   Mr. Christopher Lang, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances
   Mr. Sean Lourim, Technology Assistant, Office of the Governing Council
   The Student was charged with one offence of use of an unauthorized aid
   found in s. B.i.1(b) of the Code, or alternatively, academic dishonesty
   under s. B.i.3(b) of the Code. The charge related to the Student
   attending and writing a midterm test with a smartphone in her
   possession during the test contrary to the rules. The Student pled
   guilty and was found to be guilty of the unauthorized aid charge. The
   University withdrew the alternative charge of academic dishonesty.
   An Agreed Statement of Fact and Joint Submission of Penalty was
   submitted by the Student and the University agreeing to a final grade
   of zero in the course, a three and a half-year suspension, a four and a
   half-year notation on her transcript and a report to the Provost
   regarding this case. Â The Student had committed three prior offences.
   Two had been committed just one month apart, and the third was
   committed after her meeting with professors with respect to the second
   charge. Discipline Counsel raised the mitigating circumstance that the
   Student had been in an abusive relationship with her spouse at the time
   of the offences. The Panel found that the Joint Submission on Penalty
   was reasonable in light of other decisions (specifically, University of
   Toronto v. L.W., Case No. 625, February 13, 2013) and there was no
   principled reason to reject it.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12925
