Report 254

DATE:

   March 1, 2001

PARTIES:

   Mr. M.M. (the Student) v UTSC

Hearing Date(s):

   February 8, 2001

Committee Members:

   Professor Ralph Scane, Acting Chair
   Professor Raymond Cummins
   Mr. Ljupco Gjorjinski
   Professor Olga Pugliese
   Ms. Susan Scace

Secretary:

   Ms. Susan Girard

In Attendance:

   Mr. M.M.
   Associate Dean Ian McDonald

   Request for a deferral of a final examination in one course on medical
   grounds, and a deferral of final examinations in three courses on
   religious grounds. The Student claimed that he did not write the one
   exam because he was suffering from the flu and he was unable to leave
   his house on the exam date to see a doctor. He did visit his doctor 6
   days after the exam. The Committee accepted the Studentâs evidence as
   to the effect of his illness and found that the medical certificate
   offered adequate corroboration. The Committee observed the difficulty
   of enforcing the Facultyâs regulation, as described in provision S.B.2
   of the Calendar,Â  due to the necessarily subjective nature of whether
   attendance at an examination was âactually preventedâ by illness. The
   Committee found that the Facultyâs interpretation of the regulation
   regarding requirements for medical certificates too rigid and not
   justified by the regulation itself. The Committee found that provision
   S.D.3(a) of the Calendar did not prescribe that medical advice must be
   sought on the day of the missed examination. The Committee observed
   that delay in seeking medical attention may affect the weight and
   credibility of evidence tendered, but that it is only one factor to be
   considered. A minority of the Committee found that the Student had not
   satisfied the onus upon him to show that he was too ill to write the
   exam. With respect to the request for a deferral of final examinations
   in three courses, the Student claimed that the scheduled dates for the
   examinations conflicted with his religious obligations. The Studentâs
   petition to defer the examinations was granted and the three deferred
   examinations were scheduled in the two days immediately following
   Easter Monday.Â  The Student claimed that he did not immediately file a
   petition to change the date of the deferred exams because he was busy
   with another examination as well as with forthcoming religious
   preparations, and because the Faculty had lulled him into believing
   that he would write the deferred examinations on a later date. Five
   days following the set dates for the deferred examination, the Student
   filed a petition for deferral on the grounds that he was unable to
   concentrate on the exams due to the busy time proceeding the exams and
   personal concerns. The Committee found that any lulling effect on the
   Student should have been overcome when the dates of the exams were
   communicated by the Faculty. The Committee observed that while the
   University had a duty to accommodate religious requirement by not
   forcing conflicts between compulsory requirements and religious holy
   days, students must on their part generally plan their lives with the
   Universityâs calendar in mind. The Committee found that the University
   fulfilled its duty by providing an opportunity to avoid actual conflict
   between the Studentâs holy days and its examinations and that the
   Student chose not to avail himself of what was offered because he
   considered that he needed more study time than he had already provided
   for himself. The appeal with respect to the deferral of the final
   examination in one course allowed. The appeal with respect to the
   deferral of the final examinations in three courses dismissed. The
   Committee ordered that the Studentâs failing grade in the course be
   vacated and that he be permitted to write a deferred examination in the
   period for deferred examinations set by the Faculty.
   [1]View Report

References

   1. file:///media/12541
