REPORT NUMBER 254 OF THE ACADEMIC APPEALS COMMITTEE
February 8, 2001

To the Academic Board,
University of Toronto.
Your Committee repo11s that it held a hearing on Thursday, February 8, 2001, with the
following members present:
Professor Ralph Scane (Acting Chair)
Professor Raymond Cummins
Mr. Ljupco Gjorgjinski
Professor Olga Pugliese
Ms Susan Scace
Secretary: Ms Susan Girard
In Attendance:
Mr, M I i i ~ (the Student)
For Scarborough College:
Associate Dean Ian McDonald
Your Committee considered an appeal from the Sub-committee on Academic Appeals of
Scarborough College, dated September 21, 2000, which dismissed an appeal from the refusal of the
College's Sub-committee on Standing to grant a deferral of a final examination in the course
MGTB02Y, sought on medical grounds. The same decision of the Sub-committee on Academic
Appeals also dismissed an appeal from a decision of the Sub-committee on Standing refusing to
grant a fm1her deferral of final examinations in the courses MGTB03S, MGTB23S and ECMB09Y.
These defe1rnls were sought on religious grounds.

The Examination in MGTB02Y
The Student did not write the final examination in MGTB02Y which was scheduled on
April 12, 2000. He testified that he was suffering from severe flu symptoms, which commenced on
April 11 and was unable to leave his house to see a doctor. He did visit his family doctor on April
18, 2000. The Sub-committee on Standing denied the petition because of the weakness of the
medical evidence, mid indeed, the doctor's note submitted with the petition was so terse as to be
w011hless. However, on the appeal to the Sub-committee on Academic Appeals, a supplementary
certificate from the doctor was filed, and considered by the Sub-committee. Although it was on the
official University Student Medical Certificate form, and was completed in some detail, the Subcommittee considered it as inadequate to justify allowing the appeal. It appears from the decision of
the Sub-committee that the fact that the visit to the doctor did not occur until six days after the
examination in question was the principal factor in deciding that the ce11ificate lacked sufficient
weight to justify relief. Associate Dean McDonald testified that Scarborough College has
consistently applied a requirement that medical advice must be sought on the day an examination is
missed because of illness, unless it is clear that this is not reasonably possible. He also pointed out
that the final exmuination regulations of the College, as published in the Calendar (1999/2000, p.
224) provide:

Report Number 254 of the Academic Appeals Committee

2

S.B.2. If you are affected by illness or other extenuating
circumstances which do not actually prevent your writing an
examination, you are required to attempt it. If, after receiving your
final grade, you feel that your performance on the exam was
adversely affected, you may petition to rewrite it.
On this pmt of the appeal, your Committee was divided. The minority considered that the
Student had not satisfied the onus upon him to show that he was so ill that he could not write the
exam, and that he was entitled to a deferral.
The majority felt that the second medical certificate, coupled with the Student's evidence,
did establish a sufficiently serious illness to justify relief. Although the Student did not visit his
doctor for almost a week after the examination, the ce1tificate did state that the symptoms described
therein would worsen for about a week after onset (April 11 ), and then stmt to decline. The doctor
would still be seeing the Student while the symptoms were still in a relatively severe state. The
obvious difficulty with enforcing the regulation quoted above is the necessarily subjective nature of
whether attendance at an examination is "actually prevented". Influenza, like many other medical
conditions, can vmy greatly in intensity and debilitating effect, and, to assess this, there may in the
end be little to go upon but the petitioner's credibility and such corroborating evidence as is
available. In this case, the majority accepted the Student's evidence as to the effect of his illness at
the relevant time, and considered that the medical certificate offered adequate corroboration. The
majority also note that the College's requirements for medical ce1tificates do not prescribe the "on
the day" medical examination that your Committee was told the College interpreted them as
requiring. The relevant provision (1999/2000 Calendar, p. 226) reads:
S.D.3 (a) Medical certificates must show
. that you were examined at the time of illness
This could legitimately be interpreted by students as meaning, "during the period of illness". It does
not say, "on the date of the examination for which relief is sought." This traditional interpretation by
Scarborough College is, in the view of the majority, too rigid, and not justified by the regulation
itself. Delay in seeking medical attention clearly may affect the weight and credibility of evidence
tendered, but this is only one factor to be considered.
The appeal with respect to the deferral of the final examination in the course MGTB02Y is
allowed. The failure presently recorded against that course in the Winter Session of 2000 is vacated.
The Student may write a deferred examination therein in the period for defen-ed examinations set by
the College at the close of the Spring Term, 200 I.

The Examinations in 1\IGTB0JS, A1GBT23S and ECMB09Y
The Student is of the Russian O1thodox faith. He is a son of the Archpriest and Rector of
Holy Trinity Russian O1thodox Church in Scarborough. As a devout member of a devout family, he
wishes, and feels obliged to observe fully the religious obligations of his faith, including, in this
case, the O1thodox Easter devotions.

Report Number 254 of the Academic Appeals Committee

3

In 2000, the final examination in MGTB03S was scheduled for Friday, April 28, and the
final examinations in the remaining two of the above courses were scheduled for Monday, May I.
According to the Orthodox Calendar, these dates were Good Friday and Easter Monday
respectively. The latter date is apparently of more pressing significance in the Russian O1thodox
faith than it has become in western versions of Christianity.
Sometime in March, 2000, (but before the final date for petitions) the Student realised that
the scheduled dates for examinations in the above courses would conflict with his religious
obligations. He testified that he called the Associate Dean (Professor Powers, who was filling in for
Professor McDonald, then on leave), and advised him of the problem. According to the Student, he
was told that the Associate Dean would check into the procedures, and get back to him. The Student
then testified that, having heard nothing fmther from Scarborough College by April 7, he
communicated with Professor Powers on that date. He states that he was told that it was unlikely
that, at that late date, he could be accommodated in the deferred examination period which would
immediately follow the scheduled examinations in April, and that most likely, he would have to
write at the August sittings for deferred examinations. The Student also confirms that he told
Professor Powers that he wished to write the deferred examinations "as soon as possible". On the
same date, April 7, he dated and filed a petition to defer these examinations scheduled for April 28
and May I to "a later date (i.e.) earlier deferred period if possible".
On April 10, the student dated and filed a confirmation that he would attend the deferred
examinations (although he states that he did not then know the actual dates on which they would be
written), and paid the required fees. It is probable that he received this form with or near the time
that he received a letter from Professor Powers, also dated April 10, advising that the petition to
write deferred exams in the three subjects had been granted. The letter stated, "You will write the
exam [sic] in the April/May examination period (April 28 - May 3)." The letter also referred to
"attached infmmation" which included a sheet headed "Instructions for Special Examinations", and,
as mentioned, probably the "confirmation" form referred to above. The letter concluded (in bold
print) "You will be given one opportunity only to sit this examination. If you miss it, another
petition will be considered only in truly exceptional circumstances."
The "Instrnctions" also contained the wording, "The examination will be held in the
April/May deferred exan1ination period (April 28 - May 3, 2000)." However, the force of this
statement was weakened by the fact that the documents given to the Student by the College stated,
in large bold print, that the confirmation form must be filed by February 25, 2000. Obviously, the
form was prepared for an earlier set of defe1rnls, and when printed out again for later use, only the
dates of the current deferred exam period were changed. This reduces the credibility of any dates
referred to in the document, and presumably the College will tighten up its procedures in this regard.
The actual dates for the examinations were established to the Student by a letter dated April
11, 2000. One examination was to be written on May 2, and the other two on May 3. Again, it is not
clear whether tl1e Student received this letter on this date, or shmtly afterwards. When the Student
realised that he would have to write three examinations in the two days immediately following
Easter Monday, he called the member of the College administration refe1Ted to in the April 11 letter,
and said that the dates were unsatisfactory. He was told that, to change them, he would have to
petition again. In fact, he did not immediately petition for fiuther relief, because, he testified, he was
busy with his other examination (a final examination in a full year course in economics), and
involvement in fo1thcoming religious preparations. He also suggested that Professor Powers'
comment, on April 7, that it was unlikely that he could be accommodated in the April/May period

Report Number 254 of the Academic Appeals Committee

4

for defelTed examinations lulled him into believing that he would not have to write the deferred
examinations until August. In fact, he did not write the deferred examinations on the set dates of
May 2 and May 3. He filed a petition, dated May 8,2000, but not received by the College until May
16, for a further deferral. In that petition, he cited inability to concentrate on the exams "due to the
busy time preceding these exams" and some personal concerns, as his grounds for relief.
Your Committee is unanimous in dismissing the appeal with regard to the three subjects in
question. If there was any lulling effect due to Professor Powers' comment that it might not be
possible to anange for deferred examinations until the August sittings, it should have been
overcome within a week, when the dates, first of the deferred examination period, and then of the
exact dates, were communicated to the Student. The Student still had two weeks before the most
intense period of religious activity of the Easter season would stmt for him, and even during that
period, there would surely be some interstitial time for prepm·ation. The Student at least must have
known from early in the academic year that his heavy Easter season duties would be occurring
sometime around the University's usual final examination period, even if he did not know actual
dates of conflict until the timetables became available to him. While the University has a duty to
accommodate religious requirements by not forcing conflicts between tests, exmninations and other
compulsory requirements and the holy days of the various religions, students must on their pmt
generally plan their lives with the University's calendar in mind. This Student's religion imposed
substantial additional time burdens on him during the final examination period. However, many
students have distracting obligations, not necessarily of religious origin, which hamper them during
examinations. Sometimes, these are of such an overwhelming nature that relief is given by the
University. In this case, the University fulfilled its duty by providing an oppottunity to avoid actual
conflict between the Student's holy days and its examinations. The Student chose not to take what
was offered, essentially because he considered that he needed more study time than he had already
provided for himself. In all the circumstances, this does not justify further relief.
The appeal with respect to the courses MGTB03S, MGTB23S and ECMB09Y is dismissed.

March 2, 2001

