Report 429

   DATE:

   November 21, 2023

   PARTIES:

   J.Z. ("the Student"). v. Rotman School of Management

   HEARING DATE(S):

   N/A/ (Pre-hearing motion councluded via written submissions)

   Senior chair:

   Professor Hamish Stewart

   APPEARANCES:

   FOR THE STUDENT APPELLANT:
   The Student

   FOR THE Rotman School of management

   Lily Harmer, Paliare Roland Rosenberg Rothstein LLP

   The Student sought a review of a final grade in a course which involved
   a re-reading of a paper submitted by the Student by an anonymous second
   reader. The Student appealed to the Academic Appeal Committee (the
   ‚Committee‚) seeking to have a grade of CR substituted for B+ or, in
   the alternative, a grade based solely on the reaction paper, or, in the
   further alternative, a substantive re-evaluation of all of the
   components of the Student‚s grade.

   Prior to the commencement of the hearing, t he Student provided written
   submission requesting that the Senior Chair [1][CSL1] issue summonses
   pursuant to ss. 10.1 and 12 of the Statutory Powers Procedure Act ,
   R.S.O 1990, c. S.22 (‚SPPA‚), compelling the course instructor, the
   Academic Director of the Full-Time MBA Program at Rotman at the
   relevant time, and another Professor responsible for providing a second
   reading of a paper submitted by the Student in the Course
   (collectively, the ‚proposed witnesses‚).

   The Senior Chair noted that the power conferred by s. 12(1) of the SPPA
   is discretionary. The objectives stated in s. 2 of the SPPA are
   relevant to the exercise of this discretion. It further observed that a
   necessary, though not sufficient, condition for exercising the
   discretion to summons a person to be a witness before an administrative
   tribunal under s. [2][CSL2] 12(1) is that the person could offer
   testimony that would be necessary or helpful to the tribunal in
   resolving the factual issues before it . In this case, the Senior Chair
   found that such condition was not satisfied and that, to the extent
   that there were facts in dispute, the testimony of the proposed
   witnesses would add little to the written record.

   The Senior Chair proceeded to address whether the proposed witnesses
   could provide testimony was necessary to the Student‚s submissions.
   First, the Chair held that the proposed witnesses could not provide any
   testimony relevant to the Student‚s submissions regarding the relevant
   Rotman policies concerning disputes about grading participation points
   and presentations. The Senior Chair further noted that to the extent
   that the Student‚s submission required a substantive review of the
   course instructor‚s evaluation of the Student‚s participation and
   presentation grade, it was outside the jurisdiction of the Committee.

   Next, the Senior Chair considered whether the proposed witnesses could
   provide any testimony material to the issue of whether the procedures
   undertaken to re-assess the Student‚s reaction paper were unfair. In
   particular, the Student pointed to a lack of transparency due to
   Rotman‚s refusal to disclose the identity of the anonymous regrader, or
   to otherwise provide the Student with an opportunity to object to the
   appointment of the regrader. The Senior Chair concluded that this issue
   required the Committee to interpret Rotman‚s re-reading policy and to
   decide whether Rotman applied that policy fairly to the Student‚s case.
   The Senior Chair concluded that the proposed witnesses could not
   provide any testimony material to that precise issue.

   The Senior Chair noted that since the Student‚s request to discover the
   identity of the second reader via a freedom of information request
   pursuant to the Freedom of Information and Protection of Privacy Act ,
   R.S.O. 1990, c. F.31 (‚ FIPPA ‚) was denied, the Senior Chair inferred
   that the Student wanted to call the Professor they believe was the
   second reader to ask them under oath if they were in fact the second
   reader. The Senior Chair noted that the Student‚s apparent use of the
   Committee‚s process to determine the identity of the second reader
   would be a collateral attack on the FIPPA process and would therefore
   be an abuse of the Committee‚s process .

   Lastly, the Senior Chair considered whether the proposed witnesses‚
   testimony would be necessary or helpful to the Student‚s allegations of
   procedural unfairness. The Senior Chair noted that the Student‚s
   submission indicated that they were entitled to a high degree of
   procedural fairness was essentially a question of law to which the
   testimony of the proposed witnesses would be immaterial. With respect
   to the Student‚s submission impermissibly delegated his authority over
   grading the participation grade to the teaching assistant in the
   course, the Senior Chair concluded that two of proposed witnesses‚ had
   no knowledge of the issue, or in the case of the course instructor,
   would be of limited, if any assistance to the Committee. The Senior
   Chair further noted that, if the Student‚s apparent intention to
   cross-examine the course instructor with a view to impugning their
   credibility, such form of impeachment is impermissible as a matter of
   law. With respect to the Student‚s assertion that the conduct of the
   course instructor and the GAAB demonstrated reasonable apprehension of
   bias, the Senior Chair concluded that the Committee could determine the
   issue without testimony from the proposed witnesses. Finally, the
   Student‚s submission of procedural unfairness due to the instructor‚s
   inordinate delay in rendering his decision, did not raise any factual
   issues for which the testimony of the proposed witnesses would be
   necessary.

   The Student‚s request to summons the three proposed witnesses was
   refused.
   [3]View Report

References

   1. file:///tmp/lynxXXXXsYoeVR/L18001-1856TMP.html#_msocom_1
   2. file:///tmp/lynxXXXXsYoeVR/L18001-1856TMP.html#_msocom_2
   3. file:///media/31392
