Case #576

   DATE: January 26, 2011
   PARTIES: University of Toronto v. H.S.
   Hearing Date(s): August 24, 2010
   Panel Members:
   Rodica David Q.C., Chair
   Professor Nick Cheng, Faculty Member
   Jake Brockman, Student Member
   Appearances:
   Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel for the University
   Betty-Ann Campbell, Law Clerk, Paliare Roland Barristers
   Elaine Ishibashi, Associate Faculty Registrar
   Professor Lisa Steele, Department of Art
   Janine Robb, Executive Director of Health and Wellness at the
   University of Toronto
   In Attendance:
   Dr. Tamara Jones, Office of Student Academic Integrity
   Professor Don Dewees, Department of Economics
   Trial Division â s. B.I.3(a); s. B.I.3(b); s. B.I.1(a) of Code â forged
   transcripts â misrepresentation of academic record â misrepresentation
   of academic prerequisites â falsified university syllabi â forged
   medical certificates â providing false e-mail addresses of professors â
   hearing not attended â peremptory hearing â reasonable notice of
   hearing provided â guilty pleaâÂ  egregious conduct â lack of remorse
   âÂ  consistent and repeated pattern of deception â international
   implications â University submission on penalty accepted -Â  grade
   assignment of zero for courses; five-year immediate suspension;
   recommendation to the President that the Student be expelled; and
   report to Provost
   Student charged twice for a total of twenty-seven offences under s.
   B.I.3(a), s. B.I.3(b), and s. B.I.1(a)Â  of the Code. The charges
   related to the allegations that the Student misrepresented her academic
   history in the form of a false academic record from a foreign
   university, as well as a false ROSI transcript, as well as the
   allegations that the Student submitted false medical certificates to be
   allowed to write a make-up examination in a course. The Panel heard the
   Student engaged in a course of conduct to delay the hearing of all
   charges. After several attempts at scheduling a hearing, the Panel
   heard that the Universityâs Discipline Counsel made certain the Student
   was aware of the newly scheduled peremptory hearing date. The hearing
   proceeded without the Student being present.Â Â  The Panel found the
   conduct of the Student egregious in many respects. The Panel found the
   Student guilty of fourteen charges; the University withdrew the
   remaining thirteen charges. The Panel considered the Sopinka factors.
   The Panel noted particular concern with the detriment to the University
   occasioned by the consistent and repeated pattern of deception and
   forgery by the Student. The Panel also noted the international
   implications of the Studentâs conduct and the damage her conduct could
   have on the University in the eyes of other universities and other
   educational institutions internationally.Â  The Panel accepted the
   Universityâs submission on penalty and imposed a final grade of zero in
   the course, a five-year immediate suspension, a recommendation to the
   President that the Student be expelled, and that a report to the
   Provost be issued. The Panel invited the University to make a claim for
   costs, but the University declined to do so.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12774
