Report #306

   DATE: January 10, 2006
   PARTIES: the Student Appellant v. the Faculty of Arts & Science
   Hearing Date(s): December 6, 2005
   Committee Members:
   Kaye Joachim, Chair
   Professor Pamela Catton
   Professor Clair Beghtol
   Professor Ian McDonald
   Ms. Coralie D‚Souza
   Secretary of the Academic Appeals Committee:
   Dr. Anthony Gray
   Appearances:
   For the student:
   The Student
   The Student‚s father
   For the Faculty of Arts & Science:
   Professor Susan Howson, Vice Dean Undergraduate Education and Teaching
   Faculty of Arts & Science ‚ late withdrawal without academic penalty
   from four courses ‚ combination of adverse circumstances ‚ petition
   filed 4 years after completing courses ‚ Faculty did not rely on delay
   in filing petition ‚ unusual circumstances prevented making a rational
   decision ‚ compassionate grounds ‚ appeal allowed in part ‚ late
   withdrawal from one course allowed ‚ late withdrawal from three courses
   dismissed
   Request for late withdrawal without academic penalty from four courses.
   The Student experienced a combination of adverse circumstances in her
   first year of University, including financial difficulties, stressful
   living conditions, cultural pressures, emotional stress due to the
   death of a relative, and physical illness during the examination
   period. A counselor recommended that the Student drop some of her full
   course load. The Student failed one of the courses and sought
   permission to withdraw or re-write the examination. The Student claimed
   that she was advised that she had no grounds for a petition and she did
   not learn about the appeal process until 4 years later. The Faculty did
   not rely on the delay in filing the petition and the subsequent
   appeals. The Committee considered the unique combination of events that
   affected the Student and granted late withdrawal without academic
   penalty from one of the courses on compassionate grounds. The Committee
   found that the unusual circumstances occurring at the deadline for
   dropping courses without academic penalty prevented the Student from
   making a rational decision. Appeal allowed in part. Late withdrawal
   from one course allowed. Late withdrawal from three courses dismissed.
   [1]View Report

References

   1. file:///media/12661
