Report 308

DATE:

   February 3, 2006

PARTIES:

   The Student Appellant v. Faculty of Medicine

Hearing Date(s):

   January 24, 2006

Committee Members:

   Professor Emeritus Ralph Scane, Senior Chair
   Professor Glen Jones
   Professor Michael Marrus
   Professor Ian McDonald
   Mr. Mahadeo Sukhai

Secretary:

   Mr. Anthony Gray, Judicial Affairs Officer

In Attendance:

For the Student Appellant:

   Mr. Robert Wakulet (Counsel)

For the Faculty of Medicine:

   Ms Sari Springer (Counsel)

   Motion brought by the Faculty of Medicine to quash, on the grounds of
   undue delay and want of prosecution, an appeal brought by the Student
   from a decision to terminate the Student from the residency programme
   in plastic surgery. The Student appealed the Facultyâs decision on
   medical grounds. The Student tendered medical reports, as evidence on
   the substantive appeal and in response to the motion brought by the
   Faculty, which indicated that the Student was suffering from depression
   and a personality disorder. The Student claimed that the wording of the
   form of notice of appeal lulled the Student into a belief that there
   was no urgency in filing the material referred to in his Notice of
   Appeal and that he could wait until a hearing date was fixed. The
   Committee found that the Acting Secretaryâs response to the Student
   clearly indicated that she would await the complete submission of the
   Student before fixing a hearing date. The Committee considered the
   medical reports and the Studentâs Statement of Appeal and found that
   the surrounding circumstances did not remove the prima facie
   unreasonableness for the delay between the original filing of the
   Notice of Appeal and the filing of documents referred to in that notice
   which were required to proceed with a hearing. The symptoms described
   in the medical reports did not explain or justify the delay in
   proceeding and the fact that the Student focused on preparing a
   successful application to Queenâs University during the relevant
   periodÂ  indicated that had he abandoned his intention to proceed with
   his studies in plastic surgery, and the appeal.Â  The Committee found
   that the Faculty was under no duty to the Student to press the matter,
   nor was the Governing Council Office. The Committee found that the
   Faculty was prejudiced in making any response to the substantive appeal
   by the excessive delay. The Facultyâs complaints against the Student
   which led to his termination stemmed from behavioural issues in a
   clinical setting, the evidence of which was particularly vulnerable to
   challenge due to the long delay. Motion granted. Appeal quashed for
   excessive delay in prosecution. The Committee ordered that the decision
   of the Divisional Appeals Committee stand as the final academic appeal
   decision of the University.
   [1]View Report

References

   1. file:///media/12662
