THE UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
IN THE MATTER OF charges of academic dishonesty made on November 1,
2013
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on
Academic Matters, 1995,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Act, 1971, S.O. 1971, c.
56 as amended S.O. 1978, 88

c.

BETWEEN:
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO

-AND-

Date of Hearing: January 9, 2014
Members of the panel:
Ms. Julie Rosenthal, Barrister and Solicitor, Chair
Professor Charmaine Williams, Factor-Inwentash Faculty of Social Work, Faculty Panel
Member
Ms. Ching (Lucy) Chau, Student Panel Member
Appearances:
Mr. Robert Centa, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland, Barristers
Mr. Adam Goodman, Barrister and Solicitor, for the Student
M r . - ~• the Student

In Attendance:
Professor Luc De Nil, Dean's Designate, School of Graduate Studies
Ms. Natalie Ramtahal, Coordinator, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances

2

Reasons for Decision
Introduction - The Charges
1.

The Trial Division of the University of Toronto Tribunal was convened on

January 9, 2014 to consider charges advanced by the University against - ~
(the "Student") under the Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters. The charges were as
follows:
(1)

In 2012, you knowingly submitted academic work containing a purported
statement of fact that had been concocted, which violated section B.I. l (f)
of the Code.

(2)

In the alternative, in 2012, you knowingly engaged in a form of cheating,
academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or misrepresentation in order to
obtain academic credit or other academic advantage of any kind, which
violated section B.l.3(b) of the Code.

2.

The Student attended at the hearing and was represented by counsel.

The Agreed Statement of Facts
3.

At the outset of the hearing, Discipline Counsel advised that the University and

the Student had entered into an Agreed Statement of Facts.

4.

As part of the Agreed Statement of Facts, the Student pleaded guilty to both

charges. In addition, as part of the Agreed Statement of Facts, the Provost agreed that, if
a conviction were entered by the Tribunal on charge 1, the Provost would withckaw
charge 2.

3

5.

The salient facts are as follows.

6.

In the Summer session of 2010, the Student was admitted to the School of

Graduate Studies in the Master of Science program in the Department of Physiology.
7.

In 2012, the Student submitted his Masters' thesis, in partial completion of the

requirements for the Master of Science degree.

8.

The thesis was accepted and, in November 2012, the University confen-ed the

Master of Science degree on the Student.
9.

In July 2013, a revised version of the Student's thesis was published in a peer-

reviewed journal. The Student was listed as the lead author with a number of co-authors.

10.

In August 2013, the Student advised Dr. Denise Belsharn that he had fabricated

much of the data contained in the thesis. The fabricated data also appeared in the
published journal article. As a result, Dr. Belsham contacted the journal to request that
the article be withdrawn.

11.

The Student also sent an email to Patricia Brubaker, the Associate Chair

(Academic) in the Department of Physiology. In that email, the Student described in
some detail the nature of his research, as well as the specific parts of his thesis that he had
fabricated or misrepresented. The Student also admitted that, in order to avoid detection,
he deliberately overwrote some of the original files that were used to obtain data.

12.

The Tribunal reviewed the Agreed Statement of Facts and the documents filed in

connection therewith.

4

13.

The Tribunal also heard from the Student who again admitted the facts set out

above, namely, that:
(a)

he had fabricated and/or altered much of the data contained in his thesis;
and

(b)

in order to avoid detection, he deliberately overwrote some of the original
template files that he had used to obtain data.

14.

We note that, had the Student not advised Dr. Belsham that he had fabricated the

data in his thesis, it is not unlikely that the entire matter would have gone undetected.
We also note that the Student cooperated fully throughout the disciplinary process,
appears fully to appreciate the seriousness of his misconduct, and expressed deep
remorse.
Analysis

(a)

Jurisdiction

15.

As a preliminary matter, the Tribunal considered the question of its jurisdiction to

hear the matter, given that the Student was no longer enrolled at the University. In that
respect, the Tribunal considered section B.I.4 of the Code, which states as follows:
A graduate of the University may be charged with any of the above
offences committed knowingly while he or she was an active student,
when, in the opinion of the Provost, the offence, if detected, would have
resulted in a sanction sufficiently severe that the degree would not have
been granted at the time that it was.
16.

In the present case, had the Stud~nt' s offence been detected while he was an

active student, the Student would have received a grade of zero in his thesis course and,

5

as a result, his degree would not have been granted at the time that it was. Accordingly,
we find that the Tribunal has jurisdiction pursuant to section B.I.4 of the Code.

(b)

The Offence

17.

Section B.I. l(f) of the Code states as follows:

It shall be an offence for a student knowingly:
(f)
to submit any academic work containing a purported statement of
fact or reference to a source which has been concocted.
18.

In light of the facts admitted to by the Student, as set out in the Agreed Statement

of Facts and as confirmed by the Student at the hearing, the Tribunal finds that the
Student violated section B.I.l(f) of the Code, in that he knowingly submitted academic
work - namely, his Master's thesis - that contained a purported statement of fact that had
been concocted- namely, the data and research results presented in his thesis.

19.

Given the Provost's stated intention to withdraw the second charge if a conviction

were entered on the first charge, the Tribunal refrains from considering the second
charge.

Penalty
20.

The University and the Student submitted a Joint Submission on Penalty. The

Joint Submission on Penalty proposed the following:

(1)

that the Tribunal recommend to the President that he recommend to
Governing Council that it cancel and recall the Student's Master of

6

Science degree (pursuant to section C.11.(b) 1(j)(i) of the Code), which
degree was conferred in November 2012;

(2)

that a final grade of zero be assigned in the course RST999Y Research/Thesis, pursuant to section C.II.(b)l(g) of the Code;

(3)

that a permanent notation of this sanction be placed on the Student's
academic record and transcript;

(4)

that the Tribunal report this case to the Provost who may publish a notice
of the decision of the Tribunal and the sanctions imposed, with the
Student's name withheld.

21.

With respect to the cancellation of the Student's degree, the Tribunal's

jurisdiction to impose such a penalty is conferred by section C.11.(b)l(j)(i) of the Code,
which states as follows:

One or more of the following sanctions may be imposed by the Tribunal
upon the conviction of any student:
(j)

22.

(i)

recommendation to the Governing Council for cancellation,
recall or suspension of one or more degrees, diplomas or
certificates obtained by any graduate ... who, while
enrolled, committed any offence which if detected before
the granting of the degree, diploma [or] certificate ...
would, in the judgment of the Tribunal, have resulted in a
conviction and the application of a sanction sufficiently
severe that the degree, diploma [or] certificate ... would
not have been granted.

As submitted by Discipline Counsel, this provision contemplates that the Tribunal

can recommend the cancellation and recall of a student's degree, in those cases where a

7

student has committed an offence that, had it been detected before the granting of the
degree, would have resulted in the degree not being granted.
23.

In the present case, given the seriousness of the offence, we are satisfied that, had

the offence been detected before the Student received his degree, the degree would not
have been granted. Accordingly, we find that we have jurisdiction to impose the penalty
sought.
24.

With respect to whether the penalty should be imposed, we are mindful of the fact

that the proposed penalty was the subject of a Joint Submission. Although such a Joint
Submission is not binding, the Tribunal should only depart from it in very limited
circumstances. Specifically, the Tribunal should only depart from the Joint Submission
where the acceptance of the Joint Submission would bring the administration of justice
into disrepute. (See, in this regard, The University of Toronto v. S.M, Case No. 696;
September 12 2013, at para. 24.)
25.

This is not such a case. The Tribunal considered the following criteria relevant to

the imposition of a sanction:
(a)

the character of the person charged;

(b)

the likelihood of a repetition of the offence;

(~)

the Jl!l.tln'~ qf the offence committed;

( d)

any extenuating circumstances surrounding the commission of the offence;

8

(e)

the detriment to the University occasioned by the offence; and

(f)

the need to deter others from committing a similar offence.

26.

In particular, we have considered the following facts.

27.

The offence committed by the Student is very grave indeed. A Master's thesis is

an important piece of academic work. And the Student's misconduct resulted in a
Master's thesis that was fundamentally compromised by false data. The seriousness was
magnified by the fact that the thesis (including the fabricated data) was published in a
peer-reviewed journal. The withdrawal of the article, given the circumstances,
necessarily resulted in harm to the University's reputation- something that is obviously
detrimental to the University community as a whole. There is no doubt of the need to
ensure that the penalty imposed serves as a deterrent in the future.

28.

We are, however, mindful of the mitigating factors, including the important fact

that it was the Student himself who voluntarily brought the misconduct to the
University's attention. We also take note of the Student's cooperation in the disciplinary
process and his expressions of remorse, which we accept as genuine. We have no reason
to fear a repetition of the offence by the Student.

29.

Considering all of the foregoing, the penalty sought appears appropriate in the

circumstances.

30.

Moreover, an examination of the jurisprudence reveals that the recommended

penalty has been imposed in other cases involving similar offences. For example, in the

9

case of The University of Toronto v. J.D. (Case No. 456; August 16 2007) (as in the
present case), the student fabricated or falsified data that he included in his Master's
thesis. In addition, the student in the J.D. case (as in the present case) authored a
publication that included that fabricated data. And the student in the J.D. case (as in the
present case) voluntarily brought his misconduct to the attention of his supervisor. The
facts are, accordingly, remarkably similar to those in the present case. And we note that,
in the J.D. case, where the student was currently enrolled in a Ph.D. program at the
university, the penalty imposed was as follows:
(a)

a recommendation that the student's Master of Science degree be
cancelled and revoked;

(b)

suspension of the student for a period of six months;

(c)

assignment of a grade of NCR in the student's thesis course; and

(d)

a permanent notation on the student's transcript with respect to the degree
cancellation and the grade of NCR for the thesis course.

31.

We have also considered the case of the University ofToronto v. S.G. (Case No.

588; July 28 2011). In that case, the tribunal found that the student had knowingly
incorporated into his master's thesis a number of false statements which were essential to
the integrity of the thesis. The penalty imposed was as follows:
(a)

assignment of a grade of zero in the student's thesis course;

10

(b)

a recommendation that the student's Master of Science degree be
cancelled and revoked;

(c)

a permanent notation on the student's transcript; and

(d)

a recommendation that the case be reported to the Provost for publication
of a notice of the decision of the Tribunal and the sanction imposed, with
the student's name withheld.

32.

In other words, the penalty imposed in that case was identical to that sought in the

joint submission in the present case.
33.

Accordingly, we find that the penalty sought in the present case is consistent with

that imposed in other cases with similar facts.
34.

For all of the foregoing reasons, the imposition of the penalty sought would not

bring the administration of justice into disrepute. There is, therefore, no reason to depart
from the joint submission.
Conclusion

35.

For all of these reasons, the Tribunal imposes the following penalty.
(a)

The Tribunal recommends to the President that he recommend to
Governing Council that it cancel and recall the Student's Master of
Science degree, which was conferred in November 2012.

(b)

The Tribunal orders that a final grade of zero be assigned in the course
RST9999Y - Research/Thesis.

11

(c)

The Tribunal orders that a permanent notation of this sanction be placed
on the Student' s academic record and transcript.

36.

The Tribunal further directs that this case be reported to the Provost who may

publish a notice of this decision and the sanction imposed, with the Student's name
withheld.

Dated at Toronto, this

l~'l1"-- day of February, 2015.

Julie Rosenthal, Co-Chair

