Case 736

DATE:

   February 19, 2015

PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v S.M.

Hearing Date(s):

   January 9, 2014

Panel Members:

   Julie Rosenthal, Chair
   Charmaine Williams, Faculty Member
   Ching (Lucy) Chau, Student Member

Appearances:

   Robert Centa, Assistant Discipline Counsel
   Adam Goodman, Counsel for the Student
   The Student

In Attendance:

   Natalie Ramtahal, Coordinator, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty
   Grievances
   Luc De Nil, Deanâs Designate
   Student charged with an offence under s. B.i.1(f) , and in the
   alternative, an offense under s. B.i.3(b) of the Code . The charges
   related to fabrication of materials and sources in a thesis paper. The
   parties entered into an Agreed Statement of Facts (ASF) which included
   a guilty plea to both charges. The University agreed that if a
   conviction is entered on the first charge the alternative charge is
   withdrawn. The salient facts included that the Student submitted a
   Mastersâ thesis which was subsequently published in a peer-reviewed
   journal. A month later the Student advised the Deanâs Designate much of
   the data in the thesis was fabricated and the journal was therefore
   contacted to request the article be withdrawn. The Student also emailed
   the associate Chair of the Department of Physiology describing his
   thesis and admitting he had overwritten some cited files to avoid
   detection.
   The Panel considered its jurisdiction as the Student was no longer
   enrolled in the University, concluding it had jurisdiction as per s.
   B.i.4 of the Code , as the Student would have been sanctioned had the
   offense been discovered while he was still enrolled. The Panel found
   that the Student violated s. B.i.1(f) of the Code and did not consider
   the second charge.
   The parties submitted a Joint Submission on Penalty (JSP) proposing a
   sanction including a recommendation that the University cancel and
   recall the Studentâs Masterâs degree, a grade of NCR in the course in
   question, a permanent notation on the Studentâs transcript, and that
   the case be reported to the Provost for publication.
   The Panel considered a number of cases including cases dealing with
   principles in establishing penalty and cases of a similar nature. The
   Panel noted that it will only depart from a JSP where its acceptance
   would bring the administration of justice into disrepute and that this
   was not such a case. Â The Panel noted the severity of the offence but
   also that without this admission the entire matter may have gone
   undetected and that the Student cooperated and expressed deep remorse.
   The Panel imposed a penalty including a grade of NCR in the course in
   question, recommendation that the Studentâs Masterâs degree be canceled
   and recalled, a permanent notation on the Studentâs transcript, and
   that the case be reported to the Provost for publication.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12869
