Case 1295

DATE:

   February 24, 2023

PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v. J.S. ("the Student")

HEARING DATE:

   November 24, 2022, via Zoom

PANEL MEMBERS:

   Paul Morrison, Chair
   Professor Glen Jones, Faculty Panel Member
   Farhana Islam, Student Panel Member

APPEARANCES:

   Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg
   Rothstein LLP

HEARING SECRETARY:

   Ms. Krista Kennedy, Administrative Clerk and Hearing Secretary, Office
   of Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances

   The Student was charged with two counts of knowingly forging or in any
   other way altering or falsifying an academic record, and/or uttering,
   circulating or making use of such forged, altered or falsified record,
   whether the record be in print or electronic form, namely a University
   of Toronto transcript and a letter confirming their eligibility to
   graduate, which they submitted to Canadian Border Services Agency
   (‚CBSA‚), contrary to section B.i.3(a) of the Code. In the alternative,
   the Student was also charged with knowingly forging or in any other way
   altering or falsifying a document or evidence required by the
   University, and/or uttering, circulating or making use of such forged,
   altered or falsified of the letter submitted to CBSA, contrary to
   section B.i.1(a) of the Code. In the alternative to these three
   charges, the Student was also charged for knowingly engaging in a form
   of cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or
   misrepresentation not otherwise described in the Code, in order to
   obtain academic credit or other academic advantage of any kind, by
   submitting the transcript and the letter to CBSA, contrary to section
   B.i.3(b) of the Code.

   The Student did not attend the hearing. The University tendered
   evidence that the Student had sent an email to counsel for the
   University, from which it was apparent that the Student was aware of
   the charges against them and that the University was proceeding to
   prosecute those charges. In light of the University‚s evidence and
   submissions, the Panel was satisfied that the Student had received
   reasonable notice of the hearing. The Panel ordered that the hearing
   proceed in the absence of the Student.

   The CBSA sought authentication from the University of two documents
   received by the CBSA from the Student, who had submitted them as part
   of their application for a post-graduate work permit. The letter
   purported to be from the Associate Registrar of the University,
   certifying that the Student had completed the requirements for an
   Honours Bachelor of Arts Degree. The other document purported to be the
   Student‚s academic transcript from the University, indicating that they
   had earned 20.0 credits from the University with a Cumulative Grade
   Point Average (‚CGPA‚) of 3.78. The University provided the Panel with
   a detailed comparison of the transcript received by the CBSA and the
   Student‚s official transcript. This evidence outlined discrepancies
   relating to credits earned, course enrolments, grades, CGPA, and
   academic status. In light of the University‚s evidence and submissions,
   the Panel entered a finding of guilt and a conviction on both counts
   under section B.i.3(a) of the Code. The University withdrew the
   alternative charges.

   In determining sanction, the Panel considered evidence that the Student
   had a lengthy prior history of academic violations. It accepted that
   forgery or falsification of a transcript is among the most serious
   offences a student can commit. It noted that forged transcripts and
   academic records negatively impact the entire University community and
   undermine the credibility and standing of the University and of a
   student‚s peers who are attempting to legitimately fulfill academic
   courses, requirements and degrees. The University provided a chart
   comparing similar cases to this case. According to the Panel, the chart
   convincingly demonstrated that expulsion is almost always the outcome
   for a falsified transcript or academic record.

   The Panel imposed the following sanctions: up to five-year suspension
   until Governing Council makes its decision on expulsion, whichever
   comes first, up to five-year notation on the Student's transcript until
   Governing Council makes its decision on expulsion; and a report to the
   Provost for publication .
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/30981
