Case No.: 1295
THE UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
IN THE MATTER OF charges of academic dishonesty filed on November 11, 2021,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters, 2019,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Act, 1971, S.O. 1971, c. 56 as am. S.O. 1978, c. 88

B E T W E E N:
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
- and J

S

REASONS FOR DECISION
Hearing Date: November 24, 2022, via Zoom
Members of the Panel:
F. Paul Morrison, Chair
Professor Glen Jones, Faculty Panel Member
Farhana Islam, Student Panel Member
Appearances:
Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg Rothstein LLP
Hearing Secretary:
Carmelle Salomon-Labbé, Associate Director, Office of Appeals, Discipline and Faculty
Grievances
Not In Attendance:
J

S

-21.

On November 24, 2022, this Panel of the University Tribunal held a hearing to
consider the charges brought by the University of Toronto (the “University”)
against J

S

(the “Student”) under the Code of Behaviour on Academic

Matters, 1995 (the “Code”).
A.

CHARGES AND PARTICULARS

2.

The Charges were as follows:
1.

In or about August, 2020, you did knowingly forge or in any other

way alter or falsify an academic record, and/or did utter, circulate or make
use of such forged, altered or falsified record, whether the record be in
print or electronic form, namely a University of Toronto transcript of
consolidated academic record as of 2019-07-17 (“Transcript”) which you
submitted to Canadian Border Services Agency (“CBSA”), contrary to
section B.I.3(a) of the Code.
2.

In or about August, 2020, you did knowingly forge or in any other

way alter or falsify an academic record, and/or did utter, circulate or make
use of such forged, altered or falsified record, namely a letter confirming
your eligibility to graduate dated May 23, 2019 (“Letter”) which you
submitted to CBSA, contrary to section B.I.3(a) of the Code.
3.

In the alternative to charge 2, in or about August, 2020, you did

knowingly forge or in any other way alter or falsify a document or
evidence required by the University, and/or did utter, circulate or make
use of such forged, altered or falsified document or evidence, namely the
Letter which you submitted to CBSA, contrary to section B.I.1(a) of the
Code.
4.

In the alternative to charges 1, 2 and 3, in or about August 2020,

you did knowingly engage in a form of cheating, academic dishonesty or
misconduct, fraud or misrepresentation not otherwise described in the
Code, in order to obtain academic credit or other academic advantage of
any kind, by submitting the Transcript and the Letter to CBSA, contrary to
section B.I.3(b) of the Code.

-3A.

Particulars of the offences charged

1.

You were a student at the University of Toronto Scarborough at all

material times.
2.

You earned only 3.0 credits from the University. You served

successively longer periods of suspension from the University because
your cumulative grade point average did not meet the necessary
minimum. Starting in January 2018, you were required to serve a three
year suspension from the University.
3.

In or about August 2020, you knowingly submitted the Transcript

and the Letter to CBSA in connection with a post-graduate work permit.
4.

The grades contained in the Transcript for the courses listed are

false. Many of the courses taken and grades earned are entirely fictional
and greatly inflated. Grade point averages and numbers of credits earned
are inflated, courses taken were altered, and your status was
misrepresented.
5.

The information contained in the Letter which states that you had

completed the requirements for graduation by May 2019 and that you had
requested to graduate in June 2019 was false.
6.

You knowingly submitted the false information in the Transcript

and the Letter to CBSA intending that CBSA rely on it to grant you
privileges in respect of post-graduation work permits, knowing that the
information provided to CBSA about your academic record at the
University was forged, altered and falsely inflated your marks and
misrepresented your official academic record at the University.
7.

You knowingly submitted the forged, altered and falsified

Transcript and the Letter containing falsified information to obtain an
academic advantage.

-4B.

PROCEEDING IN ABSENCE OF STUDENT

3.

At the commencement of the hearing, counsel for the University sought an order
that the hearing proceed in the absence of the Student. In support of that
request, counsel tendered to the Panel a Book of Documents (Re:
Notice/Service), which was marked as Exhibit 1 at the hearing.

4.

Exhibit 1 contained the following evidence:
(a)

The Affidavit of Nick Cheng dated November 4, 2022. This Affidavit
demonstrated that the University sought to have a meeting with the
Student and the Provost but the Student did not respond to invitations to
that effect.

(b)

The Affidavit of Andrew Wagg, dated October 14, 2022. This Affidavit
contained evidence as to the email account of the Student, and that it was
last accessed on February 11, 2022.

(c)

The Affidavit of Natalia Botelho dated November 10, 2022. Ms. Botelho is
an assistant at the law firm of Paliare Roland Rosenberg Rothstein LLP,
counsel for the University. This Affidavit contained further evidence as to
contact with the Student and, in particular, as to the occasions on which
and means by which the Student was given notice of the charges against
him and the hearing scheduled to proceed with respect to those charges.
This Affidavit also contained evidence that the Student sent an email to
counsel for the University dated February 10, 2022, from which it is
apparent that the Student was aware of the charges against him and that
the University was proceeding to prosecute those charges.

5.

On the basis of this evidence and submissions of counsel for the University, the
Panel was satisfied that the Student had received reasonable notice of the
hearing. Accordingly, the Panel ordered that the hearing proceed in the absence
of the Student.

-5C.

FINDINGS

6.

Counsel for the University gave an undertaking that if there were a finding of guilt
and a conviction on Charges 1 and 2, the University would withdraw Charges 3
and 4.

7.

Counsel for the University tendered into evidence a Book of Documents (Re:
Finding of Offence). The Book of Documents was accepted by the Panel and
entered as Exhibit 2 at the hearing.

8.

The Affidavit of Richard Levin, dated November 3, 2022 was contained in Exhibit
2. Mr. Levin was a Senior Strategist, Office of the Vice Provost at the University.

9.

Mr. Levin’s Affidavit recounted that in August, 2020 he was contacted by the
Canadian Border Services Agency (“CBSA”), which was seeking authentication
of 2 documents received by the CBSA from the Student. The Student had
submitted the documents as part of his application for a post-graduate work
permit. The documents consisted of a letter purporting to be from the Associate
Registrar of the University, certifying that the Student had completed the
requirements for an Honours Bachelor of Arts Degree. The other document was
what purported to be the Student’s academic transcript from the University
indicating that the Student had earned a total of 20.0 credits from the University
with a Cumulative Grade Point Average of 3.78.

10.

In the course of his employment, Mr. Levin compared the documents sent by the
CBSA to the Student’s official academic record from the University.

11.

Mr. Levin’s Affidavit evidence continued as follows:
6.

I identified numerous discrepancies between the information

contained in the CBSA Transcript as compared to the Official Transcript
in terms of marks, courses taken, and academic status. In short, virtually
every bit of information in the CBSA Transcript was markedly different
from the Student’s actual academic record as reflected in the Official
Transcript. I have attached a Table with a detailed comparison of the

-6CBSA Transcript to the Student’s Official Transcript to my affidavit as
Exhibit E.
7.

I have highlighted some of the most egregious discrepancies here:
(a)

Credits Earned. The Student’s Official Transcript indicated
that he had earned a total of 3 credits in five terms from the
University of Toronto Scarborough, whereas the CBSA
Transcript indicated that he had earned 20 credits over
nine terms from the University of Toronto Mississauga.
None of the Credits earned entries in the CBSA Transcript
are accurate.

(b)

Course Enrolments. The CBSA Transcript includes only
two of the courses from the Official Transcript (MATA32H3
and MGE02H3 in his first term in 2015 Fall). Every other
course which appears on the CBSA Transcript does not
appear on the Official Transcript (a total of 38 added
courses), and was therefore not taken by the Student.
Similarly, the remaining 14 courses which appear on the
Official Transcript have been deleted from the CBSA
Transcript.

(c)

Grades. The Student’s marks received in the three courses
that appear on both the Official Transcript and the CBSA
Transcript have been grossly inflated on the CBSA
Transcript. An official mark of LWD (late withdrawal) from
2015 Fall in MATA32H3 appears as an 88 (A) on the
CBSA Transcript. The Student’s official mark from 2015
Fall of 27 in MGEA02H3 appears as a 90 (A+) on the
CBSA Transcript. Similarly, the Student’s official mark from
2016 Winter of 0 in MGEA06H3 appears a mark of 86 (A)
in Fall 2015 on the CBSA Transcript.

-7All of the other grades on the CBSA Transcript are for
courses not taken by the Student and are all very high
grades.
All of the Sessional and Cumulative Grade Point Averages
in the CBSA Transcript are also different from those in the
Official Transcript, and again are consistently inflated.
(d)

CGPA. The Student’s final actual Cumulative Grade Point
Average (“CGPA”) was 0.36 whereas the CBSA Transcript
claims the Student had a CGPA of 3.78. 008

(e)

Academic Status. The CBSA Transcript consistently
misrepresents the Student’s status. It did not reflect the
fact that the student was on academic probation after the
2016 Winter term, or that he was suspended for four
months following the 2016 Summer term and then for
twelve months which covered the 2016 Fall, 2017 Winter
and 2017 Summer terms. Instead, the CBSA Transcript
contains courses and grades for the 2016 Fall and 2017
winter terms as if the Student had attended classes when
he was in fact suspended.
The Official Transcript confirms that the Student was
suspended from the University for three years following the
2018 Fall term. This is not reflected in the CBSA
Transcript; rather, the CBSA Transcript makes it appear
that the Student successfully completed courses in the
following 2019 Winter term.

(f)

The Student was enrolled at the University of Toronto
Scarborough. The CBSA Transcript appears as if it is from
the University of Mississauga.

(g)

The Letter falsely indicates that the Student had completed
the requirements to graduate with an Honours Bachelor of

-8Arts Degree from the University of Toronto Mississauga
and that he requested to graduate at the June 2019
convocation ceremony. In reality, the Student has not
completed the requirements to graduate, and was never
enrolled at the University of Toronto Mississauga.

12.

The Panel carefully considered all of the evidence as well as the submissions of
counsel for the University. Having done so, the Panel entered a finding of guilt
and a conviction on Charge 1 and Charge 2.

13.

On that basis the University, as undertaken, withdrew Charge 3 and Charge 4.

D.

PENALTY

14.

In support of her submissions as to the appropriate penalty, counsel for the
University filed the Affidavit of Associate Professor Nick Cheng, dated November
4, 2022. This affidavit and its accompanying evidence were marked as Exhibit 3
at the hearing.

15.

The Affidavit of Professor Cheng advised that the Student has a lengthy prior
history of academic violations, including the following:
(a)

the Student was placed on academic probation following the Winter 2016
trimester and suspended from the University for 4 months following the
Summer 2016 trimester;

(b)

the Student admitted to submitting forged medical notes for 2 separate
courses during the Winter 2016 term;

(c)

the Student failed to hand in an assignment worth 12% of the final grade
in a course in Winter 2016;

(d)

the Student failed to write the final exam in a course in Winter 2016, and
submitted a forged medical certificate in support of a petition for a deferred
exam;

-9(e)

as a result of the foregoing, the Student received a mark of zero on 2
courses, a 12-month suspension starting September 1, 2016 and
notations on his academic record and transcript, all of which was reported
to him in a letter dated August 11, 2016.

16.

In its deliberations, the Panel recognized and accepted that forgery or
falsification of a transcript is among the most serious offences a student can
commit. Forged transcripts and academic records negatively impact the entire
University community. They undermine the credibility and standing of the
University and of a student’s peers who are attempting to legitimately fulfill
academic courses, requirements and degrees.

17.

In support of her submissions, counsel for the University tabled a chart
comparing similar cases to this case and the sanction imposed in such similar
cases. The chart convincingly demonstrates that expulsion is almost always the
outcome for a falsified transcript or academic record.

18.

Having carefully considered the submissions of counsel for the University and the
materials submitted, the Tribunal issued an Order as set out below.

E.

ORDER

19.

The Tribunal issued the following Order:
(a)

THAT the hearing may proceed in the absence of [the Student].

(b)

THAT [the Student] is guilty of two counts of knowingly forging or in any
other way altering or falsifying an academic record, and/or uttering,
circulating or making use of such forged, altered or falsified record,
contrary to section B.l.3(a) of the Code.

(c)

RECOMMENDS to the President of the University that he recommend to
the Governing Council that [the Student] be expelled from the University.

- 10 (d)

THAT [the Student] shall be immediately suspended from the University
for a period of up to five years from the date of this order or until
Governing Council makes its decision on expulsion, whichever comes
first, and that a corresponding notation be placed on his academic record
and transcript.

(e)

THAT this case be reported to the Provost for publication of a notice of the
decision of the Tribunal and the sanctions imposed, with the name of the
student withheld.

DATED at Toronto, this 24th day of February, 2023.

Original signed by:

_________________________________

F. Paul Morrison, Chair
On behalf of the Panel

