Case No.: 970
THE UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
IN THE MATTER OF charges of academic dishonesty made on July 20, 2018
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic
Matters, 1995,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Act, 1971, S.O. 1971, c. 56 as
amended S.O. 1978, c. 88

BETWEEN:
UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO

- and -

-■-

S

J

REASONS FOR DECISION

Hearing Dates: August 10, 2018 and October 4, 2018
Members of the Panel:
Ms. Sara Zborovski, Barrister and Solicitor, Chair
Professor Michael Evans, Faculty Panel Member
Ms. Yusra Qazi, Student Panel Member
Appearances:
Robert A. Centa, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland, Barristers
In Attendance:
Ms. Laurie O’Handley, Academic Integrity Specialist, Faculty of Arts & Science
Hearing Secretary:
Mr. Christopher Lang, Director, Appeals, Discipline and Academic Grievances, University of
Toronto (August 10, 2018)
Ms. Tracey Gamerio, Associate Director, Appeals, Discipline and Academic Grievances,
University of Toronto (October 4, 2018)
Not in Attendance:
Mr. S
J
, the Student

-■-

2

--

1.

This panel of the University Tribunal held a hearing on October 4th, 2018 to consider

J

-

(the “Student”) under the Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters, 1995 (the “Code”).

A.

Preliminary Issue: Proceeding in the Absence of the Student

2.

The hearing was scheduled to begin at 9:45 am on August 10th, 2018. At that time,

the charges brought by the University of Toronto (the “University”) against Mr. S

Discipline Counsel advised that neither the Student nor a representative of the Student had
responded to the Notice of Hearing.
3.

Discipline Counsel made submissions on proceeding with the hearing in the absence

of the Student. He advised the Tribunal that the following attempts had been made to provide
notice of the charges and hearing to the Student:
i.

On April 18th, the University sent the charges as issued to the Student
to his utoronto email address, the email address provided by him in
ROSI.

ii.

On June 15th, the University attempted to contact the Student by email
at his utoronto email address to advise that he had been charged with
certain offences under the Code and that a hearing had been scheduled
to take place on August 10th at 9:45. This correspondence to the
Student also advised that no hard copies of documents would be
provided by courier because he had not listed a current or permanent
address in ROSI.

The Student did not respond to any of this

correspondence. No “bounce back” message was received indicating
that the email could not be delivered.
4.

As of the August 10th hearing date, the Student had not responded to any of the above-

noted correspondence.

3

5.

However, in light of the limited attempt to provide notice to the Student, i.e., only

through his utoronto account, the Tribunal adjourned the hearing to October 4th, 2018 to
provide additional time for the Student to respond to notice of the hearing.
6.

At the hearing on October 4th, Discipline Counsel advised of the following additional

attempts which had been made to contact the Student to advise of the new hearing date:
i.

On August 10th, 2018, the Office of Governing Council sent the charges
in this matter on the Student by email to the email address that the
Student had provided in ROSI.

No “bounce back” message was

received indicating that the email could not be delivered.
ii.

Assistant Discipline Counsel, was advised by Mike Wiseman, acting
Director, Information Security, Information Technology Services at the
University that the last login to the Student’s utoronto account was
September 21st, 2018 at 12:09 and that the account has not been
forwarded to another email account.

iii.

A student in Assistant Discipline Counsel’s office contacted Owens
OnLine, the company that placed the request to verify the academic
credentials of the Student to determine if they had additional contact
information for the Student but was advised that the company has not
had any direct communication with the Student and no contact
information for him.

iv.

On August 20th, 2018, Assistant Discipline Counsel sent a letter by
overnight courier to the Student at the address provided in ROSI
attaching the Notice of Hearing for the continuation of the hearing on
October 4th at 1:45 pm, the revised charges, correspondence from the
Office of Governing Council, the Code and the University Tribunal Rules
of Practice and Procedure (the “Rules”). On August 21st, 2018 the
courier advised Assistant Discipline Counsel’s office that they received
no answer at the address, that the concierge confirmed that the Student

4

lived at the address but would not accept the courier package. Assistant
Discipline Counsel subsequently followed up by sending a letter to the
Student by mail to this same address enclosing the Notice of Hearing
for the continuation of the hearing on October 4th at 1:45 pm and the
revised charge.
7.

Pursuant to sections 6 and 7 of the Statutory Powers Procedure Act (the “Act”) and

Rule 17 of the Rules, where reasonable notice of an oral hearing has been given to a party
in accordance with the Act and the party does not attend the hearing, the Tribunal may
proceed in the absence of the party and the party is not entitled to any further notice in the
proceeding.
8.

The University requested that the Tribunal proceed with this hearing in the absence of

the Student.
9.

Pursuant to Rule 9, a Notice of Hearing may be served on a student by various means,

including by sending a copy of the document by courier to the student’s mailing address in
ROSI or by emailing a copy of the document to the student’s email address in ROSI.
10.

The University’s Policy on Official Correspondence with Students expressly states that

students are responsible for maintaining a current and valid postal address and email account
on ROSI. Students are expected to monitor and retrieve all mail, including emails, on a
frequent and consistent basis.
11.

The onus of proof is on the University to demonstrate that it provided a student with

reasonable notice of the hearing.
12.

Based on totality of the attempts made to provide notice to the Student, and particularly

given the evidence that the Student had accessed his utoronto account subsequent to notice
of the charges and hearing being sent thereto, the Tribunal concluded that the Student was
given reasonable notice of the hearing in compliance with the notice requirements of the Act
and the Rules.

5

13.

The Tribunal therefore determined on October 4th, 2018 that it would proceed to hear

the case on its merits in the absence of the Student, and the hearing proceeded on the basis
that the Student was deemed to deny the Charge made against him.
B.

The Charge and Particulars

14.

The Revised Charges and Particulars were detailed in a letter dated July 20, 2018 and

are set out below:
i.

You knowingly forged or in any other way altered or falsified an
academic record, and/or uttered, circulated or made use of such forged,
altered or falsified record, namely, a document which purported to be a
degree certificate from the University of Toronto dated June 12, 2015
2005, contrary to section B.I.3(a) of the Code.

Particulars

ii.

You were a registered student in the Faculty of Arts, University of
Toronto, from Fall 2011 to Winter 2015. You accumulated 9.0 earned
credits. You did not graduate from the University of Toronto.

iii.

You circulated and made use of a document that purported to be
your degree certificate from the University of Toronto dated June 12,
2015 2005.

iv.

You forged this document and falsely represented your academic
history and status.

v.

You knew that this document was forged, altered, and/or falsified
when you circulated or made use of it.

vi.

You had an obligation to provide accurate and truthful information
and not to misrepresent your academic record.

6

C.

The Evidence

15.

The University called the evidence of Mr. Terry Johnston, Assistant Director of the

Office of Convocation at the University. The Office of Convocation is responsible for annual
convocation ceremonies and for the reissue of degrees and diplomas and the verification of
the graduation status of the University alumni.
16.

The University accepts third-party requests to confirm degrees through the University

of Toronto Confirmation of Degree Website.

Mr. Johnston monitors the email account to

which requests are made.
17.

Mr. Johnston advised the Tribunal that on December 1st, 2017 a confirmation of

degree request was received from Armi Pineda of Owens OnLine requesting confirmation of
a degree conferred in 2015 on the Student. Mr. Johnston advised that he reviewed the
University’s records and, on December 4th, 2017, sent an email to Mr. Pineda advising that
no degree had been granted to the Student.
18.

Mr. Pineda responded to Mr. Johnston providing an image of the University degree

that the Student had provided for verification (the “Purported Degree”).

Mr. Johnston

responded to Mr. Pineda and reiterated that the University had no record of conferring a
degree on the Student.
19.

Mr. Johnston forwarded his correspondence with Mr. Pineda, including the image of

the Purported Degree he received to Sana Kawar on December 5th, 2017.
20.

The University called the evidence of Ms. Sana Kawar, Manager of the University’s

transcripts center. Ms. Kawar’s duties include the responsibility for responding to requests
for confirmation of transcripts. Ms. Kawar explained the process for third-party verification of
transcripts.
21.

Ms. Kawar confirmed for the Tribunal that she had received a copy of an email

exchange between Mr. Johnston and Armi Pineda of Owens OnLine. Ms. Kawar advised that

7

she is familiar with Owens OnLine and has handled several previous requests from that
company.
22.

Ms. Kawar advised the Tribunal that she accessed the Student’s academic record and

the University’s academic history for the Student. Ms. Kawar determined that the University
had never conferred a degree on the Student and that the Student had only completed 9
credits and was serving a three-year suspension for poor academic performance in
December 2018.
D.

Decision of the Tribunal.

23.

The onus is on the University to establish on the balance of probabilities, using clear

and convincing evidence,that the academic offence charged has been committed by the
Student.
24.

The Student was charged with two offences under Section B.I.3(a) of the Code, which

reads:
It shall be an offence for a […] student […] knowingly: to forge or in any other way
alter or falsify any academic record, or to utter, circulate or make use of any such
forged, altered or falsified record, whether the record be in print or electronic form.

25.

The Tribunal determined that the evidence clearly established that the Purported

Degree provided by the Student to Owens OnLine was false.
26.

Having concluded that the Purported Degree was a forgery, and given that it was

circulated and/or made use of by the Student, as evidenced by the fact that the Student
provided it to Owens OnLine, the Tribunal found it more likely than not that the Student was
responsible for circulating and making use of the forged record.
27.

The Tribunal found that the Student is guilty of forging or in any other way altering or

falsifying an academic record, and/or uttering, circulating or making use of such forged,
altered or falsified record, contrary to section B.I.3(a) of the Code.

8

E.

Penalty

28.

The matter continued with a hearing on the appropriate sanction. The University

requested that the Tribunal make an order immediately suspending the Student for up to five
years, and recommending to the President of the University that he recommend to the
Governing Council that the Student be expelled from the University.
29.

The panel reviewed a number of Tribunal decisions presented by the University.

These cases establish the importance of the University as an educational institution and as a
degree-granting body, and emphasize that members of the public must be able to rely on
degree certificates allegedly issued by the University as being accurate. These decisions
establish that the forgery or falsification of an academic record, including a transcript, is an
offence of the utmost seriousness because such falsification both undermines the credibility
of the University and of other students who have legitimately earned their grades and
degrees.
30.

Additional considerations of the Tribunal included that the Student’s conduct was

premediated and egregious, and that the Student did not respond to correspondence from
the University or its counsel, nor did he attend the Hearing or send anyone on her behalf. As
a result there were no mitigating circumstances for consideration.
31.

The Tribunal deliberated and concluded that, under the circumstances, it was

appropriate to make a recommendation for expulsion.
F.

Conclusion

32.

The Tribunal orders that the Student is guilty of 1 count of knowingly forging, altering,

or falsifying, an academic record, or uttering, circulating, or making use of such an academic
record, contrary to section B.I.3(a) of the Code;
33.

The Tribunal orders that the following sanctions be imposed on the Student:

9

i.

the Student be immediately suspended from the University of Toronto for a
period of up to 5 years from the date of the Tribunal's order or until Governing
Council makes its decision on expulsion, whichever comes first, and that a
corresponding notation be placed on her academic record and transcript; and

ii.

the Tribunal recommends to the President of the University that he
recommend to the Governing Council that the Student be expelled from the
University.

34.

The Tribunal· also ordered, that the case be reported to the Provost for publication of

a notice of this decision and the sanctions imposed, with the name of the Student withheld.

Dated at Toronto this

fr day of \) e c.£vVl l, ~

018

