Case #970

   DATE: December 17, 2018
   PARTIES: University of Toronto v. S.J. (âthe Studentâ)
   Hearing Date(s):Â  Â  August 10 and October 4, 2018
   Panel Members:
   Ms. Sara Zborovski, Barrister and Solicitor, Chair
   Professor Michael Evans, Faculty Panel Member
   Ms. Yusra Qazi, Student Panel Member
   Appearances:
   Robert A. Centa, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland,
   Barristers
   In Attendance:
   Ms. Laurie O'Handley, Academic Integrity Specialist, Faculty of Arts &
   Science
   Hearing Secretary:
   Mr. Christopher Lang, Director, Appeals, Discipline and Academic
   Grievances, University of Toronto (August 10, 2018)
   Ms. Tracey Gamerio, Associate Director, Appeals, Discipline and
   Academic Grievances,
   University of Toronto (October 4, 2018)
   Not in Attendance:
   The Student
   Trial Division - s. B.i.3(a) â forging or falsifying an academic
   recordÂ  Â â forged degree â reasonable notice of hearing not met when
   service only made to email account without ensuring account had been
   checkedÂ  Â â student did not attend hearing - suspension of five years
   pending expulsion and a report to the Provost with the Studentâs name
   withheld.
   The Student was charged with one charge of forging or falsifying an
   academic record contrary to s.B.i.3(a) of the Code. The charges related
   to a degree certificate that the Student had provided to an online
   degree verification service that purported to confer a degree to the
   Student when in fact, the Student had not graduated from the
   University.Â  The initial hearing was adjourned because the Tribunal
   found that adequate notice had not been provided to the Student on the
   basis of evidence that the only attempt at service had been through an
   email to the Studentâs ROSI account. The Tribunal found that adequate
   notice of the subsequent hearing had been given by the University on
   the basis of the totality of attempts that the University had made to
   effect service on the Student, including: the Studentâs ROSI email
   account had been checked since notice of the hearing had been sent by
   the University via email, that the University had attempted to send a
   courier to the Studentâs last known address on ROSI and was told by the
   concierge that the Student lived at that address but would not accept
   the letter, and a letter that had been send by Canada Post. The Student
   did not attend the hearing. The hearing proceeded in the Studentâs
   absence pursuant to sections 6 and 7 of the Statutory Powers Procedure
   Act and Rule 17 of the Rules .
   The Tribunal found that the Student was guilty of forging an academic
   record on the basis of affidavit evidence that the Student had provided
   a Certificate of Degree to an individual who had then asked a service
   to verify its authenticity. The Tribunal reviewed a number of
   decisions, which established that the forgery of a degree was a serious
   offence because falsification both undermines the credibility of the
   University and of other students who have legitimately earned their
   grades and degrees.Â  The Tribunal also considered that the Student's
   conduct was premediated and egregious, and that the Student did not
   respond to correspondence from the University or its counsel, nor did
   he attend the hearing or send anyone on their behalf. The Tribunal
   ordered: an immediate suspension for a period of up to five years; a
   recommendation to the President that the Student be expelled; and that
   the case be reported to the Provost with the Studentâs name withheld.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12980
