Case 410

DATE:

   August 20, 2007

PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v. Mr. A.L.

Hearing Date(s):

   April 3, 2007

Members of the Panel:

   John A. Keefe, the Chair
   Melanie Woodin, Tribunal Faculty Member
   Liang Yuan, Student panel member

Appearances:

   Lily Harmer, Discipline Counsel of the University
   The Student did not appear

   Student charged with 84 offences under s. B.i.1(b), s. B.i.1(d) and s.
   B.i.3(b) of the Code. The charges related to 9 courses in which the
   Student was alleged to have enlisted the aid of two female students to
   prepare 21 assignments, including course assignments, essays and exams,
   which the Student submitted as his own work. The Student was also
   alleged to have been in possession of, and copying from, text relevant
   to the subject matter of several exams in the courses at issue. The
   Student did not attend the hearing. The Panel considered the evidence
   submitted by the University and the Direction of the Tribunal, and
   found that the Student had received reasonable notice of the hearing in
   accordance with the Code and the Statutory Powers Procedures Act, and
   that it was appropriate to proceed in the Studentâs absence. The
   University submitted that the female students attended the lectures on
   behalf of the Student, wrote his assignments or essays, and then
   allowed him to submit them, or submitted them for him, under his name.
   The Panel considered the affidavits and oral testimony of the two
   âfriendsâ and e-mail exchanges between the Student and the âfriendsâ.
   The Panel found that the email exchanges provided clear evidence that
   all the work for the assignments was done by the âfriendsâ and not by
   the Student. The Panel found the two âfriendsâ to be credible.Â  The
   Panel also considered affidavit evidence from the course professors and
   instructors, the Chair of the department and the Manager of the
   Divisional Office of Student Academic Conduct. According to the
   University, the Student had denied the allegations and claimed that he
   had done all of the work for the courses himself although he might have
   obtained editing help for some assignments. At a Deanâs meeting
   regarding the allegations, the Student was unable to provide meaningful
   answers to questions concerning the content of the coursework. The
   Panel observed that some of the charges against the Student were
   duplicative because they alleged different offences for the same
   misconduct. The Panel found that a conviction should be entered on one
   count only relating to each event of misconduct with other charges
   being dismissed as duplicative. With respect to the first course, the
   Panel found that the evidence was inconclusive as to whether the
   Student used draft answers, prepared by Friend 1, as âcheat-sheetsâ on
   the exam. The Panel dismissed the six charges related to the first
   course. With respect to the second course, the Panel compared the
   research paper submitted by the Student and the documents tendered as
   exhibits to the affidavit of Friend 1 and found that it corroborated
   Friend 1âs evidence that she prepared the paper. The evidence of Friend
   1 was that she also prepared the webpage related to the project without
   any assistance or input from the Student. The Panel found the Student
   guilty of two offences under s. B.i.1(b) and B.i.1(d) of the Code in
   connection with the course work, and two offences under B.i.1(d) of the
   Code in connection with the essay and the webpage. There were two term
   tests and a term paper at issue with respect to the third course. The
   Panel found that there was no clear and convincing evidence that the
   Student used draft answers, prepared by Friend 1, on the first test,
   and dismissed the charges associated with the test. The Panel found
   that the Student took a test booklet with answers pre-prepared by
   Friend 2 to a re-write of a second test and that he submitted a term
   paper prepared by Friend 2 as his own work. The Panel dismissed the
   charges in connection with the first term test and found the Student
   guilty of two offences under s. B.i.1(b) and s. B.i.3(b) of the Code in
   connection with the second term test, and one offences under B.i.1(d)
   in connection with the term paper. There were two course assignments
   and a term paper at issue with respect to the fourth course. The Panel
   found that the first assignment was prepared by Friend 1 and submitted
   on behalf of the Student, and that the second assignment and term paper
   were prepared by Friend 1 and submitted by the Student as his own work.
   The Panel found the Student guilty of three offences under s. B.i.1(d)
   of the Code in connection with the two assignments and the term paper.
   With respect to the fifth course, the Panel compared the book report
   submitted by the Student and the documents submitted as exhibits to the
   affidavit of Friend 1 and found that it corroborated her testimony that
   she prepared the report, with assistance from Friend 2, which was
   submitted by the Student as his own work. The Student was taking work
   from Friend 1 and Friend 2 at the same time. The Panel found the
   Student guilty of one offences under s. B.i.1(d) of the Code in
   connection with the book report. With regard to the sixth course, the
   Panel considered the evidence and testimony of Friend 2 and found that
   she prepared the answer for a test in advance of the test and that the
   Student copied the answer on to a cheat-sheet which he used while
   writing the test. The Panel found the Student guilty of one offences
   under s. B.i.3(b) of the Code in connection with the test. With regard
   to the seventh course, the Panel considered the evidence of Friend 2
   and found that she did all the course work for an essay worth 100 per
   cent of the course grade and that she prepared the essay that was
   submitted by the Student as his own work. The Panel found the Student
   guilty of one offences under s. B.i.1(b) in connection with the course
   work and s. B.i.1(d) of the Code in connection with the essay. There
   was an essay and an exam at issue with respect to the eighth course.
   The Panel considered the evidence of Friend 2 and found that the essay
   was prepared by Friend 2 and submitted by the Student as his own work.
   The Panel found that the evidence was inconclusive as to whether the
   Student used draft answers, prepared by Friend 2, as âcheat-sheetsâ on
   the exam. The Panel found the Student guilty of one offences under s.
   B.i.1(d) of the Code in connection with the essay and dismissed the
   charges in connection with the exam. There was a term test and an essay
   at issues with respect to the ninth course. The Panel considered the
   evidence of Friend 2 and found that there was no clear evidence that
   the Student used draft answers, obtained by other students and edited
   by Friend 2, as a âcheat-sheetâ on the test. The Panel found that the
   essay was prepared by Friend 2 and submitted by the Student as his own
   work. The Panel dismissed the charges in connection with the exam and
   found the Student guilty of one offences under s. B.i.1(d) of the Code
   in connection with the essay. The Panel considered the guidelines for
   determining appropriate sanction and found that the Student
   demonstrated a pattern of deliberate disregard for Universityâs rules
   of ethical conduct. The Student submitted work that was not authored by
   him, that was not his original work and that was entirely the work of
   others; there was evidence of cheating on tests and assignments; and
   there was a pattern of deliberate dishonest and manipulative conduct.
   The Panel found that the Studentâs pattern of conduct involved
   violations of the Universityâs practices and procedures and the
   manipulation of the two students, and took place over several years and
   involved several courses. The Panel found no evidence of extenuating
   circumstances. No evidence was presented by the Student to rebut the
   evidence of the âfriendsâ; he did not participate in the Tribunal
   process; he intentionally evaded service; he perpetuated his dishonesty
   when confronted with the allegations; and he showed no understanding of
   his wrongdoing. The Panel accepted the Universityâs submission on
   penalty and imposed a recommendation to the President, further to s.
   C.ii.(b)(i) of the Code, that the Student be expelled from the
   University; a grade of zero in the nine courses; a five-year suspension
   pending the expulsion decision; and that a report be issued to the
   Provost.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12697
