UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORO TO
emb r 12 2012

IN THE I TT R OF hargcs of academic dishonesty mad

n

ND I THE M TTER OF lhe University of Tor nto
Malfers, /995,

ode of Behaviour on Academic

THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto A ,;t, 1971
S.O. 1978 c. 88

AND I

.0. 1971, c. 56 as amended

BET\VEEN:

UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO (the "University")
-AND-

.. 1' "JL"), ~ rJ (''BL") and Al I9 ~ (" OZ'') (collectively, the
"Stud en ts")
Hearing Dat : July 11 2014 (Continuation from

arch 24 201 4

Pan l M mber :
Ms. Roslyn . sao Chair
ProJe or Marku Bussmann Faculty Panel Member
Mr. Adel B ulazreg tudent Panel Member
Appearance :

Ms. Lily farm r, Assislanl Discipline Counsel for University Palime Roland Barristers
Mr. Samuel Greene, Downtown Legal Services, for the Stud -nt J
Ms. Lucy Gaspini Manage r, Academic Integrity and Affairs, University of Toronto Mississauga
M ·. alb rin

guin, enior Lecturer, Management, Univ rsity of Toronto Mis issauga

In Attendance:
Ms.

Ms.
Mr.

11 lJ JL), tudent
atali Ramtahal oordinator Appeals Disciplin and acuity Ori vance
hri t ph r Lang Dire tor, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty ri vances

ot in
Mr. I~

ttendance:
(HL)

I.J

'1111~

tudent
AOZ) tud nt

Ms.
No one app ari ng fo r TTL and AOZ

2

CONTINUATION OF HEARING FROM MARCH 24, 2014
1.

This Panel's earlier Decision dated May 26, 2014 relating to JL and HL (relating to "use
of unauthorized aid" in November 2011 Charges) should be read in conjunction with this
decision.

2.

The Panel found JL and HL guilty of the November 2011 Charges.

3.

The penalty determination for JL and HL for the November 2011 Charges was adjourned
until after this Hearing on charges relating to a "personation" allegations against AOZ
and JL in December 2011 ("December 2011 Charges").

4.

Again, HL and AOZ did not attend at this Hearing although notice of this continuation
was served as a courtesy following their previous nun-attendance on March 24, 2014.

DECEMBER 2011 CHARGES
Charges Relating to December 2011 Incident
5.

JL was charged on November 12, 2012 with the following offences:
(a)

On or about December 5, 2011, JL knowingly had another person, AOZ,
personate her at the final examination in HIS 284H5F (the "Course"), contrary to
section B.I.l(c) of the Code;

(b)

In or about December 2011, JL knowingly forged, altered or falsified an academic
record, and did utter, circulate or make use of any such forged, altered or falsified
record, namely a T-Card, contrary to section B.I.3(a) of the Code; and

(c)

In the alternative, JL knowingly engage<l in a form of cheating, academic
dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or misrepresentation not otherwise described in
the Code in order to obtain academic credit or other academic advantage of any
kind in connection with the final examination in HIS 284H5F, contrary to section
B.I.3(b) of the Code.

6.

AOZ was also charged on November 12, 2012 with the following offences:

3
(a)

On or about December 5, 2011, AOZ knowingly personated another person, JL, at
a final examination in HIS 284H5F, contrary to section B.I.l(c) of the Code;

(b)

In or about December 2011, AOZ knowingly forged, altered or falsified an
academic record, and did utter, circulate or make use of any such forged, altered
or falsified record, namely a T-Card, contrary to section B.I.3(a) of the Code,· and

(c)

In the alternative, AOZ knowingly engaged in a form of cheating, academic
dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or misrepresentation not otherwise described in
the Code in order to obtain academic credit or other academic advantage of any
kind in connection with the final examination in HIS 284H5F, contrary to section
B.I.3(b) of the Code.

Agreed Statement of Facts
7.

JL brought a Mandarin Interpreter who was sworn for the Hearing.

8.

JL was the only one of the 3 Students who attended at this Hearing on July 11, 2014. JL
pleaded guilty to the December 2011 Charges based on an Agreed Statement of Facts
("ASF").

9.

The ASF is dated and signed March 24, 2014 (the -':irst date of hearing in these matters).
The Panel presumes that it was not tendered at the March 24 th hearing based on the
procedural Recommendation of the Senior Chair with respect to sequence of the hearing
on the Charges.

10.

We note that only JL and the University have signed the ASF and AOZ has not.
However, with AOZ's absence, the ASF is uncontradicted.

11.

The ASF confirms, among other things, that:
(a)

JL did not attend the final examination in the Course on December 5, 2011 and
had persuaded AOZ, another student at the University, to attend and write on JL's
behalf;

(b)

AOZ was not enrolled in the Course;

4
( c)

JL agreed with AOZ in advance of the examination that AOZ would present a TCard which had JL's name but featured a photograph of AOZ;

(d)

AOZ presented the doctored T-Card at the examination. AOZ was not recognized
by a Teaching Assistant from the Course and AOZ was asked to provide
additional identification to verify her identity as JL.

AOZ could not provide

additional identification at that time and was required to return the next day to do
so. AOZ completed a form on the day of the examination with false information;
(e)

JL attended at a meeting with the Dean's Designate on March 28, 2012 ("Dean's
Meeting") with legal counsel. JL admitted to having asked her "cousin" who was
a high school student to write the examination for her;

(f)

On September 18, 2012, AOZ attended at a meeting with the Dean's Designate
and admitted that she had written the examination for JL at JL's request and that
she was, in fact, a University student in the same program as JL and was not JL's
cousm;

(g)

JL admitted that she had AOZ personate her for the final examination and that
they forged and presented a doctored T-Card with the intention of obtaining
academic advantage; and

(h)

AOZ obtained a grade of 19% on the final examination.

Additional Evidence
Ms. Catherine Seguin
12.

The University re-tendered Professor Seguin, the Dean's Designate at UT - Mississauga,
to give evidence about her meeting with AOZ on September 18, 2012.

Ms Seguin's

Minutes of the meeting were tendered without objection.
13.

At the meeting, AOZ confirmed that she was a student at the University and that she had
agreed to personate JL at the final examination in the Course with the forged T-Card.

5
14.

AOZ also stated at the meeting that she wanted to show JL sympathy after being told that
JL had recently broken up with her boyfriend and st.:1ted that she was "na'ive" to trust JL.

15.

Ms. Seguin's recollection was AOZ told her that she had been asked by JL to personate
her about 3 days before the examination.

DECISION OF THE TRIBUNAL
16.

Based on the ASF, the evidence of Ms. Seguin, and AOZ not appearing, the Panel finds
JL and AOZ guilty of charges (a) and (b) in paragraphs 5 and 6 above, respectively.

17.

The University has withdrawn the alternative charge (c) for both students.

PENALTY

Penalty Re: HL
18.

The University has recommended a 2 year suspension for HL for his role 111 the
November 2011 Charges, namely, using an unauthotized aid during a test.

19.

HL has no academic offence history.

20.

The Panel accepts the University's recommended penalty and imposes a 2 year
suspension on HL commencing March 24, 2014 with a notation to be placed on HL's
academic record for the length of the suspension.

Penalty Re: AOZ
21.

AOZ had another academic-related infraction prior to the personation offence. AOZ was
disciplined for continuing to write during a test on October 5, 2011 after being told to
stop. On December 6, 2011, AOZ received a letter alleging this academic offence and on
January 2, 2012, AOZ admitted to the offence and accepted the sanction of a 3 mark
reduction from her final grade in the course.

22.

The University has recommended expulsion for AOZ's role in the December 2011
Charges, namely, personation of another student at a final examination and forging/using
a T-Card.

6

23.

AOZ has not attended or participated at the hearing and was involved in the earlier
academic infraction (though she was not sanctioned at the time of commission of the
personation offence). It is uncontroverted that AOZ participated in the planning before
and after personation of JL in an effort to mislead the University instead of admitting
guilt at the earliest opportunity.

24.

AOZ appears to have been disengaged from the University for some time since the
meeting with the Dean's Designate.

25.

In cases of personation, the Code (Appendix "C'') recommends a sanction of expulsion
from the University.

26.

AOZ gained no academic advantage for herself and advised at the Dean's Meeting that
she was trying to show JL "sympathy" for assisting her. Her ability to assist JL was
minimal given that she had not taken the course nor was enrolled in it.

27.

Despite the aggravating circumstances and recommendation by the University, the Panel
finds that a 5 year suspension of AOZ commencing on the date of this Decision with a
notation to be placed on AOZ's academic record for the length of the suspension plus 1
additional year is a sufficient penalty to address general and specific deterrence and the
principles of sanctioning.

Penalty Re: JL
28.

JL's penalty will address the findings of guilt for JL's roles in the November 2011
Charges (providing unauthorized aid) and in the December 2011 Charges (having another
student personate her in a final examination and forging a T-Card).

29.

JL testified under oath for the penalty phase of the hearing and her counsel made
submissions with respect to mitigating factors, summarized as follows:
(a)

JL's grandmother passed away in China on November 29, 2011 (death certificate
was tendered) and this had a profound impact on her as she had been raised by her
mother and grandmother;

7
(b)

JL had no family in Toronto at this time;

(c)

JL was not aware that she could petition to defer the December 5, 2011 final
examination in the Course although there was evidence tendered that JL had, in
fact, obtained a medical note on December 6, 2011 and submitted an online
request on December 8, 2012 to defer the final examination in another course
which she failed to attend on December 6, 2011. JL's explanation was that she
only learned about the ability to seek a deferral after the December 5th
examination in the Course;

(d)

JL admitted her guilt at an early opp01iunity at the Dean's Meeting in March
2012, but she did not provide AOZ's real name and attempted to mislead by
indicating that the person was her cousin, a high school student;

(e)

JL's action in asking AOZ to personate her for the final examination occurred
only 3 days before the examination and AOZ had not even taken nor was enrolled
in the Course. Accordingly, it is submitted to us that JL's request to have AOZ
personate her was "not calculated" and AOZ did not have a lot of time to prepare
for the examination.

(f)

JL does not have any prior academic offence history and the likelihood of her
reoffending is small.

JL has participated in this two (2) year process and

continued to take courses without any further disciplinary incidents.
(g)

JL has never gone through any prior disciplinary process before the November
2011 Charges and as such, has not had the opportunity of rehabilitation
occasioned by any earlier penalty. This is µresumed to extend to the submission
that JL should have the opportunity to demonstrate that specific deterrence can be
achieved by a suspension as opposed to an expulsion.

JO.

The University's Submissions can be summarized as follows:
(a)

JL acknowledged in cross-examination that she did not take advantage of the first
opportunity to admit her guilt to the personation offence. In particular, there had

8

been meetings with the University relating to the November 2011 Charges before
her March 28, 2012 Dean's Meeting for the personation offence when she could
have admitted her guilt;
(b)

JL acknowledged in cross-examination that this Hearing (July 11, 2014) was the
first time that JL ever mentioned being affected by the death of her grandmother
to anyone at the University;

(c)

JL continued to mislead at the March 2012 Dean's Meeting about AOZ's identity;

(d)

the T-Card forgery and continued attempt the day after the examination to
convince the Registrar that AOZ was JL by providing her Chinese passport to use
was evidence of deliberate, pre-meditated and calculated academic dishonesty;
and

(e)

later, on January 12, 2012, JL obtained a new T-Card and, for her photograph, JL
acknowledged in cross-examination that she wore a wig.

The University's

supposition is that JL did this with the intention to create a greater resemblance
between AOZ and JL on her T-Card in case there was future investigation into the
matter.
31.

The University has recommended the following sanctions for JL for both sets of charges:
(a)

expulsion;

(b)

a grade of zero in both MGM 101H5F and HIS 284H5;

(c)

immediate suspension of 5 years; and

(d)

notation to be placed on JL's academic record for the length of the suspension
plus 1 additional year.

32.

The Student is seeking a 5 year suspension commencing August 31, 2014 with a notation
to continue for an extra year. The deferred commencement to the suspension is to allow

9
th

tud nt to complete courses that she is taking during this ummer term (the Panel

onl had J ' transcript to the Winter 2014 term at

arch 12 2014).

Review ofAuthorities
33.

th th

Un iversity and the Student provided th

ith

uthmitie in support of

their po iti ns on p nalty. The Panel is, of cours , mindful of th ~ Decision which
s ts out gov ming principles with respect to penalty.
J 4.

The auth r ities cited by the University relating to the charge of persona ti on include:
(a)

L.Q. (Case No. 627 ;June 26, 2012) and JvlB. ( ase No. 623; November 30, 2011 ):
Th se tw cases involved the "impersonator" and the tucl nt, respectively. In the
s parate dec isions, each student was sanctioned with a 5 year suspension and the
niversity did not seek xpulsion in ither ca e. In th M.B. Decision, we note

that th

tudent in question was "offered" th a si ta n

int nd d to lea e the Univer ity anyway.

of the impersonator who

.B. adrnitt d his guilt at the Dean s

. ignate meeting but failed to attend at th hearing though duly given notice. In

MB., the University indicated that it was not

king

xpulsion because the

tud nt's conduct did not appear to be "unduly pr 1 editaled .. . but merely taking
advantage of the opp01iunity of [Q] leaving the

ni ersity and offering to do this

fi r the tudent".
(b)

lvf.W. (Case No . 585; September 1, 2010): T h facts in thi case resemble the
within cas . The student had another student attend to write her examination but
when that student was unable to provide a T- ard, suspicion was raised.
d

eption was later discovered and

Profi

or.

tud nt to

The

1. W. wa cal I d in to a meeting with the

M. W . with her mother, admitted that b had arranged for another
·it the examination in her place. The

tudent "panicked and asked

h r friend to impersonate her". The tudent bad no prio r disciplinary record. The
tud nt did not attend the Hearing and the
proving its case.

niv r ity was put to the ta k of

Upon a finding of gui lt th

u pen ion with a r commendation of e pul ion.

ni

r it

sought a 5 year

10
The University submitted that M.W.'s failure to attend the Hearing should be
considered an exacerbating factor. The Panel questioned this proposition as the
Notice of Hearing does not warn that, if a student fails to attend the hearing, the
penalty may be more severe than would have been imposed if the student had
attended (paragraph 23).
Nevertheless, the Panel found the unexplained absence of M.W. as an
exacerbating factor and indicated that had they heard fi'om her, they might have
arrived at a less serious sanction than the recommendation of expulsion and 5
year suspension that they ultimately made.

(c)

F.C. (Case No. 531; April 20, 2009): This decision was referred to by both the
University and JL.

The facts in F. C. are similar to JL's case. FC had another

person sit in for him on a final examination and engaged in another incident of
academic dishonesty in close proximity in time.
occtmed in the second course.

The personation offence

F.C. attended at the examination, signed an

examination list, presented his student card and then submitted an examination
booklet in a fictitious name after having arranged for another individual to attend
and submit an examination booklet in his name.

F.C. pleaded guilty at the

hearing and then testified on his own behalf for the purposes of the penalty as to
extenuating circumstances.

F.C. expressed remorse and requested a 5 year

suspension and not to be expelled.
In F. C., the Panel reviewed a number of authorities and concluded, which we
echo, that the various authorities differ in the various combinations of mitigating
and aggravating factors. Ultimately, that Panel did not expel the F.C. given the
mitigating circumstances and was not persuaded that he should be "given the life
sentence" of expulsion.
(d)

J 0. (Case No. 617; August 25, 2011): J.O. attended at the Hearing and admitted
to having had another person personate him at a term test. The University sought
expulsion which was resisted by J.O. The facts in JO. are quite different from
the within case as J.O. placed ads on the internet seeking someone to help write 3

11

tests and the final of his Math course and offered monetary compensation. The
University had learned of these advertisements early in the term and questioned
J.O. about them. J.O. denied that he was looking for someone to personate him at
written tests, rather, he was looking for a tutor. The Department accepted his
explanation and the matter was concluded.
J.O., in fact, did retain an individual to write his term test and then was
discovered.
penalty.

J.O. admitted guilt at the Hearing and gave sworn evidence on
The Student expressed remorse and provided some extenuating

circumstances.

Nevertheless, the Panel recommended expulsion because they

considered J.O.'s offence to have been committed even though he had the benefit
of a first chance vis-a-vis the initial meeting when he was merely questioned
before he committed the act. At paragraph 26, the Panel states,
"Although this is a ''first ojfence ", Mr. 0. on these facts, has
already been given another chance. Rather than taking advantage
of that second chance, Mr. 0. lied, rejected any opportunity to find
another means of passing or withdrawing fi·om the course, and, in
effect, flaunted the benefit of doubt he vvas given at this first stage
of the academic process. It is difficult to conceive of a more
egregious way to engage in this offence. Mr. 0. 's conduct showed
a total disregard for the academic proc?ss and the need for
honesty in order to preserve the integrity of that process."
3 5.

The Panel views this passage to support the consideration that a lesser penalty might be
warranted if the offence is a "first offence" and the student might benefit from a second
chance.

36.

Although JL was found guilty of the earlier offence relating to her allowing another
student copy her test (see companion decision dated May 26, 2014), it is our view that
that conviction cannot be considered a "prior" offence given the timing of charges and
hearing.

37.

With respect to the premeditation and calculation that the University highlights in the
commission of personation offences, the evidence was that JL engaged AOZ on her
behalf only 3 days before the examination which was after the death of her grandmother,

12
AOZ had never taken the course and was not enrolled in the course and AOZ would have
been of minimal assistance even if the personation had gone undetected.
38.

The Panel is concerned about the delay in providing the "new" information, raised for the
first time at the Hearing, about JL's grandmother's death. Nevertheless, we find that the
prospect of individual deterrence is a significant consideration in this case and JL has
continued to take courses at the University since 2012 while this disciplinary action has
been processed without further disciplinary incidents.

39.

Although JL did not admit guilt to the earlier offence ("unauthorized aid"), JL did, in
contrast, admit guilt at the Dean's meeting in March, 2012 for the personation charge. JL
signed the ASF relating to the personation charges on March 24, 2014, the date of the
first Hearing of these offences. JL has also participated in this disciplinary process for
two years which has likely had an emotional toll and deterrent effect.

40.

JL's counsel submitted that JL has not had the "benefit" of a penalty less serious than
expulsion to reflect and rehabilitate. We are prepared to treat the two offences as a "first
offence" given the proximity in time of the incident and that the Student has pleaded
guilty at an early opportunity to the personation offence. Even though JL pursued a trial
of the other offence and was found guilty, we do not find that this negates her remorse
and cooperation with respect to the personation offence.

41.

With respect to general deterrence, the Panel is of the view that the over 2 years that it
has taken JL to see this matter dealt with to its finality, the fact that JL has had to
participate throughout this process and will be subject to a 5 year suspension is sufficient
to effect general deterrence while balancing the considerations of individual deterrence
and rehabilitation.

42.

Accordingly, we impose the following penalty for JL:
(a)

a final grade of zero in MGM 101H5F;

(b)

a final grade of zero in HIS 284H5F;

13
c

a su pensjon of 5 years commencing August 31, 2014 th c mmencement ofth
u p nsion has been deferred to permit JL to complet the cour e

he is currently

nroll d in for the Summer 2014 term)· and
d)

a n tati n be placed on JL's academic rec rd and tr, n cript from the date of the
rd r until Augu t 31. 2020.

43.

Tl,

ribunal shall report this decision to he Pr v t for publi ation of a Notice of the

within d cisions and sanctions in the University n wspaper with the
withheld.

Dat d at T rant

this

(

(~ day of August 2014.

tudents' names

ADDENDUM

1.

It has been brought to my attention by Ms. Harmer for the University that the Panel
did not address all of the recommended sanctions against HL.

In particular, the

University sought a grade of zero for HL in MGMl 0 1H5F for the 2011 fall term.

2. The Panel acknowledges its oversight in neglecting to include the above-noted
sanction relating to HL and, accordingly, Paragraph 20 of the original Decision
should be amended to include:
11

The Panel also accepts the University's recommendation and imposes a final

grade of zero in MGMJ0JH5F. 11

3. Ms. Harmer also sought clarification regarding the request to report HL's decision to
the Provost for publication with the Student's name withheld. I note that Paragraph
43 of the Decision directs the reporting of the decision to the Provost for publication
with respect to all of the Students, including HL.

,v<
Dated at Toronto, this~ day of September, 2014.

<

Co-Chair

