Case 994 - Finding

DATE:

   May 27, 2020

PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v. H.W.

HEARING DATE:

   February, 21, 2020

Panel Members:

   Mr. Dean F. Embry, Chair
   Professor Lynne Howarth, Faculty Panel Member
   Ms. Julie Farmer, Student Panel Member

Appearances:

   Ms. Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg
   Rothstein LLP
   The Student
   Mr. Denna Jalili, The Student's Representative, Downtown Legal Services

In Attendance:

   Mr. Christopher Lang, Director, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty
   Grievances

   TheÂ StudentÂ was charged underÂ ss.Â B.i.3(a)Â andÂ B.ii.2Â of
   theâ¯Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters, 1995â¯(the âCodeâ) on the
   basis thatÂ sheÂ intendedÂ to commit the offence of forging or in any
   other way altering or falsifying an academic recordÂ andÂ sheÂ did or
   omitted to do something for the purpose of carrying out that
   intention.â¯Alternatively, she was chargedÂ under s.Â Â B.i.3(b) of
   theÂ Code.Â Additionally, she wasâ¯charged with one count
   underÂ s.Â B.i.1(d) of theÂ CodeÂ on the basis that sheÂ knowingly
   representedÂ asÂ her own an idea or expression of an idea or work of
   another inÂ a term paperÂ that she submittedÂ in a course.Â She was
   also chargedÂ alternatively for this offenceÂ underÂ s.Â B.i.3(b) of
   theÂ Code.

   TheÂ parties submitted anÂ Agreed Statement of Facts (âASFâ), a Joint
   Book of DocumentsÂ (âJBDâ)Â and affidavitÂ evidence.Â TheÂ StudentÂ did
   not contest the charge under s. B.i.1(d)Â of theÂ Code.
   SheÂ acknowledgedÂ that sheÂ hadÂ included verbatim or nearly verbatim
   text and ideas in her essay without proper attribution andÂ represented
   the ideas of another person as her own and in doing so committed
   plagiarism.Â Consequently, the Panel found her guilty.

   TheÂ StudentÂ contested
   theÂ allegationÂ pertainingÂ toÂ ss.Â Â B.i.3(a)Â andÂ B.ii.2Â of
   theÂ Code.Â TheÂ StudentÂ had placed an online order for a self-inking
   customized stamp and a seal embosser.Â It wasÂ admitted that the
   content of eachÂ itemÂ replicatesÂ the official stamp and seal used by
   the Office of the Registrar at theÂ University of Toronto Mississauga
   (âUTMâ)Â to authenticate official documents.Â TheÂ StudentâsÂ order
   came to the attention of the University becauseÂ a representativeÂ of
   the companyÂ contactedÂ the Office of the Registrar toÂ confirm that
   they had orderedÂ these items.

   TheÂ Panel foundÂ theÂ StudentÂ guiltyÂ under ss.Â  B.i.3(a) and
   B.ii.2Â becauseÂ the mental element andÂ actus reusÂ had been
   proven.Â With respect to theÂ actus reusÂ necessary to make out the
   offence,Â the PanelÂ found that theÂ StudentÂ had clearly gone
   beyondÂ âmere preparationâ, a principle outlined inÂ Deutsch v. The
   QueenÂ [1986] 2 SCR 2.Â ItÂ consideredÂ the costÂ ofÂ theÂ stamp and
   sealÂ she ordered and their accuracy.Â It commented that theÂ careful
   steps of acquiring, studying and replicating theseÂ itemsÂ would
   haveÂ hadÂ to be taken before ordering the stamps online.Â The Panel
   alsoÂ foundÂ that theÂ StudentâsÂ actions constituted an attempt
   becauseÂ there were very fewÂ steps remainingÂ within
   theÂ StudentâsÂ controlÂ to complete the offenceÂ onceÂ sheÂ received
   the items.Â As for theÂ mental element, the Panel found
   thatÂ whenÂ theÂ StudentÂ ordered the items, sheÂ intended to useÂ them
   to commit the offence.Â ItÂ acceptedÂ thatÂ the most likely useÂ to be
   madeÂ of the items once received would be to forge or falsify documents
   for some sort of material gain.

   InÂ discussing andÂ weighing the inferencesÂ available, the
   PanelÂ explained thatÂ when applying the balance of probabilities
   standard, it is not enough for there to be another reasonable inference
   available. Any reasonable inferences available must effectively
   outweigh the inference that the items were intended to be used to
   commit the offence.Â It also stated that any competing inferences did
   not have to be led directly in evidence but would have to arise from
   the evidence received by the Panel.Â The PanelÂ foundÂ that the
   inference that the items were going to be used in an offence was much
   more likely than all other inferencesÂ when put together.

   The Panel did notÂ accept theÂ StudentâsÂ argumentÂ thatÂ it risked
   falling afoul of the rule of law.Â SheÂ argued thatÂ nothing in
   theÂ CodeÂ prohibits students from ordering instruments that resemble
   those used by the UniversityÂ andÂ asserted thatÂ ifÂ the PanelÂ were
   to find that doing so constitutes an offence, itÂ would be creating a
   new offence.Â According to the Student, thisÂ wouldÂ offend the rule of
   law requirement of prior notice as to what is forbidden.Â According to
   the Panel, this argumentÂ didÂ not consider the general nature
   ofÂ codified offences andÂ mischaracterizedÂ the issue and what the
   Panel was tasked to consider.Â The PanelÂ observedÂ that the fact that
   it was asked to rely on reasonable inferencesÂ to consider the issue
   did not result in the Panel inventing a prohibition. ItÂ was merely an
   instanceÂ of drawing inferences from proven facts toÂ come to a
   conclusion.

   Ultimately, the Panel concluded thatÂ allÂ chargesÂ had beenÂ proven.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/29337
