Case 837 - Appeal

   [1]Case 837

DATE:

   December 22, 2016

PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v. M.A. (âthe Studentâ)

Hearing Date(s):

   December 13, 2016

Panel Members:

   Mr. Ronald Slaght, Chair
   Professor Elizabeth Peter, Faculty Panel Member
   Professor Allan Kaplan, Faculty Panel Member
   Ms. Jiawen Wang, Student Panel Member

Appearances:

   Mr. Robert Centa, Counsel for the University

In Attendance:

   Mr. David Dewees, Deanâs Designate
   Appeal by the University from a [2]Tribunal decision not to accept the
   partiesâ Joint Submission on Penalty (JSP). Â The Student pled guilty
   to two charges of impersonation. Â The matter proceeded by an Agreed
   Statement of Facts and a JSP. Â Included in the JSP was a penalty of a
   permanent notation on the Studentâs transcript coupled with an
   agreement that the Student never reapply to the University. The Panel
   accepted all the sanctions in the JSP, including the agreement that the
   Student not reapply to the University, except it replaced the permanent
   notation on the Studentâs transcript with a lesser penalty of a
   five-year notation on the Studentâs transcript. Â The University
   appealed and sought a permanent notation on the Studentâs transcript as
   agreed to in the JSP.
   The Board allowed the appeal and ordered a permanent notation on the
   transcript per the JSP. Â In so doing, they followed the test set out
   in the Board decision, The University of Toronto v S.F. (2014, DAB Case
   # 690). The Board found the parties should be able to expect the Panel
   to uphold a JSP unless it is fundamentally contrary to the interests of
   the University community and objectively unreasonable or unconscionable
   after considering all the relevant circumstances. Â The Board
   elaborated that a JSP is against the public interest of the University
   if it is offensive to the values and behaviours that members of the
   University community are expected to uphold. Â Examples of these values
   may be found in the preamble of the Code. Â The Board adopted the
   standard of unreasonableness or unconscionable sentencing agreements
   set out by Moldaver J in the Supreme Court of Canada decision R v
   Anthony Cook , (2016 SCC 43) where sentencing agreements are
   unconscionable if they are Â âso unhinged from the circumstances of the
   offenceâ that their acceptance would lead a reasonable observer to
   believe that the proper functioning of the justice system had broken
   down.
   The Board further cited the policy reasons for deference to negotiated
   sentences from the Cook decision which states that sentencing
   agreements are both commonplace and vitally important to the justice
   system at large. Â The Board found that JSPs promote certainty in
   circumstances where an accused has given up their right to a hearing in
   exchange for a guilty plea and a negotiated sentence, acceptable to
   all. Time and resources are thus conserved, furthering the greater
   interests of fairness and efficiency. The Board found that the Panel
   erred by concentrating on its own subjective view on the reasonableness
   of the penalty, and not that of the greater community interests.
   The Board found that the Panel did not consider the actual
   circumstances surrounding the JSP, namely, that both parties gained
   advantages in the negotiated sanction. Â The Student admitted to three
   serious offences (though only charged and pled guilty for two of them)
   which justified a sanction of an expulsion had the Student not agreed
   that she would never reapply to the University. Â In making this
   agreement not to reapply which was not recorded on her transcript, the
   University obtained the benefit of the effect of an expulsion, at the
   same time, the Student avoided having a permanent notation of an
   expulsion on her transcript. If the notation was limited to five years,
   there would be nothing flagging the Studentâs serious academic
   misconduct at the University should she choose to apply for admission
   to other institutions after five years. Â Finally the parties were
   represented by counsel throughout the process. Taken together, the
   Board found that the JSP was reasonable in the circumstances and ought
   to have been accepted by the Panel.
   Appeal allowed.
   [3]View Case

References

   1. https://live-the-office-of-the-governing-council.pantheonsite.io/media/12911
   2. file:///Assets/ADFG+Digital+Assets/Case+$!23837.pdf
   3. file:///media/13072
