=""'
""', · -- - -- - - - - - -- - - - - -- - - - -- - - - - - - -

/

THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
TRIAL DIVISION

IN THE MATIER OF charges of academic dishonesty filed on July 24, 2013,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on
Academic Matters, 1995,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Act, 1971, S.O. 1971, c. 56
as amended S.O. 1978, c. 88

BETWEEN:
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
-AND -

REASONS FOR DECISION
Hearing Date: Wednesday September 18, 2013
Members of the Panel:

Ms. Sarah Kraicer, Barrister and Solicitor, Chair
Professor Bruno Magliocchetti, Department of Italian Studies, Faculty Panel
Member
Ms. Fikir Haile, Student Panel Member
Appearances:
Mr. Robert Genta, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Barristers
Ms. Danielle Muise, Legal Case Worker, Downtown Legal Services, on behalf of
the Student
In Attendance:
Mr.
Student
Mr. ~ the Student's father
Professor Eleanor Irwin, Dean's Designate, University of Toronto Scarborough
Mr. Christopher Lang, Director, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances
Ms. Sinead Cutt, Administrative Assistant, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty
Grievances

f9 Cl,

1.
The Trial Division of the University Tribunal was convened on September
18, 2013, to consider charges brought by the University of Toronto (the
"University") against Mr.
(the "Student") under the University of Toronto
Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters, 1995 (the "Code").

ftl <11

The Charges

2.

The Charges against the Student are as follows:

CSC C63 charges

1. On or about February 4, 2013, you knowingly represented as your own an
idea or expression of an idea, and/or the work of another in two discussion
threads, which you initiated for academic credit in CSC C63, contrary to
section 8 .1.1 (d) of the Code.
2. On or about February 4, 2013, you knowingly possessed an unauthorized
aid, or obtained unauthorized assistance, in co nnection with two
discussion threads, which you initiated for academic cred it in CSC C63,
contrary to section 8 .1.1 (b) of the Code.
3. On or about March 18, 2013, you knowingly represented as your own an
idea or expression of an idea, and/or the work of another in two discussion
threads, which you initiated for academic credit in CSC C63, contrary to
section 8.l.1 (d) of the Code.
4. On or about March 18, 2013, you knowingly possessed an unauthorized
aid, or obtained unauthorized assistance, in connection with two
discussion threads, which you initiated for academic credit in CSC C63,
contrary to section 8.1 .1(b) of the Code.
5. In the alternative, on or about February 4 and March 18, 2013 you
knowingly engaged in a form of cheating, academic dishonesty or
misconduct, fraud or misrepresentation not otherwise described in the
Code in order to obtain academic credit or other academic advantage of
any kind in connection with discussion threads that you initiated for
academic credit in CSC C63, contrary to section B.1.3(b) of the Code.

2

CSC 037 charges
6. On or about February 25, 2013, you knowingly represented as your own
an idea or expression of an idea, and/or the work of another in
Assignment 2, which you submitted for academic credit in CSC D37,
contrary to section 8.1.1 (d) of the Code.
7. On or about February 25, 2013, you knowingly possessed an
unauthorized aid, or obtained unauthorized assistance, in connection with
Assignment 2, which you submitted for academic credit in CSC D37,
contrary to section 8.1.1 (b) of the Code.

8. In the alternative, on or about February 25, 2013 you knowingly engaged
in a form of cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or
misrepresentation not otherwise described in the Code in order to obtain
academic credit or other academic advantage of any kind in connection an
assignment that you submitted for academic credit in CSC D37, contrary
to section 8.1.3(b) of the Code.

CSC C73 charges
9. On or about December 12, 2012, you knowingly possessed an
unauthorized aid, or obtained unauthorized assistance in an examination
in CSC C73, contrary to section 8.1.1 (b) of the Code.
10. In the alternative, on or about December 12, 2012, you knowingly
engaged in a form of cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud
or misrepresentation not otherwise described in the Code in order to
obtain academic credit or other academic advantage of any kind in an
examination in CSC C73, contrary to section B.1.3(b) of the Code.

MAT C32 charges
11. On or about November 7, 2012, you knowingly possessed an
unauthorized aid, or obtained unauthorized assistance during a term test
in MAT C32, contrary to section 8.1.1 (b) of the Code.
12. In the alternative, on November 7, 2012, you knowingly engaged in a form
of cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or
misrepresentation not otherwise described in the Code in order to obtain

3

academic credit or other academic advantage of any kind in a term test in
MAT C32, contrary to section B.l.3(b) of the Code.
Agreed Statement of Facts and Plea

3. Discipline Counsel advised the Tribunal at the outset of the hearing that the
University had entered into an Agreed Statement of Facts with the Student,
which is attached as Appendix "A" to these Reasons for Decision. The Tribunal
also received into evidence a Joint Book of Documents, on consent, containing
documents
referred
to
in
the
Agreed
Statement
of
Facts.
4.
Pursuant to the Agreed Statement of Facts, the Student pleaded guilty to
all charges filed by the Provost. The University agreed that if the Tribunal
convicts the Student on any of Charges 1-4, the Provost will withdraw charge 5. If
it convicts on any of charges 6 or 7, the Provost will withdraw charge 8. If it
convicts on charge 9, the Provost will withdraw charge 10. If it convicts on
charge 11, the Provost will withdraw charge 12.
5.
The facts underlying the charges are set out in the Agreed Statement of
Facts and the Joint Book of Authorities and are summarized below:
A.

MAT C32 - Charges 11 and 12

6.
In Fall 2012, the Student enrolled in MAT C32 - Graph Theory and
Algorithms for its Applications, which was taught by Professor Viktor Harangi
("C32"). The academic requirements for the course included a mid-term
examination, which was worth 30% of the final grade.
7.
The C32 mid-term examination was held on November 7, 2012. The
examination was closed book and students were not permitted to bring
calculators or any notes into the examination. Professor Harangi also made an
announcement at the beginning of the class that no aids, such as notes, books,
or calculators were permitted. He made it clear that only pens and pencils were
permitted.
8.
The Student attended the mid-term examination and handed in an
examination booklet. The Student admits that he knew that he was not permitted
to possess any notes, electronic devices, or other aids.
9.
During the examination, Professor Harangi observed that the Student had
a bundle of notes and a smart-phone in his possession. Professor Harangi told
4

the Student, on more than one occasion, to put the notes and the phone away
and not to look at them. The Student admits that Professor Harangi did not
confiscate the smart-phone or the lecture notes from him and that the Student
was permitted to take the unauthorized aids with him when he left the exam
room.
10.
On November 22, 2012, the Student met with Professor Nick Cheng, the
designate of the Chair of the Computer Science Department, to discuss the
matter.
11.
On December 5, 2012, Professor Eleanor Irwin, the Dean's Designate for
academic integrity at the University of Toronto Scarborough, invited the Student
to meet with her to discuss Professor Harangi's concerns regarding the possible
academic office in the mid-term examination. Her letter stated "I must point out
that it is considered an offence to use or possess an unauthorized aid or aids or
obtain unauthorized assistance in any academic examination or term test or in
connection with any other form of academic work".
12.
The Student admits that he brought lecture notes and other relevant
material into the mid-term examination with him. The Student admits that he was
warned about possessing and using the notes during the examination, and that
he used this unauthorized material to answer questions on the mid-term
examination.
13.

The Student admits that he knowingly:
(a)

possessed and used an unauthorized aid and received
unauthorized assistance in completing the mid-term examination;
and

(b)

engaged in a form or cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct,
fraud or misrepresentation in order to obtain academic credit,
contrary to section B.l.1(b) of the Code.

B.

CSC C73 - Charges 9 and 10

14.

In Fall 2012, the Student enrolled in CSC C73 - Computability and
Computational Complexity, which was taught by Professor Mike Molloy
("C73").

15.

The academic requirements for C73 included a final examination, which
was worth 45% of the final grade in C73.
5

16.

To assist students to prepare for the examination, Professor Molloy posted
online the exam questions and solutions to the 2009 exam ("2009
Answers").

17.

The C73 final examination was held on December 12, 2012, which was
one week after the date Professor Irwin sent the Student the letter about
the alleged offence in the MAT C32. The examination was closed book
and students were not permitted to bring calculators or any notes into the
examination.

18.

The Student attended the C73 final examination and submitted an answer
booklet. The Student admits that he knew that he was not permitted to
possess any notes, electronic devices, or other aids during the final
examination.

19.

Professor Molloy did not notice anything unusual during the examination,
but when he marked the Student's exam, he noticed that three of the
Student's solutions were copied almost verbatim from the 2009 Answers.
Professor Molloy concluded that must have had access to the 2009
Answers during the examination and used the 2009 Answers to complete
his examination.

20.

On December 19, 2012, Professor Molloy met with the Student to discuss
the matter.

21.

On January 30, 2013, Professor Wayne Dowler, the Dean's designate for
academic integrity at the University of Toronto Scarborough wrote to the
Student to invite him to discuss the allegation that he had committed an
academic offence in C73.

22.

The Student admits that he brought a copy of the 2009 Exam and
Solutions into the C73 final examination with him. He admits that he
copied from the 2009 Exam when completing his examination answers
and that
(a)

his answer to question 2 was copied from the solution to question 4
on the 2009 exam;

(b)

his answer to question 3 was copied from the solution to question 3
on the 2009 exam; and

(c)

his answer to question 6b was copied from the solution to question
6d on the 2009 exam.
6

23.

The Student admits that he knowingly:
(a)

possessed and used an unauthorized aid and received
unauthorized assistance in completing the final examination; and

(b)

engaged in a form or cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct,
fraud or misrepresentation in order to obtain academic credit,
contrary to section B.1.1 (b) of the Code.

C.

CSC C63 - Charges 1 to 5

24.

In Winter 2013, the Student enrolled in CSCC63 - Computability and
Computational Complexity, which was taught by Professor Nick Cheng
("C63").

25.

The course outline, which was available on-line, was linked to a specific
page warning the students about plagiarism and how to avoid committing
plagiarism and other academic offences in computer science courses.
That page stated as follows:
Plagiarism - Computer Science, UTSC

Plagiarism is a kind of fraud: passing off someone else's work or ideas as your
own in order to get a higher mark. Plagiarism is treated very seriously. The
assignments you hand in must be your own and must not contain anyone else's
ideas. Refer to the section on Code of Behavior on Academic Matters in the
Calendar for a more detailed description of plagiarism.
Guidelines for avoiding plagiarism

You may discuss assignments with friends and classmates, but only up to a
point: You may discuss and compare general approaches, but you must not
leave such discussions with any recorded material. You must not look at
someone else's solution to an assignment on paper or on the computer screen,
even in draft form. The actual coding of your programs, analysis of results, and
writing of reports must be done individually.
If you do talk with anyone about an assignment, then you must state this in your
assignment and state the extent of your discussion. Also, if you make use of
other resources such as books or webpages, then you must state this in your
assignment and paraphrase the solution in a way that shows you actually
understand the material.
Note that it is also a serious offense to help someone commit plagiarism. Do not
lend your printouts, reports or memory sticks, and do not let others copy or read
them. To protect yourself against people copying your work without your

7

knowledge, retain all of your old printouts and draft notes until the assignments
have been graded and returned to you. If you suspect that someone has stolen a
printout or memory stick, contact your instructor immediately.
To help you avoid committing plagiarism, here are some rules that you must
follow.
After any discussion about an assignment, you must immediately destroy all
notes from such discussions and you must wait at least one hour before going
back to the work you discussed.
Never discuss an assignment with anyone if he/she is going to leave with
recorded notes or is going to return to his/her work without spending an hour
doing something other than the work you just discussed.
Never show anyone (other than your instructor or tutor) anything, even in draft
form, that you intend to submit as your own work.
Never let anyone show you anything, even in draft form, that he/she is likely to
submit as his/her own work.
If you make use of material from a source other than your current course texts
and notes (for examples, books, journals, webpages, solutions to assignments
from past or concurrent offerings of a course), then you must do the following.
You must make appropriate reference to the source of what you use.
After consulting such sources, you must wait at least one hour before writing out
your solution on your own.
The first point helps you to avoid committing plagiarism. The second point helps
you to avoid getting zero for your work. After all, when we read the work you
submit, it must be clear that it is your work and yours alone, and that you fully
understand it.

26.

27.

The academic requirements for C63 included:
(a)

Online Discussion #1, which was worth 7.5% of the final grade; and

(b)

Online Discussion #2, which was worth 7.5% of the final grade.

For each discussion, each student was expected to initiate two discussion
threads by asking two questions. Each student was also required to
answer two questions posed by other students. The discussion took place
online in the Blackboard academic portal. Prior to 2012, the discussions
took place on the University of Toronto Scarborough intranet site.

8

28.

The course outline contained a specific warning that students'
contributions to the Online Discussions must be their own work and must
adhere to the plagiarism policy, which is reproduced above. The syllabus
stated:
Note #3: Each discussion will have multiple threads, and will be led by the TA
and the instructor on the Blackboard-portal {html). For these discussions, we're
looking for you to demonstrate your grasp (and learning) of relevant course
material. In grading your work, we'll be looking for breadth as well as depth, and
quality will be at least as important as quantity. If you're unable to solve a
particular problem or present a correct solution, you may still show your
knowledge by making suggestions as to how an answer could be obtained.
Sometimes this is what "real" theoretical computer scientists do when they hold
discussions. As with any work submitted for academic credit, your submissions to
these discussions must be your own work. You must adhere to the policy on
plagiarism (see below}. [emphasis added]

29.

Professor Cheng provided instruction sheets for the Online Discussions,
which included the topics to be discussed online and how to initiate the
two "language threads" on or before the relevant deadlines.

30.

On February 4, 2013, the Student initiated two discussion threads as part
of Online Discussion 1. On March 18, 2013, he initiated three more
discussions as part of Online Discussion 2.

31.

Except for some minor and inconsequential changes, the five discussion
threads initiated by the Student are identical to five discussion threads
initiated by other students during the previous year ("Original Discussion
Threads").

32.

On March 25, 2013, the Student met with Professor Cheng to discuss the
discussion threads.

33.

The Student admits that he knowingly:
(a)

included verbatim and nearly verbatim excerpts from the Original
Discussion Threads in the discussion threads that he initiated;

(b)

failed to attribute the verbatim and nearly verbatim excerpts from
the Original Discussion Threads or to indicate in any way that his
discussion threads they were based on the Original Discussion
Threads;

(c)

represented the ideas and work of others as his own;
9

(d)

did no meaningful academic work on the discussion threads that he
submitted;

(e)

committed plagiarism contrary to section B.l.1(d) of the Code;

(f)

received unauthorized assistance from the Original Discussion
Threads; and

(g)

engaged in a form or cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct,
fraud or misrepresentation in order to obtain academic credit,
contrary to section B.l.1(b) of the Code.

D.

CSC D37H - Charges 6 to 8

34.

In Winter 2013, the Student enrolled in CSC D37H - Analysis of
Numerical Algorithms for Computational Mathematics, which was taught
by Professor Wayne Enright ("D37").

35.

The academic requirements for D37 included an assignment that was
worth 10% of the final grade in the course ("Assignment 2").

36.

Professor Enright prepared a handwritten set of answers and a marking
scheme for Assignment 2 ("Enright Answers"). Professor Enright gave a
copy of the Enright Answers to Professor Nick Cheng, the teaching
assistant in D37, so that he could mark the students' submissions in
response to Assignment 2.

37.

Professor Enright had used Assignment 2 in a previous year. At that time,
he also prepared a handwritten set of answers to Assignment 2. He now
recalls that he may have circulated the set of answers to students in the
class to assist them to understand the correct answers to the questions.
The answer sheet he prepared in that previous years would have been
essentially identical to the Enright Answers.

38.

On or about February 25, 2013, The Student submitted his answers to the
questions contained in Assignment 2.

39.

When Professor Cheng marked the Student's assignment, he noticed that
it was very similar to the Enright Answers including the symbols used and
the diagram that was drawn. Professor Cheng concluded that this
similarity was highly unusual and that no other assignment was so similar
to the Enright Answers.
10

40.

On March 14, 2013, the Student met with Professor Cheng to discuss the
matter.

41.

The Student states that he found a copy of Professor Enright's answer
guide from the prior year posted on the Internet. He admits that he knew
he should not have accessed that answer guide and that he was not
permitted to use it to complete his assignment. He knew that copying
portions of the answer guide into his assignment was not permitted.

42.

With respect to this Assignment, the Student admits that he knowingly:
(a)

included verbatim and nearly verbatim excerpts from the answer
sheet prepared by Professor Enright;

(b)

failed to indicate in any way that his Solutions were based on the
answer sheet prepared by Professor Enright;

(c)

represented the ideas and work of the course instructor as his own;

(d)

committed plagiarism contrary to section B.l.1(d) of the Code;

(e)

obtained unauthorized assistance from the answer sheet prepared
by Professor Enright; and

(f)

engaged in a form or cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct,
fraud or misrepresentation in order to obtain academic credit,
contrary to section B.1.1(b) of the Code.

E.

The meeting with the Dean's Designate

43.

On April 17, 2013, the Student met with Professor Irwin, Dean's designate
for academic integrity at the University of Toronto Scarborough. The
Student admits that Professor Irwin provided the warning that was
required to be given to him under the Code.

44.

During that meeting, The Student admitted that he committed the
academic offences described above.

Decision on Charges

45.

The Student pleaded guilty to all charges. He acknowledged in the
Agreed Statement of Facts that the Provost had advised him of his right to
obtain legal counsel, that he had obtained legal advice, that he was
11

signing the Agreed Statement of Facts freely and voluntarily, knowing of
the potential consequences he faced and having consulted with legal
counsel, and that the Provost had made no representations to him about
what penalty the Provost would be seeking.
46.

At the hearing, the Student was present and was represented by a law
student. The law student representative advised the Tribunal that the
Student entered a plea of guilty on all charges. The Tribunal is satisfied
that the plea is informed, free and voluntary.

47.

After reviewing the facts contained in the Agreed Statement of Facts and
Book of Documents, the Tribunal deliberated and determined that the
facts demonstrated that the Charges 1,2,3,4,6,7,9 and 11 to which the
Student had entered a plea of guilty were proven.

48.

The Tribunal accepted the guilty pleas in respect of those charges, and
found the Student guilty of three counts of the academic offence of
plagiarism contrary to section B.1.1(d) of the Code in respect of Charges
1,3,and 6, and five counts of the academic offence of receiving
unauthorized assistance contrary to section B. i.1 (b) of the Code of
Behaviour on Academic Matters in respect of charges 2,4,7,9, and 11 ;.

49.

The remaining charges 5,8, 10 and 12 were withdrawn by the University.
The Tribunal therefore makes no finding with respect to charges 5,8, 10
and 12.

Sanction

50.

The University and the Student submitted a further Agreed Statement of
Facts and Joint Submission on Penalty to the Tribunal, which is attached
to these Reasons for Decision as Appendix "B".

51.

The further facts relevant to penalty are as follows:
(a)

The Student admits that he has been sanctioned for academic
misconduct on one prior occasion.

(b)

In Winter 2010, the Student enrolled in MAT A37, which was taught
by Professor Michael Goldstein. The Student admitted that he
possessed an unauthorized aid during the final exam in the course,
which was worth 45% of the final grade. The Dean's Designate for
Academic Integrity imposed a grade of zero on the examination.
12

The letter from the Dean's Designate to the Student dated June 16,
2010 stated, "I trust it is clear that the University regards with great
seriousness all acts of academic dishonesty and why they cannot
be tolerated. I hope you have learned from this unfortunate
experience and nothing similar will happen again."
52.

The Provost and the Student have agreed in a Joint Submission on
Penalty that the appropriate penalty in all the circumstances of this case is
that:
(a)

53.

a final grade of zero be assigned for each of:
(i)

MAT C32,

(ii)

CSC C73,

(iii)

CSC C63, and

(iv)

CSC D37;

(b)

The Student be immediately suspended from the University from
the date of the Tribunal's order until August 30, 2018, and that a
corresponding notation be placed on his academic record and
transcript for 5 years.

(c)

the Tribunal should report this case to the Provost who may publish
a notice of the decision of the Tribunal and the sanctions imposed,
with the Student's name withheld.

In oral submissions, Discipline Counsel highlighted the fact that the
Student has been found to have committed misconduct in 5 courses at the
University in numerous assignments ranging from class assignments to
final examinations. The misconduct took place over the course of two
separate semesters. Some of the misconduct occurred after the Student
had interactions with the Dean's office regarding misconduct in the Fall
term of 2012. The student has a history of prior discipline for misconduct.
On the other hand, Discipline Counsel noted that the Student cooperated
during his meetings with the Dean's Designate, has cooperated
throughout these proceedings, and has demonstrated some insight and
remorse in so doing. Discipline counsel submitted that in all the
circumstances, a 5 year suspension and other penalties in the Joint
Submission addressed the need for general and specific deterrence for
the serious misconduct, while affording the Student an opportunity to
13

rehabilitate his relationship with the University at the conclusion of the
lengthy suspension period. He argued that this penalty is consistent with
other penalties of this Tribunal in similar circumstances.
54.

The Student's representative highlighted several circumstances as
mitigating or extenuating in her submissions in support of the Joint
Submission on Penalty. She stated that the Student had an undiagnosed
medical condition, and a potential mental health condition, that might have
affected his studies and his conduct during the relevant period. She
presented a letter to the Panel members from the Student in this regard,
which is attached as Appendix C. In the letter, the Student provides
information about physical symptoms and a possible mental health
condition that made it difficult to concentrate, made him concerned about
his ability to maintain his grades, and led him to make "some terrible
choices about how to go about my work". The Student stated in the letter
that his struggles with his health do not excuse his behaviour over the past
year, but hoped that they might help to explain why he made the poor
choices he did.

Decision of the Tribunal on Sanction

55.

The Tribunal is mindful that a high threshold must be met for the Tribunal
to reject a joint submission on penalty. Only where the Tribunal is of the
view that accepting the joint submission would bring the administration of
justice into disrepute should the Tribunal reject it. With this threshold in
mind, the Tribunal considered the factors set out in the decision of
University of Toronto v. C. Dated November 5, 1976 at p. 12 (file 1976/773) and previous case law of this Tribunal in assessing the appropriateness
of the proposed penalty.

56.

The offences in this case are very serious acts of academic misconduct in
4 different courses: using unauthorized aids and plagiarism.
The
misconduct regarding the use of unauthorized aids was brazen and
repeated. The Student brought lecture notes and other unauthorized
material into a mid-term examination in November 2012, and used them
during the midterm despite being told by the invigilating professor to put
them away. Even though he then had interactions with the Chair's
designate and Dean's office regarding that misconduct, in December 2012
he again brought and used an unauthorized aid into a final examination in
a different course. Moreover, the Student committed this misconduct

14

despite having been previously disciplined in 2010 for using an
unauthorized aid in an examination.

57.

The misconduct regarding plagiarism was also serious: he plagiarized the
previous year's work of other students and presented it as his own original
work, and he plagiarized the answer sheet prepared by his course
professor which he found on the Internet and presented the answers as
his own. The nature of this misconduct undermines the necessary
relationship of honesty and trust between the student and the University,
and fundamentally threatens the integrity of the academic program and
the grades issued by the University.

58.

As the Student has committed misconduct in 5 courses (the four subject to
these charges, and the one prior misconduct), and has repeated similar
acts of misconduct despite receiving warnings and being subject to
disciplinary action, the Tribunal has a real concern that the student is likely
to continue the pattern of misconduct should he continue to be a student
at the University.

59.

On the other hand, the Student has cooperated with the University in this
proceeding, and appeared and participated before the Tribunal. The
Tribunal has carefully considered the Student's letter and has concluded
that while it is a genuine expression of remorse and demonstrates a
degree of insight, the information it provides does not excuse the
Student's misconduct, as the letter itself acknowledges. While the
Tribunal sympathizes with any health difficulties the Student may have,
the information provided as to the nature and timing of those possible
difficulties is insufficient to indicate that they should be considered
mitigating circumstances for the misconduct at issue in this proceeding.

60.

We agree that the proposed penalty in the Joint Submission is consistent
with previous decisions of the Tribunal in similar circumstances where
students have been disciplined for multiple acts of serious misconduct
over a period of time following an earlier disciplinary history. In University
of Toronto and the Student (Case 481; October 12, 2007), the Student
pied guilty to 6 charges of plagiarism-related misconduct, and had
previously been disciplined for one prior plagiarism offence. The Student
appeared and cooperated with the University. Tribunal accepted a joint
submission for a penalty of a 5 year suspension with a 7 year transcript
notation, and grades of zero for the five courses in which the plagiarism

15

had taken place. In University of Toronto v. ,-1 (Case 629; February 29,
2012) the student was found guilty of 1 charge of plagiarism-related
misconduct, and had previously been disciplined for 3 plagiarism offences.
The Student did not attend the hearing and did not cooperate with the
University. The Tribunal imposed a 5 year suspension, a 7 year transcript
notation, and a grade of zero for the course. In University of Toronto v.
~ (Case 625; February 13, 2013), the student pied guilty to
plagiarism-related offences in 2 courses, and had previously been
disciplined for 2 other academic misconduct offences. The Tribunal took
into account the fact that the student had been absent from the University
by his own decision for over one year in imposing a penalty of a four year
suspension, a six year transcript annotation, and a grade of zero in the
two courses in question.
61.

The Tribunal in this case has considered the relevant factors and the case
law and accepts the recommendation for the sanctions set out in the Joint
Submission on Penalty: a grade of zero in the four courses in which the
misconduct arose, a five year suspension from the University, <:l five year
transcript notation of the suspension, and publication of the notice of the
decision with the name of the student withheld. In our view, the sanctions
set out in the Joint Submission on Penalty are appropriate and reasonable
in the circumstances of this case, and accepting the recommended
penalty does not bring the administration of justice into disrepute.

Order

62.

The Tribunal issued the following Order on September 18, 2013:

1. THAT Mr.

Cl is found guilty of:

(a)

three counts of the academic offence of plagiarism contrary to
section B.l.1(d) of the Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters
("Code"); and

(b)

five counts of the academic office of receiving unauthorized
assistance contrary to section B.1.1 (b) of the Code;

2. THAT the following sanctions shall be imposed on Mr.

(c)

Cl:

he shall receive a final grade of zero in each of the courses CSC
C63, CSC D37, CSC C73, and MAT C32;
16

(d)

he shall be suspended from the University from the date of this
order until August 30, 2018; and

(e)

that a notation be placed on his academic record and transcript
until August 30, 2018;

3. THAT th is case shall be reported to the Provost for publication of a
notice of the Tribunal's decision and the sanctions imposed, with the name
of the student withheld.

Dated at Toronto, thisk:2,day of December, 2013

Sarah T. Kraicer, Co-Chair

17

APPENDIX A

1
THE UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
THE UNIVERSITY-OF TORONTO

IN THE MATTER OF charges of academ ic dishonesty made on July 24, 2013

ANO IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters, 1995,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Act, 1971, S.O. 1971, c. 56, as amended.

BETWEEN:

- and •

I

:-ie

00 0 0

this

\

jt;\/

Vo I\\ v .~ .Q •• f •· ·· · ·· ··· ·•· · · ···" ··

[i ·~~~·~f •• SQ,pt01L12r,20J) ..

AGREED STATEMENT OF FACTS

1.

. I l() "'ie

• ,.,. ll I' ~ ,- ~ ~ "' II •1 0"' 11, 'I ., • "'-

~ Ni,er ~ CuJ)

. ... ......~.J.t'..... !JJ............~

This hearing arises out of charges of academic misconduct filed by the Provost of the
University of Toronto (the "Provost") under the Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters
("Code'). For the purpose of this hearing, the Provost and ~

Cl ("Mr. Cl") have

prepared this Agreed Statement of Facts ("ASF'') and joint book of documents ("JBD").
The Provost and Mr. <111 agree that:
(a)

each document contained in the JBD may be admitted into evidence at the
Tribunal for all purposes, including for the truth of the document's _contents,
without further need to prove the document; and

(b)

if a document indicates that it was sent or received by someone, that is prima
facie proof that the document was sent and received as indicated.

2
2.

Mr.

Cl admits that he received a copy of the charges filed by the Provost. The charges

are included in the JBD at Tab 1.

3.

Mr.

Cl admits that he received the notice of hearing for September 18, 2013, which is

included in the JBD at Tab 2. He acknowledges that he received reasonable notice of
the hearing.

4.

5.

Cl waives the reading of the charges filed against him and pleads guilty to all
charges. The Provost agrees that if the Tribunal convicts Mr. Cl:

Mr:

(a)

on any of charges 1 to 4, the Provost will withdraw charge 5;

(b)

on any of charges 6 or 7, the Provost Will withdraw charge 8;

(c)

on charge 9, the Provost will withdraw charge 10; and

(d)

on charge 11 , the Provost will withdraw charge 12.

A copy of Mr.

<:as academic record dated August 12, 2013, in included in the JBD at

Tab 3.

A.

MAT C32 • Charges 11 and 12

6.

In Fall 2012, Mr.

<11 enrolled in MAT C32 - Graph Theory and Algorithms for its

Applications, which was taught by Victor Harangi ("C32"). A copy of the course outline
for C32 is included in the JBD at Tab 4. The academic requirements for the course
included a mid-term examination, which was worth 30% of the final grade in C32.
7.

The C32 mid-term examination was held on November 7, 2012. A copy of the mid-term
examination is included in the JBD at Tab 5.

3
8.

The examination was closed book and students were not permitted to bring calculators
or any notes into the examination. Prof. Harangi also made an announcement at the
beginning of the class that no aids, such as notes, books, or calculators were permitted.
He made it clear that only pens and pencils were permitted.

9.

Cl attended the mid-term examination and handed in an examination booklet. A
copy of Mr. (9's mid-term examination booklet is included in the JBD at Tab 6. Mr. CII

Mr.

admits that he knew that he was not permitted to possess any notes, electronic devices,
or other aids.
10.

During the examination, Prof. Harangi observed that Mr. Cl had a bundle of notes and a

Cl, on more than one occasion,
to put the notes and the phone away and not to look at them. Mr. <II admits that Prof.
smart-phone in his possession. Prof. Harangi told Mr.

Harangi did not confiscate the smart•phone or the lecture notes from him and that Mr.

Cl was permitted to take the unauthorized aids with him when he left the exam room.
11.

On November 22, 2012, Mr.

Cl met with Nick Cheng, the designate of the Chair of the

Computer Science Department, to discuss the matter.
12.

On December 5, 2012, Professor Eleanor Irwin, the Dean's Designate for academic
integrity at the University of Toronto Scarborough, invited Mr.

Cl to meet with her to

discuss Prof. Harangi's concerns regarding the possible academic office in the mid-term
examination. A copy of this letter is included in the JBD at Tab 7.
13.

Cl admits that he brought lecture notes and other relevant material into the midterm examination with him. Mr. <II admits that he was warned about possessing and
Mr.

using the notes during the examination, and that he used this unauthorized material to
answer questions on the mid-term examination.

4
14.

Mr.
(a)

Cl admits that he knowingly:
possessed and used an unauthorized aid and received unauthorized assistance
in completing the mid-term examination; and

(b}

engaged in a form or cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or
misrepresentation in order to obtain academic credit, contrary to section B.1.1 (b)
of the Code.

B.

CSC C73 - Charges 9 and 1o

15.

In Fall 2012, Mr.

Cl enrolled in CSC C73 - Computability and Computational

Complexity, which was taught by Mike Molloy ("C73'.'). A copy of the course outline in
C73 is included in the JBD at Tab 8.
16.

The academic requirements for C73 included a final examination, which was worth 45%
of the final grade in C73.

17.

To assist students to prepare for the examination, Prof. Molloy posted online the exam
questions and solutions to the 2009 exam ("2009 Answers"). A copy of the 2009
Answers is included in the JBD at Tab 9.

18.

The C73 final examination was held on December 12, 2012, which was one week after
the date Prof. Irwin sent Mr.

Cl the letter about the alleged offence in the MAT C32. The

examination was closed book and students were not permitted to bring calculators or
any notes into the examination.
19.

Mr.

Cl attended the C73 final examination and submitted an answer booklet. A copy of

Mr.

cas

examination booklet is included in the JBD at Tab 10. Mr.

Cl admits that he

5
knew that he was not permitted to possess any notes, electronic devices, or other aids
during the final examination.
20.

Prof. Molloy did not notice anything unusual during the examination, but when he
marked Mr.

cl's exam, he noticed that three of Mr. <:as solutions were copied almost

verbatim from the 2009 Answers . Prof. Molloy concluded that Mr.

Cl must have had

access to the 2009 Answers during the examination and used the 2009 Answers to
complete his examination.

<11 to discuss the matter.

21.

On December 19, 2012, Prof. Molloy met with Mr.

22.

On January 30, 2013, Prof. Wayne Dowler, the Dean's designate for academic integrity
at the University of Toronto Scarborough wrote to Mr.

<11 to invite him to discuss the

. allegation that he had committed an academic offence in C73. A copy of this letter is
included in the JBD at Tab 11.
23.

Mr.

<11 admits that he brought a copy of the 2009 Exam and Solutions into the C73 final

examination with him. He admits that he copied from the 2009 Exam when completing
his examination answers and that
(a)

his answer to question 2 was copied from the solution to question 4 on the 2009
exam;

(b)

his answer to question 3 was copied from the solution to question 3 on the 2009
exam; and

(c)

his answer to question 6b was copied from the solution to question 6d on the
2009 exam.

24.

Mr.

Cl admits that he knowingly:

6
(a)

possessed and used an unauthorized aid and received unauthorized assistance
in completing the final examination; and

(b)

engaged in a form or cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or
misrepresentation in order to obtain academic credit, contrary to section B.l.1(b)
of the Code.

C.

CSC C63 - Charges 1 to 5

25.

In Winter 2013, Mr.

Cl enrolled in CSCC63 - Computability and Computational

Complexity, which was taught by Nick Cheng ("C63"). A copy of the course outline in
C63 is included in the JBD at Tab 12.
26.

The course outline, which was available on-line, was linked to a specific page warning
the students about plagiarism and how to avoid committing plagiarism and other
academic offences in computer science courses. That page, which is included in the
JBD at Tab 13, stated as follows:
Plagiarism - Computer Science, UTSC

Plagiarism is a kind of fraud: passing off someone else's work or ideas as your own in
order to get a higher mark. Plagiarism is treated very seriously. The assignments you
hand in must be your own and must not contain anyone else's ideas. Refer to the section
on Code of Behavior on Academ ic Matters in the Calendar for a more detailed description
of plagiarism.
Guidelines for avoiding plagiarism

You may discuss assignments with friends and classmates, but only up to a point: You
may discuss and compare general approaches, but you must not leave such discussions
with any recorded material. You must not look at someone else's solution to an
assignment on paper or on the computer screen, even in draft form. The actual coding of
your programs, analysis of results, and writing of reports must be done individually.
If you do talk with anyone about an assignment, then you must state this in your
assignment and state the extent of your discussion. Also, if you make use of other
resources such as books or webpages, then you must state this in your assignment and
paraphrase the solution in a way that shows you actually understand the material.
·

7
Note that it is also a serious offense to help someone commit plagiarism. Do not lend
your printouts, reports or memory sticks, and do not let others copy or read them. To
protect yourself against people copying your work without your knowledge, retain all of
your old printouts and draft notes until the assignments have been graded and returned
to you. If you suspect that someone has stolen a printout or memory stick, contact your
instructor immediately.
To help you avoid committing plagiarism, here are some rules that you must follow.
After any discussion about an assignment, you must immediately destroy all notes from
such discussions and you must wait at least one hour before going back to the work you
discussed.
Never discuss an assignment with anyone if he/she is going to leave with recorded notes
or is going to return to his/her work without spending an hour doing something other than
the work you just discussed.
Never show anyone (other than your instructor or tutor) anything, even in draft form, that
you intend to submit as your own work.
Never let anyone show you anything, even in draft form, that he/she is likely to submit as
his/her own work.
If you make use of material from a source other than your current course texts and notes
(for examples, books, journals, webpages, solutions to assignments from past or
concurrent offerings of a course), then you must do the following.
You must make appropriate reference to the source of what you use.
After consulting such sources, you must wait at least one hour before writing out your
solution on your own.
The first point helps you to avoid committing plagiarism. The second point helps you to
avoid getting zero for your work. After all, when we read the work you submit, it must be
clear that it is your work and yours alone, and that you fully understand it.

27.

28.

The academic requirements for C63 included:
(a)

Online Discussion #1, which was worth 7.5% of the final grade; and

(b)

Online Discussion #2, which was worth 7.5% of the final grade.

For each discussion, each student was expected to initiate two discussion threads by
asking two questions. Each student was also required to answer two questions posed by
other students. The discussion took place online in the Blackboard academic portal.
Prior to 2012, the discussions took place on the University of Toronto Scarborough
intranet site.

8
29.

The course outline contained a specific warning that students' contributions to the Online
Discussions must be their own work and must adhere to the plagiarism policy, which is
reproduced above. The syllabus stated:
Note #3: Each discussion will have multiple threads, and will be led by the TA and the
instructor on the Blackboard-portal (html). For these discussions, we're looking for you to
demonstrate your grasp (and learning) of relevant course material. In grading your work,
we'll be looking for breadth as well as depth, and quality will be at least as important as
quantity. If you're unable to solve a particular problem or present a correct solution, you
may still show your knowledge by making suggestions as to how an answer could be
obtained. Sometimes this is what "real" theoretical computer scientists do when they hold
discussions. As with any work submitted for academic credit, your submissions to these
discussions must be your own work. You must adhere to the policy on plagiarism (see
below). [emphasis added]

30.

Prof. Cheng provided instruction sheets for the Online Discussions, which included the
topics to be discussed online and how to initiate the two "language threads" on or before
the relevant deadlines. A copy of the instruction sheet for each Online Discussion is
included in the JBD at Tab 14.

31.

On February 4, 2013, Mr.

<11 initiated two discussion threads as part of Online

Discussion 1. On March 18, 2013, he initiated three more discussions as part of Online
Discussion 2.
32.

Except for some minor and inconsequential changes, the five discussion threads
initiated by Mr.

Cl are identical to five discussion threads initiated by other students

during the previous year ("Original Discussion Threads"). Copies of all five of Mr.

Cl's

discussion threads and the Original Discussion Threads are included in the JBD at Tab

15.
33.

On March 25, 2013, Mr.

34.

Mr.

Cl met with Prof. Cheng to discuss the discussion threads.

Cl admits that he knowingly:

9
(a)

included verbatim and nearly verbatim excerpts from the Original Discussion
Threads in the discussion threads that he initiated;

(b)

failed to attribute the verbatim and nearly verbatim excerpts from the Original
Discussion Threads or to indicate in any way that his discussion threads they
were based on the Original Discussion Threads;

(c)

represented the ideas and work of others as his own;

(d)

did no meaningful academic work on the discussion threads that he subm itted;

(e)

committed plagiarism contrary to section B.l.1(d) of the Code;

(f)

received unauthorized assistance from the Original Discussion Threads; and

(g)

engaged in a form or cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or
misrepresentation in order to obtain academic credit, contrary to section B.I. 1(b)
of the Code.

D.

CSC D37H - Charges 6 to 8

35.

In Winter 2013, Mr.

Cl enrolled in CSC 037H - Analysis of Numerical Algorithms for

Computational Mathematics, which was taught by Wayne Enright ("D37"). A copy of the
course outline in D37 is included in the JBD at Tab 16.

36.

The academic requirements for D37 included an assignment that was worth 10% of the
final grade in the course ("Assignment 2"). A copy of Assignment 2 is included in the
JBD at Tab 17.

10
37.

Prof. Enright prepared a handwritten set of answers and a marking scheme for
Assignment 2 ("Enright Answers"). A copy of the Enright Answers is included in the JBD
at Tab 18. Prof. Enright gave a copy of the Enright Answers to Nick Cheng, the teaching
assistant in D37, so that he could mark the students' submissions in response to
Assignment 2.

38.

Prof. Enright had used Assignment 2 in a previous year. At that time, he also prepared a
handwritten set of answers to Assignment 2. He now recalls that he may have circulated
the set of answers to students in the class to assist them to understand the correct
answers to the questions. The answer sheet he prepared in that previous years would
have been essentially identical to the Enright Answers.

39.

On or about February 25, 2013, Mr. Cl submitted his answers to the questions
contained in Assignment 2

("Cl Assignment''). A copy of the Cl Assignment is included

in the JBD at Tab 19.
40.

When Mr. Cheng marked the Cl ·Assignment, he noticed that it was very similar to the
Enright Answers including the symbols used and the diagram that was drawn. Mr.
Cheng concluded that this similarity was highly unusual and that no other assignment
was so similar to the Enright Answers.

41.

On March 14, 2013, Mr.

42.

Mr.

Cl met with Prof. Cheng to discuss the matter.

Cl states that he found a copy of Prof. Enright's answer guide from the prior year

posted on the Internet. He admits that he knew he should not have accessed that
answer guide and that he was not permitted to use it to complete the
He knew that copying portions of the answer guide into the
permitted.

Cl Assignment.

Cl Assignment was not

11
43.

With respect to the
(a)

Cl Assignment, Mr. ca admits that he knowingly:

included verbatim and nearly verbatim excerpts from the answer sheet prepared
by Prof. Enright;

(b)

failed to indicate in any way that his Solutions were based on the answer sheet
prepared by Prof. Enright;

(c)

represented the ideas and work of the course instructor as his own;

(d)

committed plagiarism contrary to section B.1.1 (d) of the Code;

(e)

obtained unauthorized assistance from the answer sheet prepared by Prof.
Enright; and

(f}

engaged in a form or cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or
misrepresentation in order to obtain academic credit, contrary to section B.1.1 (b)
of the Code.

E.

The meeting with the Dean's Designate

44.

On April 17, 2013, Mr.

Cl met with Prof. Irwin, Dean's designate for academic integrity
at the University of Toronto Scarborough. Mr. Cl admits that Prof. Irwin provided the
warning that was required to be given to him under the Code.

45.

Cl admitted that he committed the academic offences
described above. A copy of the letter sent to Mr. Cl by Prof. Irwin on May 8, 2013, is
During that meeting, Mr.

included in the JBD at Tab 20. Mr.

ca

admits that the letter accurately summarizes what

took place during his meeting with Prof. Irwin.

12
F.

Acknowledgments

46.

Mr.

Cl acknowledges that:

(a)

the Provost has advised Mr.

Cl of his right to obtain legal counsel and that Mr.

~ has obtained legal advice; and

(b)

he is signing this ASF freely and voluntarily, knowing of the potential
consequences he faces, and having consulted with legal counsel; and

(c)

that the Provost has made no representations to Mr.

Cl regarding what penalty

the Provost may ask the Tribunal to impose in the circumstances of this case.

Signed on August 23 , 2013

Signed on August J i, 2013

Robert A. Genta
Assistant Discipline Counsel
University of Toronto

Doc 937970 v2

APPENDIX B

TH:: UN VERS!TY TRIB UN.-\L

THE UNI ERSITY OF TORONTO
2-1 ,i{,'
1,9
! i ', !) ..) I

THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO

. ld -

JOl~JT SUBMISSION ON PENALTY
r -s ,

~1'

. "er::,

1

g a :;:>.sou' 01 Gra,·~e, -,. a•·adem11.. ,n,s,:;oncLc1 ftt"'C ~,. tr~ Pm,ost "'I · e
of T .,,oi'to 'tr., ·Fr ,c-:,t 1 .,nnE:, the COCi:! oi Se avio1i,- (ll) A ·a Je-f) ,~
.,::• · ,s '

• . '
■

,= :,r ,;-i.; p:1 :;c, -· u tt'.e pr,,.-a,~, .t ase of th, 11:'.a , ::; the 0 rc •o,,
0

.::■ 'la ·1:: pr,

a -'C ,n.c; Jo nt SJn•-r:.1ss.o

11 ?"n:i ty,

1SP , ,,, 1.

cC•,"d-;.,_,,era'acc~; ::e :-. ct;:::;JS;-, T eP;·o·.JOS'a,.J '·ii •.::t agre-:- hi1

'ld'c

ti., /;:-V die, CP. ::I. !':,

THE UNl\lERS!TV TRIBUNAL
UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO

ced by

I\ - \)

.

y. ................,.··

Q:f~J.f:

the •••••••\..I.{)_1_ •••
this

~~ day of ~Q ptQ.J\b0,20 .•l].

s~r d r.,H

......... !.0!)./?!-...... ~.... .

-,

:n ;·\r: ;er .~~(;": ')

-:;c,kJ~te·:•·

he ancriied

1r

rvl.,·\T ,\:1 ?, v~1hich

•tvas. £augi·n by Prof

\:1i<)"':8B1

t/;r ·2■ a<frn it1&d 1r:~::;~ he possessed an unautrtonzeo akf during the firtal

13\\::;:·n n :iu;, coursst t.Nhi::h ~!-:'~is \V(:!'th 45'-Y~. of the· final grade
1

The [:,e2·-1ts 0Esigr18te

~c1 ,;>./:t. ;:-:,t::n·1<(;. ~r1tegnt\1 .1:-nr.lO'>,~d a g; •~Ot} of zero on ~he axan1incth.Jn. Th0 p~rth;'!.s r12rve
c.it;;c'7.:,,j a "ri:-iv ,-rf· lh8 dl'-'C,sio:1 :E:11.,~r frnn, !i1e Oe8n's Dr~s,gn;:,te. d,~ted ,June 16,

t1.11:-

c:a

t:e irnrt.~dia-tety ~u::,pen(Jed fror-1 (he Unv.1ersi'lV frocn H~~ d<.1 tB 0;

li"l& ·i·r:bun~:1l's rFder uni!! i~ugust ·30, ~~018. and that a correspc:1c:ir.g
notai.ion be pizc&d on ~,1s t.tC3dsrnic record and tr3n~:.c6p1 for~) yf';:;:J:-s.

"'• ,· f,./ ;to on S;;;~,ternti-;

I7

20U.

-~
Rooen A Centa
As$islanl Disi.;ip:ir)e Cv1.msd
Un1vers1\y nf Tr>r00tc
r, ... ~,.; ·:"

-

APPENDIX C

September 18, 2013
Dear Panel Members,
T hank you for allowing me to present to you some of the health troubles that I
have been going through over the past year. I submit this statement to you in
support of the Joint Submission on Penalty that will be presented to you at my
sanction hearing on September 18, 2013, by Mr. Genta and Ms. Muise.
Towards the middle of the Fall 2012 Term I began to suffer from symptoms of
stomach and throat pain. My condition slowly worsened , and I found it very
difficult to concentrate and felt that my studies were suffering as a result. I
becam_e incredibly overwhelmed and concerned about my ability to maintain my
grades, and as a result, I made some terrible choices about how to go about my
academic work.
I was unable to find the time to go to a medical specialist until after my final
exams in the spring of 2013, as I was trying, albeit unsuccessfully, to focus on
my studies. My condition was finally diagnosed on July 15, 2013 as chronic
gastritis with a bacterial infection.
I have included with this statement a copy of a letter from my family physician,
Dr. Chongen Liu, which confirms my diagnosis, and my symptoms. Dr. Liu
confirms that I had been suffering from these symptoms for at least several
months, and states that the symptoms of my undiagnosed condition affected my
concentration and ability to focus on my studies.
Dr. Liu's letter also refers to the likelihood that I have anxiety and/or depression,
and that my mental health is currently under assessment. I believe that it is likely
that I have been dealing with some mental health issues for some time, and that
this could also have contributed to my difficulties in my studies.
I know that my struggles with my health do not excuse my behaviour over the
past year, but I hope this information might help to explain why I made the poor
choices that I did.
Yours truly,

T!HE UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
UN~\fERS~TY OF TORONTO

Exnt ,
the •••• •••

this

V..0.f.kJJ{).~§!~t;(...................

ll day of tSe ptw1bQf. 20.1.-1.•
.......ca!.1.e9.J...Uiu..~.

Dr. Chongeu Liu_,Ml), fanJU~-physichi.n·
205~2330 Kenne9y Road,, ScarbQ.roug.Ji.QN: MlT 206
.Phque: 4 L.6-609•0000- Fax~ 416-609-0001
Au·gust 29, 1013
TO 'yv'hbin fl May Concern~
'
.
tam ·a f~inily p:&ysi~fo:n iirSci.Irbo:rough,Wheii.i$ ~ me:ltl·~~ ~·9f·GP$.():'· and ·
CCFf, _.
.···
1

tllilR8il

Mr..
r,i1s been a patients of t1iy •gra~!ic;e !iiilce .N,oyc~b~'r, 2Qll/ ff~
had symptoms ·of hea.r.lbUJO, tbma~ gisco,mfort .fJ lld ~toinach p,,iid
for:At '
lel1sfseve_ral _months. He h~¢beeo.sent to endoscop,y. and seen EN1''
specialist-to eventu~ly c1JJ,1{1J:1p-:diagnosis·of·cli ro1lic gastritis wilh H. Pylori
bncfcria. infectj~h.
.

c*~

This condition ga~e b.iin ·tfie h_~~utoum·; .st9m:j.ch pil.i~;_ lJjroat tliscomf~r~ etc.
affecling liis. conc~ntTatioil, eftetgY:AA~-boil,ity t9 (oots Oil :s t~~Y-·.
l{e- also had Tuberculosis:in•20-i0. And he is-probably has anxiety ~ud/qt\

dcp)'ession:."t present; whtcn: is-.-under·assessment.

Yours ttuly,

,,-,,:/?
_,..,. /

~- -·

"''

,J'

Dr. Chongcn Liu, .wlD

