Case 959

DATE:

   September 18, 2018

PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v. J.L. (âthe Studentâ)

Hearing Date(s):

   June 28, 2018

Panel Members:

   Mr. Douglas Harrison, Barrister and Solicitor, Chair
   Dr. Chris Koenig-Woodyard, Faculty Panel Member
   Mr. Chad Jankowski, Student Panel Member

Appearances:

   Mr. Robert Centa, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland
   Rosenberg Rothstein LLP, Barristers
   Mr. Nathan Korenberg, Paralegal and Agent, Juslaw Legal Services
   Ms. Sana Kawar, Manager, Transcript Centre, University of Toronto

In Attendance:

   Ms. Lucy Gaspini, Manager, Academic Success & Integrity, Office of the
   Dean, University of Toronto Mississauga
   Ms. Lisa Devereaux, Academic Integrity Officer, Academic Success &
   Integrity, Office of the Dean, University of Toronto Mississauga
   Ms. Krista Osbourne, Administrative Clerk and Hearing Secretary, Office
   of Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances
   Mr. Sean Lourim, Technology Assistant, Office of the Governing Council

Not in Attendance:

   The Student
   The Student was charged with forging or falsifying an academic record
   contrary to s.B.i.3(a) of the Code , or in the alternative, academic
   dishonesty not otherwise described contrary to s. B.i.3(b) of the Code
   . The charges related to an application that the Student had made to
   another University which contained a transcript that was a forgery. The
   Student pled guilty to the first charge, the University withdrew the
   alternative charge. The Student did not attend the hearing.
   The Tribunal accepted the Studentâs guilty plea. The parties submitted
   a joint submission on penalty (JSP) and an undertaking from the Student
   that he would not apply to the University for re-admission. Pursuant to
   the JSP, the University and the Student requested an order (a)
   immediately suspending the Student for five years; (b) that a
   corresponding notation of this sanction be made on the Student's
   academic record and transcript for ten years; and (c) that the
   Tribunalâs decision be reported to the Provost with the Student's name
   withheld. In determining the appropriateness of the sanction, the
   Tribunal referred to the case University of Toronto v. N.R . (Case No.
   714, October 11, 2013) for the proposition that forging a transcript
   was one of the most serious offences a Student can commit because it
   involves deliberate dishonesty, which was particularly egregious in
   this case because the Student was attempting to defraud another
   publicly funded post-secondary academic institution, taking away a
   space from an honest applicant. The Tribunal noted that expulsion is a
   common penalty in cases of forged academic records, however the Student
   had admitted guilt and cooperated with the University and in similar
   cases a lengthy suspension and transcript notation had been appropriate
   in other cases (See The University of Toronto v. A. F . (Case No.
   2004/05-07, May 16, 2005); University of Toronto v. N. R., supra ; and
   University of Toronto v. S.B .(Case No.905, November 1, 2017).Â  Noting
   that there was no authority for the Tribunal to enforce the
   undertaking, the Tribunal made an order: (a) immediately suspending the
   Student for five years; (b) that a corresponding notation of this
   sanction be made on the Student's academic record and transcript for
   ten years; and (c) directing that the Tribunalâs decision be reported
   to the Provost with the Student's name withheld.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12975
