Case #845

   DATE: April 26, 2017
   PARTIES: University of Toronto v. B.D. ("the Student")

   Hearing Date(s): July 26, 2017

   Panel Members:
   Ms. Johanna Braden, Barrister and Solicitor, Chair
   Professor Ernest Lam, Faculty Panel Member
   Mr. Sean McGowan, Student Panel Member

   Appearances:
   Ms. Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland,
   Barristers
   Mr. Robert Sniderman, Student-at-law, Downtown Legal Services

   In Attendance:
   Ms. Lucy Gaspini, Manager, Academic Integrity and Affairs, Office of
   the Dean, U of T, Mississauga
   Ms. Tracey Gameiro, Associate Director, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty
   Grievances
   Mr. Sean Lourim, Technology Assistant, Office of the Governing Council
   Ms. Clara Ryu, Student-at-law, Downtown Legal Services (observer)

   Not in Attendance:
   The Student

   Trial Division - ss. B.i.1(a) and B.i.1(d) of Code - forged or
   falsified test - plagiarism - student submitted an altered test for
   remarking - student copied unattributed text in paper - agreed
   statement of facts - finding of guilt - joint submission on penalty -
   zero on courses, three year suspension, four year notation, publication
   of the decision with the name of the Student withheld

   The Student was charged with forgery and plagiarism under ss. B.i.1(a)
   and B.i.1(d) of the Code, and alternatively, academic dishonesty under
   s. B.i.3(b) of the Code. There was an agreed statement of facts that
   included guilty pleas to the forgery and plagiarism offences. In one
   course, the Student altered a test and submitted it for the marks to be
   recounted. In another course, the Student submitted a paper that
   included substantial unattributed verbatim copying.

   The Tribunal found the student guilty of the forgery and plagiarism
   charges, and the University withdrew the academic dishonesty charges.
   The parties made a joint submission on penalty seeking a grade of zero
   in both courses, a three year suspension, a four year notation, and
   that the decision be reported to the Provost for publication with the
   name of the Student withheld. In determining whether this submission
   was appropriate, the Tribunal noted that by admitting guilt the Student
   took responsibility for their actions and demonstrated remorse. On the
   other hand, while the Student had written a seemingly heart-felt letter
   claiming to have learned a lesson after the first offence she went on
   to commit the second offence, raising a concern for a repeat offence.
   The offences showed elements of calculation and deliberation. A
   personal statement attesting to the Student's stress was not valuable
   because it too came between the commission of the two offences.
   Particularly troubling, the Student at one point attempted to drag her
   teaching assistant into covering up her offence. For these reasons the
   Tribunal found accepted the joint submission.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12949
