Case #753

   DATE: April 10, 2014
   PARTIES: University of Toronto v J.G.
   Hearing Date(s): April 2, 2014
   Panel Members:
   Roslyn M. Tsao, Chair
   Wayne Enright, Faculty Member
   Michael Dick, Student Member
   Appearances:
   Robert Centa, Discipline Counsel for the University
   In Attendance:
   Kasha Visutkie, Office of Academic Integrity, Faculty of Arts and
   Science
   Natalie Ramtahal, Coordinator, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty
   Grievances
   Trial Division â s. B.i.1(d) and s. B.i.3(b) of the Code â plagiarism â
   Â Agreed Statement of Facts â Student request that hearing proceed in
   her absence â two prior sanctions â Student cooperative â grade of zero
   in the course; Â suspension of four years commencing the date of the
   Order; notation on transcript until graduation; case reported to the
   Provost for publication
   Student charged with plagiarism in a course under s. B.i.1(d) and, in
   the alternative, in engaging in a form of cheating not otherwise
   described in the Code under s. B.i.3(b) .
   The University and Student submitted an Agreed Statement of Facts (ASF)
   and a Joint Book of Documents (JBD). The Student requested that the
   hearing proceed in her absence and the Panel proceeded. The Student
   admitted in the ASF that she knowingly plagiarized. The Panel noted
   that she also failed to attribute sources or use quotation marks. The
   Panel found the Student guilty of the charge under s. B.i.1(d) and the
   University withdrew the alternative charge.
   The University and the Student submitted a Joint Submission on Penalty
   which included a zero in the course, a suspension of four years
   commencing the date of the Order and a notation on the Studentâs
   transcript until graduation. The Student had already been sanctioned
   for academic misconduct (particularly plagiarism) on two prior
   occasions and the Panel agreed that a four year suspension was
   appropriate. The Panel was also advised that the Student was no longer
   enrolled at the University and had fully cooperated with the
   prosecution.
   The Panel accepted the Joint Submission on Penalty and imposed a final
   grade of zero in the course, a suspension of four years commencing the
   date of the Order, a notation on the Studentâs transcript until
   graduation and ordered that the case be reported to the Provost for
   publication.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12829
