UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO

IN THE MATTER OF charges of academic dishonesty made on February 18, 2014
AND IN IBE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters, 1995,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Act, 1971, S.O. 1971, c. 56 as amended S.O.
1978, C. 88

BETWEEN:
UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO (the "University")
-AND-

-

~ (the "Student")

REASONS FOR DECISION
Hearing Date: April 2, 2014
Panel Members:
Ms. Roslyn M. Tsao, Chair
Professor Wayne Enright, Department of Computer Science, Faculty Panel Member
Mr. Michael Dick, Student Panel Member
Appearances:
Mr. Robert Centa, Assistant Discipline Counsel for University, Paliare Roland Barristers
No one appearing for the Student

In Attendance:
Ms. Kasha Visutskie, Office of Academic integrity, Faculty of Arts and Science
Ms. Natalie Ramtahal, Coordinator, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances

2

1.

The Trial Division of the Tribunal heard this matter on April 2, 2014. The Student was
charged on February 18, 2014 with plagiarism in ENG322Yl Y ("Course") on or about
November 27, 2013. The Student was also charged in the alternative with engaging in a
form of cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or misrepresentation not
otherwise described in the Code.

Decision of the Tribunal
2.

The University and Student submitted an Agreed Statement of Facts ("ASF") and Joint
Book of Documents ("JBD") in this matter.

3.

At paragraph 4 of the ASF, the Student has requested that the Hearing Tribunal proceed
in her absence. As such, the Panel proceeded in her absence.

4.

At paragraphs 10 and 11 of the ASF, the Student admits that she knowingly plagiarized
certain original material for her essay submitted in the Course on November 27, 2013.

5.

It is noted that the Student not only reproduced passages from the original work but that

she also failed to attribute or appropriately use quotation marks and failed to list the
original work in her cited works.
6.

As such, there will be a finding of guilt on the first charge pursuant to section B.I. l (d) of
the Code. The University withdraws the alternative change under section B.I.3(b) of the
Code.

Penalty
7.

The Student and University submitted the following Joint Submission on Penalty:
(a)

Student will receive a zero in the Course;

(b)

Student will be suspended for four (4) years from the University commencing the
date of the Order; and

(c)

a notation of the sanction will be made on the Student's academic record and
transcript until her graduation from the University.

-

3
8.

The Student has been sanctioned for academic misconduct, in particular plagiarism, on
two prior occasions:
(a)

In 2009, the Student admitted that she had committed plagiarism and was
sanctioned with a grade of zero and a 25 mark reduction in her final grade. At
that time, the Student was warned in writing about such misconduct in the future
and given the advice that she improve her method of transcribing passages in her
researching and writing skills.

(b)

Unfortunately, in 2011, the Student again committed plagiarism in an assignment
and again, admitted her guilt. The Student was sanctioned with final grade of
zero and suspended from the University for a 12-month period. She was again,
warned in writing about such misconduct in future.

9.

Accordingly, the within offence constitutes the third distinct incident of plagiarism for
this Student. A four (4) year suspension, in the circumstances, is an appropriate, if not
lenient, disposition.

10.

The Panel was advised that the Student is no longer emolled at the University and that
she has fully cooperated with the prosecution of this offence.

11 .

The Tribunal accepts the Joint Submission on Penalty in these circumstances. A draft
Order was signed at the hearing by the Panel to that effect.

12.

The Tribunal is to report this decision to the Provost for publication of a notice of the
decision of the Tribunal and the sanctions imposed in the University's newspapers, with
the name of the Student withheld.

Dated at Toronto, this

lo ol,

day of April, 2014.

1

