1

Case No. 1177
THE UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
IN THE MATTER OF charges of academic dishonesty filed on February 8, 2021,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters,
1995,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Act, 1971, S.O. 1971, c. 56, as
amended S.O. 1978, c. 88

B E T W E E N:
UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO (the “University”)
- and –
Y N

C

(the “Student”)

REASONS FOR DECISION
Hearing Date: June 29, 2021, via Zoom
Members of the Panel:
Mr. Bernie Fishbein, Chair
Professor Julian Lowman, Faculty Panel Member
Ms. Arlinda Ruco, Student Panel Member
Appearances:
Ms. Tina Lie, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg Rothstein LLP
The Student
Hearing Secretary:
Ms. Carmelle Salomon-Labbé, Associate Director, Office of Appeals, Discipline and Faculty
Grievances

2

1. This is the decision of a Panel of the University Tribunal in a hearing that was held by
video conference on June 29, 2021. The University of Toronto (Mississauga) had preferred
14 charges of violating the Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters, 1995 (“the Code”)
against the Student”. Rather than reproducing the charges in their entirety, they are
attached as Appendix A to this decision. Essentially, they related to two incidents of
plagiarism (and other charges in the alternative) with respect to two assignments in
ENV311H5S (“Environmental Issues in the Developing World”) in February and March
of 2020, one incident of unauthorized assistance (and other charges in the alternative) in a
test in PHL245H5S (“Modern Symbolic Logic”) in March of 2020, and five charges of
forgery (and other charges in the alternative) with respect to five medical certificates
submitted in support of a petition the Student had submitted to lift a suspension that the
University had imposed for poor academic performance.
Evidence and Findings
2. At the hearing, an Agreed Statement of Facts, a Joint Book of Documents, an Agreed
Statement of Facts on Penalty (essentially disclosing a prior offence of unauthorized
assistance by the Student in the winter of 2018 for which she had received the sanction of
a zero grade in the course), and a Joint Submission on Penalty, all previously filed by the
University, were made exhibits. Again, rather than repeat them in their entirety, the Agreed
Statements of Fact (including the one on penalty) and the Joint Submission on Penalty are
attached as Appendices to this decision. To be perfectly clear, they were agreed to by the
Student who admitted all the facts, agreed to plead guilty to all charges and agreed to the
penalties sought by the University.
3. The Student was present at the hearing and given the opportunity to speak at all salient
stages of the hearing. She declined all such opportunities.
4. University counsel briefly reviewed the agreed upon evidence. Again, the Student declined
the opportunity to comment. The Panel adjourned briefly to deliberate. In view of the
Agreed Statement of Facts, the admissions of the Student including her guilty plea, the
Panel unanimously concluded that the University had established the violation of the Code
with respect to all eight of the violations of the Code in these circumstances. As agreed,
the University then withdrew the six charges it had made in the alternative.
5. University counsel then briefly made submissions in support of and in accordance with the
Joint Submission on Penalty. University counsel recommended the following:
a. a final grade of zero in the course ENV311H5S in Winter 2020;
b. a final grade of zero in the course PHL245H5S in Winter 2020;
c. immediate suspension from the University for a period of up to five years from the
date of the Tribunal’s order or until Governing Council makes its decision on
expulsion, whichever comes first;
d. a corresponding notation on her academic record and transcript;

3

e. a recommendation to the President of the University that he recommend to the
Governing Council that the Student be expelled from the University; and
f. that this case be reported to the Provost for publication of a notice of the decision
of the Tribunal and the sanction imposed in the University of Toronto newspapers,
with the name of the Student withheld.
6. First, University counsel noted the high threshold established in the jurisprudence to depart
from a joint submission on penalty—although it was possible, it ought not to be done unless
the joint submission was “truly unreasonable or unconscionable”, which was not the case
here. See University of Toronto and S.F. (Case No.: 690, October 20, 2014) at paras. 16,
18, 20 and 22; and University of Toronto and M.A. (Case No.: 837, December 22, 2016).
7. Counsel reviewed the traditional factors established in the jurisprudence to be considered
in determining sanction. The University conceded with respect to character of the
accused, the Student had admitted her guilt at the first opportunity and cooperated
throughout the University’s discipline process (once it had been engaged) by pleading
guilty, thereby accepting some responsibility for and “ownership” of her conduct. But
that was more than outweighed by the other factors when they were properly weighed
and considered. There was more than a legitimate concern about the likelihood of
repetition of the improper conduct. Not only had there been the prior offence of
unauthorized assistance for which the Student had received sanction, but the eight
offences had repeated themselves in a very short period of several months. They were not
interrupted, nor was the Student deterred or dissuaded even when spoken to at a meeting
with her instructor in the midst of this pattern. The Student has asserted no mitigating
circumstances, nor were any identified.
8. The remaining factors of the nature of the offences, the detriment to the University and
general deterrence all weighed very heavily in favour of accepting and implementing the
Joint Submission on Penalty. Both plagiarism and the unauthorized assistance, as
frequently stated in the jurisprudence, are very serious offences that undermine the teaching
and learning experience at the core of the University and warrant strong messages of
general deterrence. The plagiarism in the first assignment in ENV311H5S was particularly
egregious with 77% of the assignment taken from other sources, sometimes paragraphs in
length. The use of unauthorized assistance in PHL245H5S occurred during a test that had
to be administered online due to the pandemic, where there could not be the normal
proctoring and the level of trust required was extremely high.
9. Similarly, forgery has repeatedly been found in the jurisprudence to be among the most
serious offences. See for example University of Toronto and Y.K. (Case No.: 855, March
10, 2017) at para. 39. Moreover, the forgeries were of medical certificates—which gravely
impairs the University’s processes to accommodate disabilities since obviously the
individual circumstances of every medical certificate cannot be routinely always
corroborated. See for example University of Toronto and Y.X.G. (Case No.: Case No.:
740, February 10, 2014) at para. 19. The offence is aggravated, or made worse, by the fact

4

the medical certificates were purchased, which again has been commented on in the
jurisprudence. See for example University of Toronto and Y.Z. (Case No.: 628, May 23,
2012) at paras. 41-44.
10. Lastly, counsel reviewed a large number of previous Tribunal decisions, comparing the
facts in those decisions to the facts here, to demonstrate that the sanctions sought in the
Joint Submission on Penalty were well within the reasonable range.
11. Again, the Student was given an opportunity to comment. She declined.
Penalty
12. The Panel deliberated and was unanimously of the view that the arguments of University
counsel were persuasive, compelling and applicable here. In other words, particularly on
the agreed facts, admissions and guilty plea here, the Joint Submission on Penalty should
be adopted. Accordingly, the Panel directs the following sanctions:
a. a final grade of zero in the course ENV311H5S in Winter 2020;
b. a final grade of zero in the course PHL245H5S in Winter 2020;
c. immediate suspension from the University for a period of up to five years from the
date of the Tribunal’s order or until Governing Council makes its decision on
expulsion, whichever comes first;
d.

a corresponding notation on her academic record and transcript;

e. a recommendation from the Tribunal to the President of the University that he
recommend to the Governing Council that the Student be expelled from the
University; and
f. that this case be reported to the Provost for publication of a notice of the decision
of the Tribunal and the sanction imposed in the University of Toronto newspapers,
with the name of the Student withheld.

Dated at Toronto, this

24th

_________________________
Bernard Fishbein
On behalf of the Panel

day of August, 2021

APPENDIX 1

Via email
CONFIDENTIAL
February 8, 2021

Y N C
UTM
University of Toronto
Student Number:
e .c
@mail.utoronto.ca

Dear Y N

C

,

On the advice of the University Discipline Counsel, I am writing to inform you that you are hereby charged with the
offences as detailed in the attached document.
By copy of this letter I have informed Mr. Christopher Lang, Director, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances, of
the Academic Tribunal, who will be in touch with you regarding the Tribunal’s proceedings.
We recognize that receiving this information may be stressful, and therefore encourage you to meet with an
academic advisor or registrar to support you in navigating the academic integrity process. If you feel that your wellbeing is impacted by this process, please consider making an appointment with a counsellor within your division or
college, or with your campus health centre. For immediate support, My SSP provides 24-hour mental health support
through chat, telephone in multiple languages online, or by phone in multiple languages. You can access My SSP
from any location in the world, 24 hours a day, by calling 1-844-451-9700, or, outside of North America, call 001416-380-6578. Or you may call Good2Talk 24 hours a day, 7 days a week at 1-866-925-5454.
Yours sincerely,

Professor Heather Boon
Vice-Provost, Faculty & Academic Life
HB/jc
Encl.
cc:

Christopher Lang
Michael Lettieri
Tina Lie

UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO MISSISSAUGA
Y N C
(
)

CHARGES

Note: Wherever in the Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters, 1995 (“Code”) an offence is described as
depending on “knowing”, the offence shall likewise be deemed to have been committed if the person
ought reasonably to have known.
ENV311 Charges
1.

On or about February 24, 2020, you knowingly represented as your own an idea or expression of an
idea, and/or the work of another in Assignment #1, which you submitted for academic credit in
ENV311H5S (“ENV311”), contrary to section B.I.1(d) of the Code.

2.

In the alternative to Charge #1, on or about February 24, 2020, you knowingly obtained unauthorized
assistance in connection with Assignment #1, which you submitted for academic credit in ENV311,
contrary to section B.I.1(b) of the Code.

3.

In the further alternative to Charges #1 and #2, on or about February 24, 2020, you knowingly
engaged in a form of cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or misrepresentation not
otherwise described in the Code in order to obtain academic credit or other academic advantage of
any kind in connection with Assignment #1, which you submitted for academic credit in ENV311,
contrary to section B.I.3(b) of the Code.

4.

On or about March 31, 2020, you knowingly represented as your own an idea or expression of an
idea, and/or the work of another in Assignment #2, which you submitted for academic credit in
ENV311, contrary to section B.I.1(d) of the Code.

5.

In the alternative to Charge #4, on or about March 31, 2020, you knowingly obtained unauthorized
assistance in connection with Assignment #2, which you submitted for academic credit in ENV311,
contrary to section B.I.1(b) of the Code.

6.

In the further alternative to Charges #4 and #5, on or about March 31, 2020, you knowingly engaged
in a form of cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or misrepresentation not otherwise
described in the Code in order to obtain academic credit or other academic advantage of any kind in
connection with Assignment #2, which you submitted for academic credit in ENV311, contrary to
section B.I.3(b) of the Code.

PHL245 Charges
7.

On or about March 25, 2020, you knowingly used or possessed an unauthorized aid or obtained
unauthorized assistance in connection with Test 4 in PHL245H5S (“PHL245”), contrary to section
B.I.1(b) of the Code.

8.

In the alternative to Charge #7, on or about March 25, 2020, you knowingly engaged in a form of
cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or misrepresentation not otherwise described
in the Code in order to obtain academic credit or other academic advantage of any kind in connection
with Test 4 in PHL245, contrary to section B.I.3(b) of the Code.

Petition Charges
9.

On or about May 12, 2020, you knowingly forged or in any other way altered or falsified a document
or evidence required by the University of Toronto, or uttered, circulated or made use of such forged,
altered or falsified document, namely, a Medical Certificate from Trillium Health Partners,
Mississauga Hospital, dated March 16, 2019, which you submitted in support of petition #73097 to
lift a three-year academic suspension, contrary to section B.I.1(a) of the Code.

10.

On or about May 12, 2020, you knowingly forged or in any other way altered or falsified a document
or evidence required by the University of Toronto, or uttered, circulated or made use of such forged,
altered or falsified document, namely, a Medical Certificate from Trillium Health Partners,
Mississauga Hospital, dated March 23, 2019, which you submitted in support of petition #73097 to
lift a three-year academic suspension, contrary to section B.I.1(a) of the Code.

11.

On or about May 12, 2020, you knowingly forged or in any other way altered or falsified a document
or evidence required by the University of Toronto, or uttered, circulated or made use of such forged,

altered or falsified document, namely, a Medical Certificate from Trillium Health Partners,
Mississauga Hospital, dated April 6, 2019, which you submitted in support of petition #73097 to lift
a three-year academic suspension, contrary to section B.I.1(a) of the Code.
12.

On or about May 12, 2020, you knowingly forged or in any other way altered or falsified a document
or evidence required by the University of Toronto, or uttered, circulated or made use of such forged,
altered or falsified document, namely, a Medical Certificate from Trillium Health Partners,
Mississauga Hospital, dated November 1, 2019, which you submitted in support of petition #73097
to lift a three-year academic suspension, contrary to section B.I.1(a) of the Code.

13.

On or about May 12, 2020, you knowingly forged or in any other way altered or falsified a document
or evidence required by the University of Toronto, or uttered, circulated or made use of such forged,
altered or falsified document, namely, a Medical Certificate from Trillium Health Partners,
Mississauga Hospital, dated February 11, 2020, which you submitted in support of petition #73097
to lift a three-year academic suspension, contrary to section B.I.1(a) of the Code.

14.

In the alternative to each of Charges #9 to #13, you knowingly engaged in a form of cheating,
academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or misrepresentation not otherwise described in the Code
in order to obtain academic credit or other academic advantage of any kind in connection with
petition #73097, which you submitted to lift a three-year academic suspension, contrary to section
B.I.3(b) of the Code.

The particulars related to the charges are as follows:
1.

At all material times, you were a registered student at the University of Toronto Mississauga.
Particulars of ENV311 Charges

2.

In Winter 2020, you enrolled in ENV311 (Environmental Issues in the Developing World), which was
taught by Professor Barbara Murck.
Assignment #1

3.

On February 24, 2020, you submitted Assignment #1 (a country status report), entitled “Sustainable
development in Sri Lanka 2020” (“Assignment #1”) in ENV311, which was worth 25% of your final
grade in the course.

4.

You submitted Assignment #1:
(a)

to obtain academic credit;

(b)

knowing that it contained ideas, expressions of ideas or work which were not your own, but
were the ideas, expressions of ideas or work of others, including but not limited to:
(i)

“Sri Lanka” on the Britannica website (available at
https://www.britannica.com/place/Sri-Lanka);

(ii)

The publisher description for “Sri Lanka: Travel Information and Environmental
Study”, by Jesse Russell (available at https://books.apple.com/ca/book/sri-lankatravel-information-and-environmental-study/id1503252909?ign-gact=1);

(iii)

“Sri Lanka” on the Wikipedia website (available at
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sri_Lanka);

(iv)

“Flag of Sri Lanka” on The Nations Online Project website (available at
https://www.nationsonline.org/flags_big/Sri_Lanka_Flag.html);

(v)

“Sri Lanka at a Glance” on the Sri Lanka Tourism website (available at
https://www.srilanka.travel/srilanka-at-a-glance);

(vi)

“Sri Lanka” on the UN Sustainable Development Goals Knowledge Platform website
(available at
https://sustainabledevelopment.un.org/index.php?page=view&type=30022&nr=998
&menu=3170);

(vii)

“Cultural Life” on the Britannica website (available at
https://www.britannica.com/place/Sri-Lanka/Cultural-life);

(viii)

“Millennium Development Goals Country Report 2008/09”, prepared by the Institute
of Policy Studies of Sri Lanka (available at
https://www.undp.org/content/dam/undp/library/MDG/english/MDG%20Country%
20Reports/Sri%20Lanka/MDGR%202008%202009.pdf);

(ix)

“Sri Lanka achieves most Millennium Development Goals targets well ahead of
schedule - MDG Country report” (available at
https://news.lk/news/business/item/6776-sri-lanka-achieves-most-millenniumdevelopment-goals-targets-well-ahead-of-schedule-mdg-countryreport?tmpl=component&print=1)

(x)

‘What are the Sustainable Development Goals” on the UNDP website (available at
https://www.undp.org/content/undp/en/home/sustainable-developmentgoals.html);

(xi)

“Status of Sustainable Development Goals Indicators in Sri Lanka: 2017”, prepared
by the Department of Census and Statistics, Ministry of National Policies and
Economic Affairs, Sri Lanka (available at
http://www.statistics.gov.lk/sdg/application/publications/book.pdf);

(xii)

“Goal 3: Good health and well-being” on the UNDP website (available at
https://www.undp.org/content/undp/en/home/sustainable-developmentgoals/goal-3-good-health-and-well-being.html); and

(xiii)

“Achieving Inclusive Health in Sri Lanka through SDGs”, by Samanthi Bandara
(available at https://www.ips.lk/talkingeconomics/2016/12/08/achieving-inclusivehealth-in-sri-lanka-through-sdgs/#)

(collectively the “Assignment 1 Sources”); and
(c)

knowing that you did not properly reference the ideas, expressions of ideas or work that you
drew from the Assignment #1 Sources.

5.

By failing to properly reference the ideas, expressions of ideas or work that you drew from the
Assignment #1 Sources, you knowingly obtained unauthorized assistance from the Assignment #1
Sources.

6.

You knowingly submitted Assignment #1 with the intention that the University of Toronto
Mississauga rely on it as containing your own ideas or work in considering the appropriate academic
credit to be assigned to your work.

7.

For the purposes of obtaining academic credit and/or other academic advantage, you knowingly
committed plagiarism in Assignment #1.
Assignment #2

8.

On March 31, 2020, you submitted Assignment #2 (a policy brief), entitled “Empowerment of Poor
Farmers in Sri Lanka” (“Assignment #2”) in ENV311, which was worth 25% of your final grade in the
course.

9.

You submitted Assignment #2:
(a)

to obtain academic credit;

(b)

knowing that it contained ideas, expressions of ideas or work which were not your own, but
were the ideas, expressions of ideas or work of others, including but not limited to:
(i)

“Sri Lanka E-agriculture Strategy – June 2016” (available at
https://www.doa.gov.lk/ICC/images/publication/Sri_Lanka_e_agri_strategy_June2016.pdf); and

(ii)

“Poverty Data: Sri Lanka” on the Asian Development Bank website (available at
https://www.adb.org/countries/sri-lanka/poverty);

(collectively, the “Assignment #2 Sources”); and
(c)

knowing that you did not properly reference the ideas, expressions of ideas or work that you
drew from the Assignment #2 Sources.

10.

By failing to properly reference the ideas, expressions of ideas or work that you drew from the
Assignment #2 Sources, you knowingly obtained unauthorized assistance from the Assignment #2
Sources.

11.

You knowingly submitted Assignment #2 with the intention that the University of Toronto
Mississauga rely on it as containing your own ideas or work in considering the appropriate academic
credit to be assigned to your work.

12.

For the purposes of obtaining academic credit and/or other academic advantage, you knowingly
committed plagiarism in Assignment #2.
Particulars of PHL245 Charges

13.

In Winter 2020, you were enrolled in PHL245 (Modern Symbolic Logic), which was taught by
Professor Alexander Koo.

14.

On March 25, 2020, you wrote Test 4 in PHL245, which was worth 20% of your final grade. Due to
the covid19 pandemic, Test 4 was administered online in an unsupervised setting.

15.

You knew that you were not permitted to collaborate with other students during the test.

16.

You knowingly participated in an on-line group chat and knowingly obtained unauthorized assistance
from this group chat during the test.

17.

By participating in the group chat, you knowingly engaged in a form of cheating, academic dishonesty
or misconduct in order to obtain an academic advantage.
Particulars of Petition Charges

18.

At the end of the Winter 2020 term, you were suspended for three years due to your academic
performance.

19.

On May 12, 2020, you submitted petition #73097 to request that the suspension be lifted.

20.

In support of your petition, you submitted 5 medical certificates, each purportedly signed by Dr.
Mahgul Malik, a member of the College of Physicians and Surgeons of Ontario with registration
number 111927, of Trillium Health Partners, Mississauga Hospital, dated March 16, 2019, March 23,
2019, April 6, 2019, November 1, 2019 and February 11, 2020 (collectively, the “Medical
Certificates”).

21.

The Medical Certificates were forged, altered or falsified. Dr. Malik did not treat you, fill out, or sign
the Medical Certificates.

22.

You knew that the Medical Certificates that you submitted were forged, altered or contained false
information when you submitted them.

23.

You knowingly submitted the Medical Certificates:
(a)

understanding that the University of Toronto Mississauga required evidence to be presented
in order to obtain the academic accommodation or relief you sought;

(b)

with the intention that the University of Toronto Mississauga rely on them in considering
whether or not to provide you with the academic accommodations or relief you requested;
and

(c)

in an attempt to obtain an academic advantage.

APPENDIX 2
THE UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
IN THE MATTER OF charges of academic dishonesty made on February 8, 2021,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters, 1995,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Act, 1971, S.O. 1971, c. 56 as amended
S.O. 1978, c. 88

B E T W E E N:
UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
- and Y N

C

AGREED STATEMENT OF FACTS
1.

For the purposes of this hearing under the Code of Behaviour on Academic

Matters (“Code”), the Provost of the University of Toronto (the “Provost”) and Y N
C

(the “Student”) have prepared this Agreed Statement of Facts (“ASF”) and a Joint

Book of Documents (“JBD”). The Provost and the Student agree that:
(a)

each document contained in the JBD may be admitted into evidence
before the Tribunal for all purposes, including for the truth of the
document’s contents, without further need to prove the document; and

(b)

if a document indicates that it was sent or received by someone, that is
prima facie proof that the document was sent and received as indicated.

The Charges and Guilty Plea
2.

This hearing arises out of charges of academic misconduct filed by the Provost

on February 8, 2021. A copy of the charges is included in the JBD at Tab 1.
3.

The Student acknowledges that she received a copy of the charges, waives the

reading of the charges, and pleads guilty to all charges.

-24.

The Provost agrees that if the Tribunal makes a finding of academic misconduct

with respect to charges #1, #4, #7, #9, #10, #11, #12 and #13, the Provost will withdraw
charges #2, #3, #5, #6, #8 and #14.
5.

The Notice of Electronic Hearing in this matter is included in the JBD at Tab 2.

The Student acknowledges that she received the Notice of Electronic Hearing and has
been given reasonable notice of this hearing.
The Student’s Academic History
6.

The Student first registered as a student at the University of Toronto Mississauga

(“UTM”) in Fall 2016. At all material times, she remained a student at the University. A
copy of the Student’s academic record as of May 18, 2021, is included in the JBD at
Tab 3.
7.

The Student has earned 8.5 credits and has a cumulative GPA of 1.14. At the

end of the Winter 2020 term, the Student was suspended for 3 years due to her low
GPA.
ENV311H5S: Environmental Issues in the Developing World
8.

In Winter 2020, the Student enrolled in ENV311H5S: Environmental Issues in the

Developing World, which was taught by Professor Barbara Murck (“ENV311”). A copy of
the course syllabus for ENV311, which the Student admits she received (and which was
updated after the course moved online in March 2020), is included in the JBD at Tab 4.
9.

The ENV311 syllabus included the following on academic integrity on page 4:
Academic Integrity and Honesty
It is your responsibility as a student at the University of Toronto to familiarize yourself
with, and adhere to, both the Code of Student Conduct and the Code of Behaviour on
Academic Matters. This means, first and foremost, that you should read them carefully.


The Code of Student Conduct is available from the UTM website (Registrar >
Academic Calendar > Codes and Policies) or in your print version of the Academic
Calendar.

-3

The Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters is available from the UTM website
(Registrar > Academic Calendar > Codes and Policies) or in your print version of the
Academic Calendar.

Another helpful document that you should read is How Not to Plagiarize, by M. Proctor.
Further Thoughts on Academic Honesty:
The Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters states that:
“The University and its members have a responsibility to ensure that a climate
that might encourage, or conditions that might enable, cheating,
misrepresentation, or seeking to disadvantage others by disruptive behaviour is
unacceptable, as is any dishonesty or unfairness in dealing with the work or
record of a student.” – University of Toronto Mississauga Academic Calendar
This summarizes what we are all trying to achieve through the implementation of this
Code – both students and faculty. We are trying – together – to create an atmosphere of
fairness and honesty, in which people can learn and receive appropriate credit for work
that they have done.

10.

The academic requirements for ENV311 included two assignments, a country

status report (“Assignment #1”) and a policy brief (“Assignment #2”), each worth 25% of
students’ final grades. The instructions for both Assignment #1 and Assignment #2
required students to cite all sources that they used. Copies of the instructions for
Assignment #1 and Assignment #2 are included in the JBD at Tabs 5 and 6,
respectively.
Assignment #1
6

11.

On February 24, 2020, the Student submitted Assignment #1 in ENV311, entitled

“Sustainable development in Sri Lanka 2020”, a copy of which is included in the JBD at
Tab 7. She did so in partial completion of the requirements of ENV311 and for the
purpose of receiving academic credit.
12.

The Student submitted her assignment via Turnitin, which is an online database

used by the University for the purposes of detecting plagiarism. The Turnitin originality
report indicated that the Student’s Assignment #1 was a 77% match to other sources
contained in the Turnitin database. A copy of the Turnitin originality report for the
Student’s Assignment #1 is included in the JBD at Tab 8.

-413.

On review, Professor Murck determined that numerous passages in the

Student’s Assignment #1 appeared to have been taken verbatim or nearly verbatim
from the following online sources:
(a)

“Sri

Lanka”

from

the

Britannica

website

(https://www.britannica.com/place/Sri-Lanka), a copy of which is included
in the JBD at Tab 9A.
(b)

The publisher description for “Sri Lanka: Travel Information and
Environmental

Study”

by

Jesse

Russel

(https://books.apple.com/ca/book/sri-lanka-travel-information-andenvironmental-study/id1503252909?ign-gact=1), a copy of which is
included in the JBD at Tab 9B.
(c)

“Sri

Lanka”

from

the

Wikipedia

website

(https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sri_Lanka), an excerpt of which is included in
the JBD at Tab 9C.
(d)

“Flag

of

Sri

Lanka”

from

The

Nations

Online

Project

website

(https://www.nationsonline.org/flags_big/Sri_Lanka_Flag.html), a copy of
which is included in the JBD at Tab 9D.
(e)

“Sri Lanka at a Glance” from the Sri Lanka Tourism website
(https://www.srilanka.travel/srilanka-at-a-glance), an excerpt of which is
included in the JBD at Tab 9E.

(f)

“Sri Lanka” from the UN Sustainable Development Goals Knowledge
Platform

website

(https://sustainabledevelopment.un.org/index.php?page=view&type=3002
2&nr=998&menu=3170), a copy of which is included in the JBD at Tab 9F.
(g)

“Cultural

Life”

from

the

Britannica

website

(https://www.britannica.com/place/Sri-Lanka/Cultural-life), a copy of which
is included in the JBD at Tab 9G.

-5(h)

“Millennium Development Goals Country Report 2008/09” by the Institute
of

Policy

Studies

of

Sri

Lanka

(https://www.undp.org/content/dam/undp/library/MDG/english/MDG%20Co
untry%20Reports/Sri%20Lanka/MDGR%202008%202009.pdf), an excerpt
of which is included in the JBD at Tab 9H.
(i)

“Sri Lanka achieves most Millennium Development Goals targets well
ahead

of

schedule

–

MDG

Country

report”

(https://news.lk/news/business/item/6776-sri-lanka-achieves-mostmillennium-development-goals-targets-well-ahead-of-schedule-mdgcountry-report?tmpl=component&print=1), a copy of which is included in
the JBD at Tab 9I.
(j)

“What are the Sustainable Development Goals” from the UNDP website
(https://www.undp.org/content/undp/en/home/sustainable-developmentgoals.html), a copy of which is included in the JBD at Tab 9J.

(k)

“Status of Sustainable Development Goals Indicators in Sri Lanka: 2017”
by the Department of Census and Statistics, Ministry of National Policies
and

Economic

Affairs,

Sri

Lanka

(http://www.statistics.gov.lk/sdg/application/publications/book.pdf),

an

excerpt of which is included in the JBD at Tab 9K.
(l)

“Goal 3: Good health and well-being” from the UNDP website
(https://www.undp.org/content/undp/en/home/sustainable-developmentgoals/goal-3-good-health-and-well-being.html), a copy of which is included
in the JBD at Tab 9L.

(m)

“Achieving Inclusive Health in Sri Lanka through SDGs” by Samanthi
Bandara

(https://www.ips.lk/talkingeconomics/2016/12/08/achieving-

inclusive-health-in-sri-lanka-through-sdgs/#), a copy of which is included in
the JBD at Tab 9M.
(collectively, the “Assignment #1 Sources”).

-614.

The copy of Assignment #1 at Tab 7 of the JBD includes highlighting and letter

codes to indicate the text that was taken verbatim and near verbatim from the
Assignment #1 Sources and to enable a comparison. The highlighting in Assignment #1
at Tab 7 of the JBD corresponds to the highlighting contained in the Assignment #1
Sources at Tabs 9A to 9M of the JBD.
15.

The Assignment #1 Sources at Tabs 9A to 9K of the JBD were not cited in

Assignment #1. The Assignment #1 Sources at Tabs 9L and 9M of the JBD were cited
in Assignment #1 but the verbatim text was not placed in quotation marks. In addition,
on page 7 of Assignment #1, the Student included an in-text citation to “Bandara, 2016”
(Tab 9M of the JBD), but the text that precedes the citation is in fact from the webpage
“Goal 3: Good health and well-being” from the UNDP website at Tab 9L of the JBD.
16.

On March 9, 2020, the Student met with Professor Murck to discuss her

Assignment #1.
Assignment #2
17.

On March 31, 2020, the Student submitted her Assignment #2 in ENV311,

entitled “Empowerment of poor Farmers in Sri Lanka”, a copy of which is included in the
JBD at Tab 10. She did so in partial completion of the requirements of ENV311 and for
the purpose of receiving academic credit.
18.

The Student submitted her Assignment #2 via Turnitin. The Turnitin originality

report indicated that Assignment #2 was a 43% match to other sources contained in the
Turnitin database. A copy of the Turnitin originality report for Assignment #2 is included
in the JBD at Tab 11.
19.

Professor Murck reviewed the Student’s Assignment #2 and determined that it

contained verbatim and near verbatim matches of text to the following sources:
(a)

“Sri Lanka E-agriculture Strategy – June 2016” from the Sri Lankan
Department

of

Agriculture

website

-7(https://www.doa.gov.lk/ICC/images/publication/Sri_Lanka_e_agri_strateg
y_-June2016.pdf), an excerpt of which is included in the JBD at Tab 12A.
(b)

“Poverty Data: Sri Lanka” from the Asian Development Bank website
(https://www.adb.org/countries/sri-lanka/poverty), a copy of which is
included in the JBD at Tab 12B.
(collectively, the “Assignment #2 Sources”).

20.

The copy of Assignment #2 at Tab 10 of the JBD includes highlighting and letter

codes to indicate the text that was taken verbatim and near verbatim from the
Assignment #2 Sources and to enable a comparison. The highlighting in Assignment #2
at Tab 10 corresponds to the highlighting contained in the Assignment #2 Sources at
Tabs 12A and 12B of the JBD.
21.

The Student did not include citations to the Assignment #2 Sources in

Assignment #2 or quotation marks to indicate that they were not her original words.
22.

On April 9, 2020, Professor Murck sent the Student an email about the concerns

raised in the Assignment #2.
23.

On April 14, 2020, the Department of Geography referred the allegations of

academic misconduct in ENV311 to the UTM Office of the Dean.
PHL245H5S: Modern Symbolic Logic
24.

In Winter 2020, the Student enrolled in PHL245H5S: Modern Symbolic Logic,

which was taught by Professor Alexander Koo (“PHL245”). A copy of the course
syllabus for PHL245, which the Student admits that she received, is included in the JBD
at Tab 13.
25.

The PHL245 syllabus stated, in part, as follows at pages 4-5:
Academic Integrity

-8The University of Toronto treats cases of academic misconduct very seriously. Academic
integrity is a fundamental value of learning and scholarship at the UofT. Participating
honestly, respectfully, responsibly, and fairly in this academic community ensures that
your UofT degree is valued and respected as a true signifier of your individual academic
achievement.
The University of Toronto’s Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters outlines the
behaviours that constitute academic misconduct, the processes for addressing academic
offences, and the penalties that may be imposed. You are expected to be familiar with
the contents of this document. Potential offences include, but are not limited to:


On tests and exams, Using or possessing any unauthorized aid, including a cell
phone. Looking at someone else’s answers. Letting someone else look at your
answers. Misrepresenting your identity. Submitting an altered test for re-grading.



Misrepresentation: Falsifying or altering any documentation required by the
University, including (but not limited to) doctor’s notes. Falsifying institutional
documents or grades.

See http://www.utm.utoronto.ca/academic-integrity/office-dean-academic-integrity
more information.

26.

for

Students in PHL245 were required to write five tests. A student’s best four tests

were each worth 20% each of their final grade, while their lowest test was worth 10%.
27.

The fourth test in the Course took place on March 25, 2020 (“Test 4”). Due to the

COVID-19 pandemic and closure of the University, Test 4 was administered online,
using Quercus, which is the online teaching and learning system used at the University.
A copy of Test 4 submitted by the Student is included in the JBD at Tab 14.
28.

Question 1 of Test 4 required students to affirm the following:
Please affirm the following commitment. If you do not agree with this statement, you are
acknowledging that your test may not be graded.
“In submitting this test, I confirm that my conduct during this test adheres to the Code of
Behaviour on Academic Matters. I confirm that I did NOT act in such a way that would
constitute cheating, misrepresentation, or unfairness, including but not limited to, using
unauthorized aids and assistance, impersonating another person, and committing
plagiarism.”

29.

The Student selected “agree” in response to Question 1.

-930.

Test 4 consisted of 9 substantive questions that required students to write logic

equations using the variants provided in the question. Each question had two versions,
using different variants. Students were not informed that different variants were used in
the test. A copy of the answer key for Test 4, which includes the different variants used
for each question, is included in the JBD at Tab 15.
31.

When grading the Student’s Test 4, Professor Koo observed that her answers to

Questions 2 and 6 did not correspond with the versions of the questions she had been
given and instead corresponded with the other versions of those questions. In particular:
(a)

Question 2 on the version of the test that the Student received included
the variants A, a, F and f (the question the student received was as
follows: “A1: {1} is an analytic philosopher. F2: {1} is greater than {2}. a0:
Willard. f0: Waverly. a1: The author of {1}.”). However, in her answer, the
Student included the variants b and G, which were not contained in her
test, but were the variants used in the alternate version of the question
(the alternate version of the question was as follows: “A 1: {1} is an analytic
philosopher. G2: {1} is greater than {2}. a0: Willard. b0: Waverly. a1: The
author of {1}.”).

(b)

Question 6 on the version of the test that the Student received included
the variants C, D and A (the question the student received was as follows:
“C1: {1} is a cat. D1: {1} is a dog. A2: {1} chases {2}.”) However, in her
answer, the Student included the variant F, which was not contained in her
test, but was the variant used in the alternate version of the question (the
alternate version of the question was as follows: “A1: {1} is a cat. D1: {1} is
a dog. F2: {1} chases {2}.”)

32.

As a result, Professor Koo suspected that the Student had obtained questions

and/or answers from another student in the class with the other versions of those
questions.

- 10 33.

Professor Koo sent the Student an email about the concern raised in Test 4.

34.

On April 22, 2020, the Department of Philosophy referred the allegation of

academic misconduct in PHL245 to the UTM Office of the Dean.
Petition for lift of suspension
35.

At the end of the Winter 2020 term, the Student was suspended from the

University for three years due to her low GPA.
36.

On May 12, 2020, the Student submitted a petition to lift her suspension. A copy

of her petition is included in the JBD at Tab 16. Her petition included the following
reason:
Hello, Dear member of petition department. I had received an letter recently informing of
my suspension from UT and I spoke with one of the academic adviser and I am writing
this letter to explaining myself as there were certain personal problems which proved to
be a hurdle for me and led to these academic difficulties. I truly appreciate and value this
opportunity to explain what happened. Past few years was not easy for me, my parents
were going through a difficult time together as well, every time when I come home, there
are endless yelling, arguing and quarrel. It is not a place that I would like to call home,
rather it is somewhere that I want to stay as far as I can. Whenever my friends who are
international students talk about how much they miss their parents and how jealous of me
that I get to see mine and spend holiday with them. I felt painful to hear it and
embarrassed to talk about my family issue with anyone. I constantly living in the feat that
my family will no longer be together, and it made it hard for me to concentrate in school.
At the same time, my grandfather was very sick and did cardiac bypass surgery. Before
coming to Canada, I live with my grandparents most of the time since my parents were
very busy with work. I was really worried about him, yet I had to pretend everything was
fine on my side, I was diagnosed with depression and anxiety in the same year and these
led to my grade being affected badly. In my worst days, I could not sleep for three
continuous days, I felt like crying but there were no more tears coming out. I was only
weighted 115 lbs for a height of 5,9. I felt hopeless and I have no one to talk to, I felt like
living in hell.
At first, I was doing well in the CHI410 ‘Modern Chinese Literature’ course, in the essay
and presentation however I had to defer the exam due to physical problem, however
professor had taken down all course material from Quercus a soon as course finished. I
kindly asked her if there was any way I could have access to the course material, and
she asked me to request from my classmates. They did not have any material as well as
there was no textbook, it is all on Quercus, and 90% literature cannot be found online
because they are prohibited in China and I could only review by relying on my notes. I
was getting 80% before the examination, I believe that I can bring positive change
towards my academic progress if given the chance and these are some steps that I will
take to achieve. First, I will use the second attempt policy to retake CHI410H5 ‘Modern
Chinese Literature’ and GGR276H5 ‘Spatial Data Science 1’ in which I am confident
about getting at least 2.3 in both courses. Second, I would also take 4 courses in the first

- 11 semester to start with to ensure that I can give ample time and focus to each one of
them. U of T is always my dream school and graduating from here meant so much to me,
I will never forget all the nights that I spent in the library studying, and how I expected to
see deer on the way home as deer represents fortune and peace in my culture. I am now
physically and mentally ready for school. I understand that life is full of ups and downs
and I might face with even worse challenges and obstacles in the future, however,
whatever doesn’t kill me will only make me stronger. My parents are now separated, and
the surgery that my grandfather did was successful. I finally learned that some time it is
important to just “let it go” and believe everything is the best arrangement, I wish them
well and healthy. Thank you again for giving me the chance to explain, I appreciate the
extra time consumed on me. It is a pleasure if I can continue to study at this beautiful
school, I will not take anything for granted. Thank you very much for your time, please let
me know if you would like to see in person.

37.

In support her petition, the Student submitted five medical certificates (“Medical

Certificates”), which were purportedly completed and signed by Dr. Mahgul Malik at
Trillium Health Partners – Mississauga Hospital. The Medical Certificates were dated
March 16, 2019, March 23, 2019, April 6, 2019, November 1, 2019, and February 11,
2020. Copies of which are included in the JBD at Tabs 16A to 16E.
38.

On June 24, 2020, Kitty Lo, Assistant Registrar, Academic Standards and

Petitions, received confirmation from Dr. Malik that the handwriting on the Medical
Certificates did not belong to her. Dr. Malik also advised that she had been on maternity
leave since September 2019 and was no longer employed at Trillium Health Partners –
Mississauga Hospital. A copy of the email chain between Ms. Lo and Dr. Malik dated
June 24, 2020 is included in the JBD at Tab 17.
39.

On July 21, 2020, the Student met with Ms. Lo to discuss the allegedly forged

documents.
40.

The matter was subsequently forwarded to the UTM Office of the Dean.

Dean’s meeting and admissions for the purposes of this Tribunal hearing
41.

On November 2, 2020, the Student met with Professor Catherine Seguin, Dean’s

Designate for Academic Integrity at UTM. The Student acknowledges that Professor
Seguin provided her with the Dean’s warning contained in the Code.

- 12 42.

During the meeting, the Student admitted that she had:
(a)

plagiarized Assignment #1 and Assignment #2 in ENV311;

(b)

obtained unauthorized assistance during the PHL245 Test 4 by
participating in an online discussion with other students; and

(c)

submitted five forged medical certificates in support of her petition to lift
her academic suspension. The Student explained that she had purchased
the Medical Certificates online for approximately $300 per note.

Admissions
43.

With respect to the Assignment #1 in ENV311, the Student admits that she

knowingly:
(a)

included verbatim or nearly verbatim passages from the Assignment #1
Sources;

(b)

failed

to

attribute

those

verbatim

or

nearly

verbatim

passages

appropriately, including through the use of citations, quotation marks or
other appropriate means;

44.

(c)

represented the ideas, expression of ideas or work of another as her own;

(d)

committed plagiarism, contrary to section B.I.1(d) of the Code; and

(e)

obtained unauthorized assistance, contrary to section B.I.1(b) of the Code.

With respect to Assignment #2 in ENV311, the Student admits that she

knowingly:
(a)

included verbatim or nearly verbatim passages from the Assignment #2
Sources;

- 13 (b)

failed

to

attribute

those

verbatim

or

nearly

verbatim

passages

appropriately, including through the use of citations, quotation marks or
other appropriate means;

45.

(c)

represented the ideas, expression of ideas or work of another as her own;

(d)

committed plagiarism, contrary to section B.I.1(d) of the Code; and

(e)

obtained unauthorized assistance, contrary to section B.I.1(b) of the Code.

With respect to Test 4 in PHL245, the Student admits that she knowingly

obtained unauthorized assistance from other students in PHL245, contrary to section
B.I.1(b) of the Code.
46.

With respect to each of the five Medical Certificates she submitted in support of

her petition to lift her suspension, the Student admits that she knowingly forged or in
any other way altered or falsified a document or evidence required by the University, or
uttered, circulated or made use of such forged, altered, or falsified document, contrary
to section B.I.1(a) of the Code.
47.

The Student acknowledges that:
(a)

the Provost has advised the Student of her right to obtain legal counsel;
and

(b)

she is signing this ASF freely and voluntarily, knowing of the potential
consequences she faces.

Date: ____________________________
Y N

C

- 14 -

Date: ___May 27, 2021_____________
Tina Lie
Assistant Discipline Counsel
University of Toronto

APPENDIX 3
THE UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
IN THE MATTER OF charges of academic dishonesty made on February 8, 2021,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters, 1995,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Act, 1971, S.O. 1971, c. 56 as amended
S.O. 1978, c. 88

B E T W E E N:
UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
- and Y N

C

AGREED STATEMENT OF FACTS ON PENALTY
1.

This hearing arises out of charges of academic misconduct filed by the Provost of

the University of Toronto (the “Provost”) under the Code of Behaviour on Academic
Matters (“Code”). For the purpose of the sanction phase of the hearing, the Provost and
Y N

C

(the “Student”) have prepared this Agreed Statement of Facts on Penalty

(“ASF on Penalty”). The Provost and the Student agree that:
(a)

each document attached to the ASF on Penalty may be admitted into
evidence at the Tribunal for all purposes, including for the truth of the
document’s contents, without further need to prove the document; and

(b)

if a document indicates that it was sent or received by someone, that is
prima facie proof that the document was sent and received as indicated.

Prior offence
2.

The Student has one prior academic offence that was resolved at the

departmental level.

2
-23.

In Winter 2018, the Student enrolled in LIN101H5 (Introduction to General

Linguistics: The Sounds of Language) (“LIN101”).
4.

On January 30, 2018, the Student submitted her answers to a quiz, which was

worth 4% of her final grade in LIN101. There were different versions of the quiz given to
different tutorial sections. The Student’s submission contained answers from a different
version of the quiz.
5.

On March 12, 2018, the Student admitted to the instructor that she had obtained

unauthorized assistance on the quiz. A copy of the admission form that she signed is
attached at Tab 1.
6.

On March 15, 2018, Belinda Grayburn, the CTEP Academic Advisor at the

University of Toronto Mississauga sent the Student a sanction letter from the Chair of
Language Studies. The Chair imposed a sanction of a mark of zero on the assignment
in question. The sanction letter also stated the following:
Since this incident is considered your first academic offence, I trust that you have had
time to reflect on the seriousness of this incident and will not commit another academic
offence again. It is important for you to know that you cannot drop a course in which an
offence has occurred and a sanction has been imposed. Finally, you should be aware
that any subsequent allegations of academic misconduct are usually referred directly to
the Office of the Dean or the Tribunal for investigation.

7.

A copy of Ms. Grayburn’s email and the sanction letter is attached at Tab 2.

Acknowledgments
8.

The student acknowledges that:
(a)

the Provost has advised the Student of her right to obtain legal counsel;
and

(b)

she is signing this ASF on Penalty freely and voluntarily, knowing of the
potential consequences she faces.

3
-3Date: ____________________________
Y N

C

Date: _____June 15, 2021____________
Tina Lie
Assistant Discipline Counsel
University of Toronto

4

TAB 1

5
ADMISSION FORM: ACADEMIC OFFENCE
Name (Last, First):
Student number:
Department:
Course:
Alleged offense:

C

,Y N

Language Studies
LIN101 H5 Winter 2018
Use of unauthorized external source (copying a classmate) on quiz

At my meeting with the Instructor today, I admit that I am (please circle one):

Not Guilty

Student Signatu

Instructor Signature

ttir (2 ¿o(

Date

INiçuul- 11

Date

rz.i

6

TAB 2

7
Belinda Grayburn
From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:
Attachments:

Dear Y N

C

Belinda Grayburn
Thursday, March 15, 2018 1:47 PM
'e .c
@mail.utoronto.ca'
Sanction letter re: LIN101H55 20181
C
_Y N sanction letter Mar 15_18.pdf

:

Please find attached the sanction letter from the Chair of Language Studies regarding your guilty plea of use of
unauthorized aids (copying) in LIN101H5S.
We strongly encourage you to read the Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters located at:
http://www.governingcouncil.utoronto.ca/Assets/Governing+Council+Digital+Assets/Policies/PDFIppjun011995.pdf. Sp
ecifically, we would like to draw your attention to pages 3 & 4 which outline the different types of academic
offences. Pages 6 & 7 list the sanctions that can be imposed. Since this is your first offence, any future offence will be
directly to the Dean's Office for review.
Should you be struggling in your courses, we encourage you to visit your instructor during their office hours for
assistance. As well, you can book time with staff within the Robert Gillespie Academic Skills Centre located in the UTM
Library. They have a variety of workshops available to assist students. You can also book one-on-one time to meet with
their staff.
Please let us know if you have any questions.
Kind regards,
Belinda Grayburn
CTEP Academic Advisor
University of Toronto Mississauga
Erindale Hall, Suite 306
Tel: (905) 569-4321

1

8

UNIVERSrrY Or

e

TORONTO
•

•

• .

MISSISS.AUGA

••

VIA E-MAIL

March 15, 2018

PERSONAL AND CONFIDENTIAL
Y N

C

Mississauga, Ontario

Dear Miss C
on March 12, 2018
, you admitted that you were
In your interview with Professor Jessamyn Schertz
unauthorized assistance
you submitted for credit in
quiz
in the
guilty of
20181 Under section C.I.(a) 8 of the University's Code of Behaviour on Academic
LIN101H5S
Matters, available on line at: http://www.qoverninqcouncil.utoronto.ca/policies/behaveac.htm I
therefore impose the following sanction:
•

A mark of zero (0) for the assignment in question.

Since this incident is considered your first academic offence, I trust that you have had time to
reflect on the seriousness of this incident and will not commit another academic offence again.
lt is important for you to know that you cannot drop a course in which an offence has occurred
and a sanction has been imposed. Finally, you should be aware that any subsequent allegations
of academic misconduct are usually referred directly to the Office of the Dean or the Tribunal for
investigation.
Yours sincerely,
deleggill j
EIPO'

Chair
Department of Language Studies

Cc.:

Professor Michael Lettieri
Office of the Dean

APPENDIX 4
THE UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
IN THE MATTER OF charges of academic dishonesty made on February 8, 2021,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters, 1995,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Act, 1971, S.O. 1971, c. 56 as amended S.O. 1978,
c 88

BETWEEN:
UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
- and Y

N

C

JOINT SUBMISSION ON PENALTY
1.

For the purposes of this hearing under the Code of Behaviour on Academic

Matters ("Code"), the Provost of the University of Toronto (the "Provost") and Y
C

N

(the "Student") have prepared this Joint Submission on Penalty ("JSP").

Joint Submission on Penalty
2.

The Provost and the Student submit that, in all the circumstances of her case, it

is appropriate that the University Tribunal impose the following sanctions on the
Student:
(a)

a final grade of zero in the course ENV311H5S in Winter 2020;

(b)

a final grade of zero in the course PHL245H5S in Winter 2020;

(c)

the Student will be immediately suspended from the University of Toronto for
a period of up to 5 years from the date of the Tribunal's order or until
Governing Council makes its decision on expulsion, whichever comes first,

-2

and a corresponding notation will be placed on her academic record and
transcript; and
(d)

the Tribunal will recommend to the President of the University that he
recommend to the Governing Council that the Student be expelled from the
University.

3.

The parties agree that it is appropriate for this case to be reported to the Provost

for publication of a notice of the decision of the Tribunal and the sanction imposed in the
University of Toronto newspapers, with the name of the Student withheld.
Acknowledgements
4.

The Student acknowledges that:
(a)

the Provost has advised her of her right to obtain legal counsel; and

(b)

she is signing this JSP freely and voluntarily, knowing of the potential
consequences she faces.

Signed on June2? 2021.
Y N

C

Signed on June 22, 2021.
Tina Lie
Assistant Discipline Counsel
University of Toronto
Doc 3826032 vi

