THE UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
IN THE MATTER OF charges of academic dishonesty made on February 14, 2013,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters, 1995,
ANO IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Act, 1971, S.O. 1971, c. 56 as amended S.O. 1978,
c.88

BETWEEN:

UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO

-AND-

REASONS FOR DECISION

Hearing Date: Monday March 31, 2014
Members of the Panel:

Ms. Sarah Kraicer, Barrister and Solicitor, Chair
Professor Ernest Lam, Faculty Panel Member
Mr. Afshin Ameri, Student Panel Member
Appearance:
Ms. Tina Lie, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Barristers
Ms. Lucy Gaspini, Manager, Office of Academic Integrity and Affairs, University of
Toronto Mississauga Campus
Ms. Marija Stankovic, Instructor, AST 201: Stars and Galaxies (Winter 2012)
In Attendance:
Ms. Sinead Cutt, Office of Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances
Not In Attendance:
Mr. the Student

f9,

2

1.

The Trial Division of the University Tribunal was convened on March 31, 2014, to

consider charges brought by the University of Toronto (the "University") against Mr.
~ •

(the "Student") under the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on

Academic Matters, 1995 (the "Code").

Preliminary Issue: Proceeding in Absence of the Student

2.

Neither the student nor a representative of the Student attended the hearing at

the scheduled time and place. The Tribunal waited 10 minutes after the scheduled time
for the Student to appear and he did not do so.

3.

The University proposed to proceed in the Student's absence. The onus of

proof is on the University under the Statutory Powers Procedure Act and the University
Tribunal Rules of Practice and Procedure (the "Rules") to establish that it provided the
Student with reasonable notice of the hearing.
4.

The University filed evidence from Janice Patterson, legal assistant at Paliare

Roland, counsel for the University, and from Natalie Ramtahal, Coordinator, Appeals,
Discipline and Faculty Grievances, with the Office of the Governing Council of the
University. This evidence was directed to the communications between these offices
and the Student regard ing the charges against him and the scheduling of the Hearing in
this matter.
5.

Under the Policy on Official Correspondence with Students, students are

responsible for providing a current postal address and University-issued electronic mail
account in the Repository of Student Information (ROSI). They are also expected to
monitor and retrieve their mail on a frequent and consistent basis.
6.

The Rules of Practice and Procedure provide that a notice of hearing may be

sent to a student "by sending a copy of the document by courier to the student's mailing
address contained in ROSI" or "by emailing a copy of the document to the student's email address contained in ROSI" (Rules 9(b) and 9(c)).

3

7.

The Student's mailing address in ROSI is indicated as
until February 28, 2013 (the "Toronto mailing

address").

His permanent address is indicated as
(the "Lahore address"). The Student's email address is listed as
mail.utoronto.ca (the "email address") His international telephone number is
(the "international telephone number'').

8.

On February 14, 2013, the University emailed the Student at the email address

advising him that he was charged with offences under the Code and enclosing the
charges. On February 15, 2013, the University sent further documents relating to the
charges to the Student to his email address and by courier to the Toronto mailing
address.
9.

On July 22, 2013, a law clerk for counsel to the University sent a package of

documents relevant to the charges by courier to the Student's Toronto mailing address.
The courier was unable to deliver the package, and advised the law clerk that the
Student did not live at that address. The law clerk then emailed the same documents on
August 16, 2013 to the Student's email addr~ss, and sent them also via courier to the
Lahore address. The courier advised that the package was delivered in Lahore and
signed for by
10.

"f 9 ~"on August 19, 2013.

The University and its c~unsel then sought to schedule the hearing in this matter.

After sending the Student a number of emails to the email address in August and
September of 2013 regarding possible dates and receiving no response, on September
24, 2013 the University sent the Student a Notice of Hearing for a hearing scheduled on
Monday, November 18, 2013 at 5:45 p.m. by email to the email address and by courier
to the Toronto mailing address.

11.

On Monday November 11, 2013 counsel to the University attempted to contact

the Student by telephone at the international phone number.

Immediately after she

hung up the phone, the Student called back. The Student advised that he was currently

4

in a village in Pakistan. He confirmed that he had received the package of disclosure
documents sent to the Lahore address. He stated that he had not received the Notice of
Hearing for November 18, 2013. While it is not apparent why he would not have
received the emailed Notice of Hearing, he would not have received the couriered
Notice of Hearing because he was no longer at the Toronto mailing address.

12.

The Student advised that he would like to participate in the hearing, but could not

do so on November 18, as he could not return to Toronto and did not have ready
access to the internet. The Student confirmed that the best number to reach him at was
on his cell phone at the international phone number and that the best way to send him
correspondence was by email to the email address and to call him at the international
phone number to let him know that an email had been sent.
13.

Following the November 11 phone call, the University agreed to adjourn the

hearing and the hearing was adjourned without a new date on consent by Tribunal
Chair Lax on November 14, 2013.
14.

On November 14, 2013, University counsel made several attempts to call the

Student at the international phone number, but was unsuccessful. Counsel sent an
email to the student at the email address confirming its agreement to the adjournment,
and reminding the Student that he was responsible for monitoring his phone and emails,
that if he could not be reached by phone or email, the University would take steps to
schedule the hearing and if he did not attend the hearing, could take the position that
the hearing should proceed in his absence.

15.

Counsel for the University made numerous further attempts to contact the

Student by telephone and email during the week of November 18, 2013 to reschedule
the hearing. She reached him by phone on November 25, 2013. The Student stated
that he was aware of the University counsel's attempts to phone him, and confirmed
that the only way to reach him was by the international phone number, and that he was
no longer in Lahore.

Despite her request, the Student did not provide an updated

5

mailing address. He advised that the best way to communicate with him by writing was
to email him and send a text message to the international cell phone number telling him
to check his email, and that this would be effective.

16.

Counsel to the University emailed, texted and called the Student on multiple

occasions from November 25, 2013 to February 26, 2014 to schedule a new date for
the hearing. The Student did not respond to these communications. Indeed there has
been no communication from the Student since the November 25, 2013 phone call.

17.

On February 26, 2014, the University sent a Notice of Hearing for the scheduled

date of Monday, March 31, 2014 at 5:45 p.m. to the Student by email. On the same day,
counsel for the University sent two text messages to the Student's international phone
number stating that "a notice of hearing for March 31, 2014 has been sent to you at
mail.utoronto.ca." In addition, the University sent the Notice of Hearing by
courier to the Lahore address on March 3, 2014. The courier slip indicates that it was
received on Saturday March 8, 2014 by ".
18.

".

The content of the Notice of Hearing for March 31 , 2014 complies with the

requirements of the Statutory Powers Procedure Act and the Rules, including the
required notice that the proceeding could proceed in the Student's absence if he failed
to appear. Many of the emails sent by counsel to the University to the Student during
the period of February 2013 to February 2014 also included a similar warning to the
. Student about the potential consequences of not appearing at the scheduled hearing.

19.

As the Student had in the November 11, 2013 conversation indicated that he

might wish to participate in the hearing via Skype rather than in person, and despite not
receiving any responses from the Student from its communications since November 25,
2013, the University sought and obtained a Direction from the Chair of this panel on
March 17, 2014 permitting the hearing to be held as an electronic hearing, on certain
conditions, including that the Student advise that he consents in advance of the March
31 hearing date to the hearing being held as an electronic hearing. University Counsel

6

emailed, texted and attempted to call the Student in advance of the motion for Direction,
and emailed and texted the Direction to the Student after it had been issued. No
response from the Student was received.
20.

Evidence from the Rogers Communications website was filed demonstrating that

the University followed the requisite procedures for sending text messages to an
international number for a cell phone in Pakistan in all of its communications to the
Student subsequent to the November 25 phone call, when he indicated that he would
be monitoring his texts for messages.
21.

The Tribunal has considered the evidence before it and the submissions of

counsel and has concluded that the Student has been given reasonable notice of the
hearing in compliance with the notice requirements in the Statutory Powers Procedure
Act and under the Rules. The Notice of Hearing dated February 26, 2014 scheduling

this hearing for March 31, 2014 at 5:45 p.m. was sent to the Student via email to the
email address listed in ROSI, as authorized by Rule 9(c). The Student confirmed in
November 2013 that was an effective current email address and the best way to reach
him through written communication. In addition, consistent with the Student's own
request, University counsel sent texts to the Student's international cell phone number
alerting him that the Notice of Hearing for March 31, 2014 had been emailed to him.
Further, the Notice of Hearing was sent via courier to the Student's per~anent Lahore
address and received by"~"- While the Student had advised University counsel in
November that he no longer was in Lahore, he also confirmed that he had received a
package at that address previously.

22.

In addition to the Notice of Hearing itself, the University counsel sent multiple

texts and emails to the Student in November 2013 and March 2014 referring to the
hearing date of March 31 , 2014, and alerting him to the fact that if he did not appear, the
hearing could proceed in his absence

23.

The Tribunal determined it would proceed to hear the case on its merits.

7

The Charges
24.

The Charges and Particulars are as follows:

1.

On March 9, 2012, you knowingly obtained unauthorized assistance in

Midterm 2 in AST201 H5 (the "Course"), contrary to section 8.1.1(b) of the Code.
2.

On March 9, 2012, you knowingly represented as your own an idea or

expression of an idea or work of another in Midterm 2 in the Course, contrary to
section 8.l.1(d) of the Code.
3.

On March 9, 2012, you knowingly did or omitted to do something for the

purpose of aiding or assisting [M.1.] to commit the section 8.1.1 (b) offence of
obtaining unauthorized assistance in Midterm 2 in the Course, contrary to section
8.11.1 (a)(ii) of the Code.
4.

On March 9, 2012, you knowingly abetted, counselled, procured or

conspired with Mr. [I] to commit or be a party to the section 8 .1.1 (b) offence of
obtaining unauthorized assistance in Midterm 2 in the Course , contrary to
section 8.11.1 (a)(iv) of the Code.
5.

On March 9, 2012, having an intent to commit an offence under the

Code, you did or omitted to do something for the purpose of carrying out your
intention to obtain unauthorized assistance and/or to represent as your own an
idea or expression of an idea or work of another in connection with Midterm 2 in
the Course, contrary to section 8.11.2 of the Code.
6.

In the alternative, on March 9, 2012, you knowingly engaged in a form of

cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or misrepresentation not
otherwise described in the Code in order to obtain academic credit or other
academic advantage of any kind in connection with Midterm 2 in the Course,
contrary to section 8.l.3(b) of the Code.

8

Particulars of the offences charged are as follows:

1.

At all material times you were a student at the University of Toronto

Mississauga. In Winter 2012, you enrolled in the Course, which was taught by
Marija Stankovic.
2.

On March 9, 2012, you wrote Midterm 2 in the Course (the "Midterm"),

which was worth 15% of your final grade in the Course.
3.

You were aware that collaborating and communicating with other students

during the Midterm was not permitted.
4.

During the Midterm, you:
a.

obtained unauthorized assistance from Mr. [I] by communicating
with Mr. l~nd/or copying from Mr. [I]' s test paper;

b.

copied some or all of Mr. [l]'s answers on your test paper;

c.

communicated with Mr. [I] and/or permitted Mr. [I] to copy some or
all of your answers, for the purpose of aiding or assisting Mr.
Ibrahim to obtain unauthorized assistance in the Midterm;

d.

communicated with Mr. [I] and/or permitted Mr. [I] to copy some or
all of your answers, thereby abetting, counseling, procuring or
conspiring with Mr. [I] to obtain unauthorized assistance in the
Midterm; and

e.

communicated or attempted to communicate with [N.S], in an
attempt to copy one of Ms. [S]'s answers on your test paper.

9

5.

The Midterm was comprised of a Scantron sheet for the answers to the

multiple choice portion of the test, and a test paper that included the answers to

1-.

the short answer portion of the test. Your answers on the Scantron sheet were
identical to those of Mr.

Your answers to the short answer portion of the

Midterm were virtually identical those of Mr. [I].
6.

You engaged in the foregoing conduct for the purpose of obtaining

academic credit or academic advantage.
25.

At the outset of the Hearing, Counsel for the University indicated that it was

withdrawing charges 4 and 5, and that if the Tribunal were to find the Student guilty of
charge 1, it would withdraw charges 2, 3 and 6.

Evidence

26.

The Tribunal heard the evidence of Ms. Marija Stankovic, the Instructor of

AST201H5 (Stars and Galaxies) in the Winter 2012 Term at the Mississauga campus.
The Student was enrolled in this course.

27.

Course requirements included two midterm tests, each worth 15%. The second

midterm was held on March 7, 2012. Ms. Stankovic was present at the midterm that
day, which was held in an amphitheatre-style lecture room. Ms. Stankovic stated that
test booklets and Scantron answer sheets were placed at every other seat, and that
different versions of the test were distributed to alternating seats, to minimize the risk of
students copying from one another during the test. Students were instructed and were
aware that they are not permitted to speak to one another or to collaborate during the
midterm.
28.

Toward the end of the test period, a student, N.S. , called Ms. Stankovic over and

indicated that the two male students sitting beside one another in the row behind her
were talking to each other throughout the test in a language she did not understand,
and that one of the students had asked her to flip over her test booklet to show them her
answer to one of the questions. N.S. documented her observations both on her own

10

test paper during the midterm, and in subsequent email messages to Ms. Stankovic and
the Dean's Office. Ms. Stankovic did not witness this behaviour herself during the
midterm, but noted their names in order to check their midterm answers later. The
students were 29.

•

and M.I.

The midterm test answers of the Student and M.I. show marked similarities.

Despite the fact that they sat in adjoining seats, they submitted the same version of the
test. The Scantron portions of their test results are identical, with the same 4 incorrect
answers. The short answer portions are not only identical, but 3 of the 4 answers are
incorrect in an identical manner, consisting of the same diagrams and written answers
that do not answer the test questions at all.
30.

It is evident from a review of the test answers submitted by the Student and M.I.

that either they collaborated extensively, or one or both of these students copied
answers from the other.
31.

The Tribunal heard evidence from Ms. Lucy Gaspini, Manager of the Office of

Academic Affairs, that the office of the Dean of the University of Toronto Mississauga
emailed the Student in May and June of 2012 to arrange a meeting to discuss the
allegation that he had obtained or provided unauthorized assistance in relation to this
midterm test. No meeting took place. The Student responded by email on June 8, 2012
that he was in Pakistan, and would be returning to Toronto the first week of September.
The Dean's office emailed the Student in August and September to advise the Dean's
meeting was rescheduled for Tuesday October 2, 2012. The Student did not respond
further and did not appear at the scheduled meeting.
32.

The University served M.I. with a summons to witness prior to this hearing, but

M.I. did not appear. The Tribunal received the affidavit of Elizabeth Kobluk, an
Undergraduate Assistant with the Department of Chemical and Physical Sciences at the
University of Toronto Mississauga, regarding a disciplinary meeting and subsequent
sanction taken with respect to M. I. related to this incident. Ms. Kobluk attended a
meeting between the Dean's Designate (the late Professor Scott Graham) and M.I. on

11

May 28, 2012. Meeting notes made by Ms. Kobluk and Professor Graham
contemporaneously to the meeting indicate that M.I. admitted at the meeting that he and
the Student had decided to collaborate and share answers during the midterm. At the
conclusion of the meeting, M.I. formally admitted that he was guilty of providing and
obtaining unauthorized assistance in order to complete the midterm. The University
imposed the following sanction on M.I.:
•

An assigned final grade of 40 in the course

•

An annotation on transcript of "Mark reduced in the course AST201 H5S, 2012(1)
due to academic misconduct" for 12 months

Decision of the Tribunal

33.

Charge 1 under subsection B .1.1 (b) of the Code covers both obtaining

unauthorized assistance from another person, or, through the operation of subsection
B.I1.1.(a), being a party to the offence of aiding or assisting another student to obtain
unauthorized assistance.

The clear similarities between the test papers, the evidence

from Ms. Stankovic, and the notes of N.S. of the discussions between the Student and
M.I. during the test establish that the Student both obtained unauthorized assistance
from M.I., and provided M.I. with unauthorized assistance during the midterm. This
evidence alone is sufficiently cogent and compelling to meet the University's burden of
proof in this matter. The evidence of the discipline actions against M.I. and M.l.'s
admissions about the collaboration that took place during the test is reliable and, in the
absence of any explanation from the Student, is additional evidence supporting our
finding that the Student obtained and provided unauthorized assistance during the
midterm test.
34.

The Tribunal finds that the Student is guilty of knowingly obtaining unauthorized

assistance in a term test, contrary to section B.1.1.(b) of the Code.
35.

The balance of the Charges were withdrawn by the University.

12

Decision of the Tribunal on Penalty
36.

The Student committed a previous academic offence in the Spring Term 2011

when he was found to have his cell phone at his desk at the commencement of the final
examination in MGM102H5S. The Student admitted the offence of possessing an
unauthorized aid during the MGM102H5S final examination contrary to Section B.1.1.(b)
of the Code, and accepted the sanction of a written reprimand and an annotation on his
academic transcript of the misconduct for 6 months ending on November 1, 2011. He
was advised that his name would be entered into the Dean's database and "should it
come to my attention again, the allegation will be treated as a second offence and
sanctioned accordingly".

37.

At this hearing, the University sought the following penalty:
•

A mark of 0 in the course,

•

2½ years suspension from the University from the date of the hearing,

•

Notation of the sanction on the Student's transcript for 4 years, and

•

Reporting of the decision to the Provost, with the Student's name withheld, for
publication of a notice of the decision and the sanction

38.

The University made the following submissions on penalty. This case should be

treated as a second offence, even though the transcript annotation from the first offence
had expired. No evidence of mitigating circumstances, good character, remorse or
insight has been presented. The Student sought to avoid or delay this hearing, by failing
to respond to communications generally about this proceeding, and by requesting an
adjournment of this hearing to allow him to participate, and then failing to acknowledge
or participate in the rescheduled date. The nature of the misconduct is serious as it was
deliberate and intentional (although not premeditated) and attacks the integrity of the
University evaluation process. A strong penalty is necessary for general deterrence in
the University community as the use of unauthorized aids is often difficult to detect
through monitoring. The University submitted that the proposed penalty was appropriate
despite the significantly lesser penalty issued to M.I. for essentially the same

13

misconduct, because M.I. participated in the Dean's meeting and admitted guilt at the
decanal level. The University presented several cases to the Tribunal and submitted
that they are consistent with the proposed penalty in the circumstances of this case.

39.

The Tribunal has considered the University's submissions, the evidence, and the

cases, in light of the principles and factors relevant to penalty set out in the University of
Toronto and Mr. C (November 5, 1976). The Tribunal has determined that the

University's proposed penalty is appropriate, with the exception that the suspension
should be for 2 years and 5 months, ending on August 30, 2016, rather than 2 ½ years.
This shorter period would allow the Student to enrol in courses in September 2016 for
the Fall 2016 Term should he wish to do so.
40.

The Tribunal acknowledges that the Student's prior disciplinary offence was

minor, and that in the previous offence he did not actually use the cell phone during the
examination. The Tribunal is troubled, however, by the fact that the Student was not
deterred by an earlier reprimand for possessing an unauthorized aid at an examination
from again obtaining unauthorized assistance during a midterm test the following year.
This history suggests that there is a likelihood that the Student is at risk of repeating
similar misconduct in the future.
41.

The Student did not respond to requests to participate in the decanal meeting,

and did not participate in this hearing, and as a result there is no evidence before the
Tribunal of any extenuating or mitigating factors, no expression of insight or remorse, or
any positive indications as to the Student's character. The evidence before us of the
University's difficulties in communicating with the Student about these proceedings, his
request for an adjournment in order to participate in this hearing, and his subsequent
failure to acknowledge or respond to correspondence about rescheduled dates, suggest
that he sought to delay and avoid these proceedings.

42.

The nature of the offence is a serious one, and the offence causes significant

detriment to the University. The Student copied and shared answers during a test with
another student in order to obtain a more favourable grade that he did not deserve. His

14

conduct is unfair to other students whose evaluation depends on their own hard work
and attention to their studies. It undermines the integrity of the University evaluation
process, and the honesty that must underly the teaching and learning relationship. As
this kind of behaviour can be difficult to detect, it is important that the penalty be
sufficient to deter others from similar misconduct. The seriousness of the offence is
mitigated to a small degree by the fact that the conduct was likely not premeditated, but
appears to have been a spontaneous misjudgment during the test itself.
43.

The Tribunal has taken into account the fact that a lesser penalty was imposed

on M.I. for essentially the same conduct. In our view, there are important differences in
the circumstances of the two cases that warrant a more significant penalty for the
Student. It was M.l.'s first disciplinary offence. He cooperated with the University,
participated in a Dean's meeting, and admitted guilt at the decanal level, demonstrating
a measure of insight and remorse, and a preparedness to take responsibility for his
conduct at an early stage of the discipline process. The Student shares none of these
circumstances.
44.

The Tribunal has reviewed a number of cases relied upon by the University in

support of the penalty sought (C. (March 20, 2014); Ms K (Case 428, 2006); Z.
(November 15, 2010); S.J. (January 21, 2010); Y.W and D. L. (May 31, 2005); S.
(February 8, 2012); and K. (October 12, 2010)). While none of these cases is exactly
on point, and none is binding, consistency is an important consideration in penalty, and
the penalty determined by the Tribunal is in our view generally in line with these cases.
All of these cases provide for a penalty of zero in the course, a suspension ranging from
2 to 5 years, and a transcript annotation ranging from 4 years to graduation.
45.

In the present circumstances, the Tribunal has determined that the fair and

appropriate length of suspension is 2 year 5 months, and the length of the transcript
annotation is 4 years. The suspension and annotation should run from the date of the
hearing in this matter. While the Student is not currently enrolled at the University and
has not enrolled in courses since the Winter 2012 term, his voluntary absence from the
University is irrelevant to the penalty.

15

46.

The Tribunal issued the following Order on March 31, 2014:
1.

THAT Mr. •

is guilty of knowingly obtaining unauthorized assistance in

an academic examination or term test, contrary to section 8.1.1 .(b) of the Code;
2.

THAT the following sanctions shall be imposed on Mr.

(a)

f9:

he shall receive a final grade of zero in the course

AST201 H5S (Stars and Galaxies);
(b)

he shall be suspended from the University of Toronto for 2

years and 5 months, from March 31, 2014 to August 30, 2016; and
(c)

a notation shall be placed on his academic record and

transcript for 4 years, from March 31, 2014 to March 30, 2018; and

3.

THAT this case be reported to the Provost, with Mr.

f9's name withheld,

for publication of a notice of the decision of the Tribunal and the sanction
imposed.

Dated at Toronto, this {, day of June, 2014

Ms.Sar~

