Case #708

   DATE: June 6, 2014
   PARTIES: University of Toronto v S.R.
   Hearing Date(s): March 31, 2014
   Panel Members:
   Sarah Kraicer, Chair
   Ernest Lam, Faculty Member
   Afshin Ameri, Student Member
   Appearances:
   Tina Lie, Assistant Discipline Counsel
   Lucy Gaspini, Manager, Academic Integrity and Affairs, University of
   Toronto Mississauga
   Marija Stankovic, Course Instructor
   In Attendance:
   Sinead Cutt, Administrative Assistant, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty
   Grievances
   Not in Attendance:
   The Student
   Trial Division â s. B.i.1(b) of the Code â unauthorized aid â
   collaboration with another student on midterm â Students not at hearing
   â collaborating student admits guilt â Â finding of guilt â second
   offence â grade of zero in the course; two-year five-month suspension;
   four-year academic record notation; report to Provost for publication
   The Student did not attend the hearing, which was postponed at his
   request. Â The Panel, therefore, first addressed whether to proceed in
   the Studentsâ absence. The Panel was satisfied that the Student had
   reasonable notice of the hearing and had been served, by letter, email,
   phone calls, text message, and courier, in accordance with the Rules of
   Practice and Procedure of the University Tribunal. The University did
   briefly make contact with the Student who was in Pakistan at the time.
   The Student advised that a text message followed by an email was the
   best way to contact him. The University followed this method and
   received no response.
   The Student was charged with offences contrary to s. B.i.1(b) , s.
   B.i.1(d) , s. B.i.1(a)(ii) , s. B.i.1(a)(iv) , s. B.ii.2 , and Â in the
   alternative, academic misconduct not otherwise described in the Code
   contrary to s. B.i.3(b) of the Code . The charges related to a midterm
   test in which the Student allegedly collaborated with at least one
   other student. Specifically, the Student copied and shared answers with
   another student and attempted to do the same with a third student. The
   Studentâs answers were virtually identical to the second studentâs. The
   University withdrew the fourth and fifth charges and advised that if
   the Student was found guilty on the first charge, the rest would be
   withdrawn as well.
   The course instructor testified that toward the end of the midterm in
   question a student notified her that two students were talking behind
   her and one of them had asked her to share her answers with them. The
   instructor noted their names and found that the studentsâ exams shared
   marked similarities. The Student was emailed to arrange a meeting with
   the manager at the Office of Academic Affairs to discuss the
   allegations. The Student responded that he was in Pakistan and a
   meeting was scheduled for when he returned. He did not respond to any
   further emails and did not attend the meeting. The other student
   involved was summoned to the hearing but did not attend. An affidavit
   delivered to the Tribunal stated that the second student met with an
   Undergraduate Assistant at the University and admitted collaboration on
   the exam. A sanction of a grade of 40% in the course and a notation on
   his transcript for 12 months was assigned.
   Based on the studentsâ testimony and the similarities between the
   midterms the Panel found the Student guilty of knowingly obtaining
   unauthorized assistance contrary to s. B.i.1(b) of the Code . The
   balance of the charges were withdrawn.
   The Student had a previous offence which had been settled at the
   departmental level. He was advised that in the event of further
   misconduct the allegation would be treated as a second offence. The
   University sought a grade of zero in the course, a suspension of two
   and a half years, a notation on the Studentâs transcript for four
   years, and that the case be reported to the Provost for publication.
   The University submitted a penalty harsher than that received by the
   other collaborating student because of the prior offence and lack of
   participation in the process.
   The Panel then considered the penalty factors from the Mr. C case,
   namely the character of the Students, likelihood of repetition, nature
   of the offence, detriment to the University, and the need for
   deterrence. The Panel distinguished the other collaborating studentâs
   punishment finding that, unlike the Student, he had been cooperative
   and admitted his guilt. The Panel considered like cases and found that
   they called for a zero in the course, a suspension of 2 to 5 years, and
   a notation on the transcript ranging from 4 years to graduation.
   The Panel imposed a grade of zero in the course, a suspension of two
   years and five months, a notation on the Studentâs transcript for four
   years, and ordered that the case be reported to the Provost for
   publication.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12854
