1
THE UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
IN THE MATTER OF charges of academic dishonesty made in October
26, 2005,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code of
Behaviour on Academic Matters, 1995,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Act, 1971, S.O.
1971, c. 56 as amended S.O. 1978, c. 88

B E T W E E N:
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
- and –
The Student
Members of the panel:
•
•
•

John A. Keefe, Chair
Melanie A. Woodin, Faculty Panel Member
Matto Mildenberger, Student Panel Member

Appearances:
•
•
•

Lily Harmer for the University of Toronto
Jeremy Glick, law student, Downtown Legal Services for The Student
Chris Burr, law student, Downtown Legal Services for The Student

NOTICE OF HEARING
[1]
The Trial Division of the University Tribunal was convened on January 18, 2006 and
January 25, 2006 to consider charges under the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on
Academic Matters, 1995 (the “Code”). The Notice of Hearing is dated January 11, 2005. The
charges are as follows:
Concoction Charges
(1)

35904 v2

Contrary to Section B.I.1(f) of the Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters (the
“Code”), on or about May 31, 2005, you submitted academic work containing a
purported statement of fact or reference to a source which had been concocted in
your abstract and podium presentation at the International Society for Postural
and Gait Research in Marseille France.

2
Academic Dishonesty Charge
(2)

In the alternative, contrary to Section B.I.3(b) of the Code, you knowingly
engaged in a form of cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or
misrepresentation in order to obtain academic credit or other academic advantage
of any kind when, on or about May 31, 2005, you submitted academic work
containing a purported statement of fact or reference to a source which had been
concocted in your abstract and podium presentation at the International Society
for Postural and Gait Research in Marseille France.
Pursuant to Section B of the Code, you are deemed to have committed the offence
“knowingly” if you ought reasonably to have known that you:

[2]

35904 v2

•

submitted academic work containing a purported statement of fact or
reference to a source, which had been concocted;

•

engaged in any form of cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or
misrepresentation in order to obtain academic credit or academic advantage of
any kind.

Particulars of the charges set out in the Notice of Hearing are as follows:
1.

At all material times you were a Doctor of Philosophy Student at the Institute of
Medical Science, Faculty of Medicine, at the University of Toronto.

2.

You were engaged in research at the Institute of Medical Science, under the
direction of Brian Maki.

3.

On May 31, 2005, you presented the results of a research study you completed in
an oral podium presentation at the International Society for Postural and Gait
Research in Marseille France. This research was completed at the Institute of
Medical Sciences as part of a larger research project.

4.

During the course of this research you fabricated, falsified, or misrepresented data
by various means including, but not limited to, by:
•

creating fictitious subjects whom you never tested and creating fictitious data
purportedly from these fictitious subjects;

•

fabricating kinematic data on the non-fictitious subjects of your study; and

•

falsifying, fabricating and/or misrepresenting gaze data.

5.

Prior to delivering this presentation, you prepared and submitted PowerPoint
slides regarding this presentation and/or an abstract of this presentation.

6.

Your presentation and abstract contained, and/or was based on data you
fabricated, falsified, or misrepresented as described above.

3
BACKGROUND TO THE HEARING
[3]
At the outset of the hearing the tribunal was advised that The Student had agreed to plead
guilty to the charge of academic dishonesty and not guilty to the concoction charges. The
Student and the University entered into an Agreed Statement of Facts upon which the guilty plea
was based. A copy of the Agreed Statement of Facts is attached hereto as appendix “A”.
[4]
After reviewing the facts set out in the Agreed Statement of Facts, The Student indicated
his willingness to plead guilty to the charge of academic dishonesty and the panel agreed to
accept the guilty plea. The hearing proceeded over a period of two evenings and, basically, dealt
with the appropriate penalty in the circumstances.
[5]

The University’s position was that the appropriate penalty was:
1.

A recommendation of expulsion;

2.

A five-year suspension;

3.

A mark of zero in the course RST999Y (the research/thesis)

4.

Publication of a notice of the decision of the Tribunal and the sanction imposed
with the name of the student withheld.

[6]
The Student’s position, through his legal representatives, was that an expulsion was not
appropriate. His position was that a suspension for an unspecified period of time, together with a
record of the suspension on the student’s academic record would be more appropriate than
expulsion.
[7]
In the course of the hearing, the panel heard from Dr. Brian Maki, The Student’s
academic supervisor. It also heard from Susan Pfeiffer, Dean of the School of Graduate Studies
and Vice-Provost and from The Student’s father.
THE TRIBUNAL’S CONSIDERATION OF THE FACTS
[8]
The Student is a graduate student at the University of Toronto School of Graduate
Studies. He is 25 years old. He was admitted to the Doctor of Philosophy programme at the
Institute of Medical Science (IMS) in September 2004. IMS is part of the Faculty of Medicine.
[9]
Prior to enrolling at the University of Toronto, The Student obtained a M.Sc. from the
University of Waterloo.
[10] The Doctor of Philosophy programme at IMS emphasises research work. The research
and thesis work was course RST9999Y. The research work for this course was to be under the
supervision of Dr. Brian Maki and was to be conduced at the Sunnybrook and Women’s College
Health Sciences Centre.
[11] Dr. Maki received a five-year operating grant from the Canadian Institute of Health
Research (CIHR) which commenced in the fall of 2004. The research was into age-related
changes in visual processing and its impact on the risk of falling by the elderly.
35904 v2

4
[12] From September 2004 to August 2005, The Student received a $19,500 stipend. It was
funded primarily from Dr. Maki’s CIHR operating grant. The Student also received a $5,000
stipend funded through the University of Toronto Open Fellowship Award.
[13] The International Society of Posture and Gait Research (ISPGR) is a research society of
more than 300 members. It was to hold a conference in Marseilles, France from May 29 to June
2, 2005.
[14] The ISPGR issued a call for abstracts. The deadline for submission was January 25,
2005.
[15] The Student, under the supervision of Dr. Maki, submitted an abstract that provided a
brief four-paragraph overview of the thesis of the methodology, the results obtained and the
discussion and conclusions. The abstract was accepted by the ISPGR for presentation at the
Marseille conference. There seems to be an agreement that the abstract itself was not false or
misleading.
[16] Prior to the submission of the abstract, The Student performed certain of the research
work which was to form the basis of the presentation. It is agreed that portions of the research
were fabricated.
[17] When pressed, the only explanation he offered for his actions was that he was under
pressure to complete the abstract for the January deadline in order to present in Marseille.
Because the equipment necessary to complete the research was not available until December, he
believed that he was not able to complete the research within the time frame and he resorted to
fabrication.
[18] Prior to the conference in Marseille, France, The Student performed further work in
preparation for the conference. There was also fabrication of some of this research data.
[19] At the conference The Student made a podium power point presentation which contained
reference to the fabricated, falsified and misrepresented data.
[20] In the Agreed Statement of Facts (Appendix “A”), The Student agreed that the slides and
the podium presentation contained fabricated, falsified and misrepresented data. Specifically:

35904 v2

(a)

fabricated data for five subjects whom he never tested (the “Fictitious Subjects”);

(b)

fabricated findings related to lateral wrist displacement, onset timing of head and
arm motion, and direction of initial arm motion (the “Fabricated Kinematic
Data”);

(c)

fabricated, falsified and/or misrepresented data related to the onset timing and
dwell time of eye movements directed toward the handrail mounted on the motion
platform and whether these eye movements occurred after of before the platform
motion (the “Fabricated Gaze Data” and all three collectively, the “Fabricated
Research Results”); and

5
(d)

reached and reported conclusion that were based on the Fabricated Research
Results.

[21] The presentation in Marseille occurred on May 31, 2005. Some concern was raised about
the content of the presentation by Dr. Maki and other members of his research team who were in
attendance at the presentation.
[22] On June 17, 2005, Dr. Maki asked The Student to provide him with all of his primary
data from the subjects. Dr. Maki’s research team examined the data and determined that there
were problems with the data.
[23] On July 18, 2005, The Student met with Dr. Maki. The Student was confronted with the
discrepancies in the data. This was a without prejudice meeting under the University’s
Divisional Procedures under the Code. As such, what the student says in such a discussion may
not be used or receivable in evidence against the student except with the consent of the student.
It is now acknowledged that, at this meeting, The Student admitted to Dr. Maki that he had
falsified some of the data that was referenced in his podium presentation.
[24]

On July 19, 2005, Dr. Maki sent The Student an e-mail that stated as follows:
I have not yet made a final decision on whether I am going to send a letter to IMS.
Regardless of that decision, you should be aware that I will definitely proceed with
disciplinary action if there are any further incidents of deliberately falsifying or
fabricating data. You are, in effect, on probation.

[25] The letter then went on to state, in some detail, what steps The Student was required to
take in order clean up the research data. One of the reasons for cleaning up the data was that
there was an upcoming conference in Cleveland in early August. This was a conference of the
International Society of Biometrics (ISB) which had accepted the same original abstract for
presentation. The concluding paragraph of the e-mail stated as follows:
As you can see, there is a lot of work to do. It may not be necessary to complete all of
these tasks prior to doing your ISB presentation; however, the presentation cannot
include any data that have not been reanalysed and verified regarding their accuracy. For
every trial you plan to include in the analysis for descriptive statistics for your
presentation, I also want to see the MPG files as described above. If you feel there is
insufficient time to complete the above before ISB, then you should withdraw your
presentation.

[26] Although there was no commitment made by Dr. Maki, it would be reasonable for The
Student to believe that Dr. Maki was extending him some opportunity for a second chance.
Included in this e-mail is the following statement by Dr. Maki:
I am hopeful that you have learned your lesson. However, it will take time to re-establish
trust.

[27] In an e-mail on July 21, 2005 Dr. Maki invited The Student to “clear the air” with the
other members of the team i.e. acknowledge his actions, apologize for disrupting the lab and
make a pledge that it will not happen again.

35904 v2

6
[28]

The e-mail also stated as follows:
I also want to let you know the situation regarding IMS. From my conversation with
IMS, it appears that it is largely down to me as to whether any formal disciplinary action
is taken. My inclination is to give you a second chance. Nonetheless, it is likely that
they will want to arrange a meeting involving you, myself and Ori Rotstein. I will keep
you posted about this.

[29] On July 25, 2005, Dr. Maki sent an e-mail to other members of the research team, but not
to The Student. In this e-mail, Dr. Maki acknowledges that IMS may or may not decide to take
formal disciplinary action against The Student, which could range from verbal or written
reprimand to suspension or expulsion from the programme. The e-mail went on to say:
In the meantime, I have told [the Student] that I will give him a second chance. He is, in
effect, on probation but I am hopeful that he has learned from this experience and that it
will not happen again. [The Student] has told me that he will be contacting some of you
individually to apologize for his actions and to let you know that it will not happen
again…I appreciate that this is a difficult situation, but I am hoping that you will be able
to help [the Student] move forward in a positive and constructive way.

[30] On August 4, 2005, The Student made a presentation at the ISB conference in Cleveland.
His presentation was based on data that had been checked by Dr. Maki and other team members
in order to ensure its accuracy.
[31] On the same day that The Student was at the conference in Cleveland, on August 4, 2005,
(after meeting with other members of the research team), Dr. Maki wrote an e-mail to The
Student instructing him to take a leave of absence until the matter is resolved officially. The email stated:
In view of the suspicion, resentment and disruption that your continued presence in the
lab appears to be causing, IMS has recommended that I instruct you to take a leave of
absence i.e. stay away from the lab, until the matter is resolved officially. You will be
expected to maintain your university registration but you will not be permitted to come to
the lab.

[32] The Student testified that he was devastated upon receipt of this e-mail. The Student’s
father testified to the same effect.
[33] On August 8, 2005, The Student sent e-mails to Dr. Maki and other members of the
research team admitting he fabricated his research data. The apology can only be described as
abject. He also apologised for not having sent an apology to the research team earlier.
[34]

On August 9, 2005, Dr. Maki e-mailed The Student and stated:
Your apology to the lab was definitely a step in the right direction. However, you could
have avoided a lot of ill feeling and suspicion if you had “come clean” much earlier…I
must tell you that, until I received your e-mail yesterday, I had pretty much decided that a
second chance was no longer warranted, given your failure to admit the full extent of
your actions and your attempt to deflect blame and gloss over the situation when talking
to other team members. Your e-mail has, in effect, earned you a temporary “reprieve”. I

35904 v2

7
will not make a final decision about this until after we have your meeting at the
university.

[35] The Tribunal finds this e-mail somewhat puzzling. The Student had been permitted to
make a presentation at the conference in Cleveland on August 4. Prior to this presentation, other
members of the team must have been satisfied with the presentation. It seems surprising to the
Tribunal that there was such a dramatic change of heart from the time that The Student was
permitted to make the presentation in Cleveland and the time when he was notified that he was to
take a leave of absence.
[36] There was very little explanation for this apparent change of heart by Dr. Maki. At the
hearing, he acknowledged that he was not very familiar with the University’s policies with
respect to fabricated research and he was doing the best he could to deal with a difficult situation
that he had never encountered before. We accept his evidence and cast no blame on him.
However, it seems to the Tribunal that Dr. Maki, at least, believed that The Student’s behaviour
did not warrant the maximum penalty that the University could impose. He seemed to believe
that The Student warranted a second chance. He gave The Student that second chance by
allowing him to make the presentation in Cleveland. Although this is not conclusive, it is
certainly a factor in the deliberations of this Tribunal.
[37] Although The Student did not turn himself in and did not initially come clean, he did so
at the meeting on July 18, 2005. After meeting with Dr. Maki on July 18, 2005 it was reasonable
for The Student to believe that he was being given a second chance. He worked diligently to
earn that second chance. The defects in the initial research must not have been so serious that
they could not be corrected in a two or three week time frame. Further, the defects did not
warrant a retraction prior to or during the presentation in Cleveland. It also reinforces the point
that the abstract itself was not false or fabricated.
[38] On September 23, 2005, The Student sent an e-mail to other members of the research
team once again apologising for his actions. There is no question that the apology is abject,
demonstrating complete remorse and an understanding of the significance and seriousness of his
actions.
[39] On September 30, 2005, The Student appeared at a meeting with the Dean of Graduate
Studies. This is a formal step under the Code. The Student admitted to academic misconduct
and apologised to Dr. Maki for his actions. The Student openly acknowledged his wrongdoing
before the Dean.
[40]

In the Meeting Notes of the meeting with the Dean, the following is stated:
The Dean stated that she was unsure whether The Student should receive a second chance
in his programme, given the high standards at the University of Toronto and the absence
of apparent remorse. Referring the case to the Provost would prolong the process, it is
not an action that is considered without serious cause. The Dean stated that she would

refer the case to the Provost.
[41] At the hearing before the Tribunal, the Dean testified that the absence of apparent
remorse referred to in the Meeting Notes was the delay in openly apologising to other members
of the research team.
35904 v2

8
[42]

The Meeting Notes of the meeting with the Dean also state:
The Dean indicated that, from his file, she could not find any indication of The Student
feeling guilty. The Dean stated that The Student’s file exhibits the absence of ethical
thinking and a presence of serious ethical misconduct.

[43] The Tribunal’s reading of the file, if it is the same file that was presented to the Dean,
does not support the conclusion that there was no indication of The Student feeling guilty. On
the contrary, we believe that the apologies to his fellow researchers were genuine and showed
real remorse; not the “absence of apparent remorse”. The Meeting Notes with the Dean make no
reference to the fact that The Student had been advised by Dr. Maki that he believed that The
Student was entitled to a second chance. There is no reference to The Student being permitted to
make the presentation in Cleveland based on the same abstract.
THE UNIVERSITIES POLICIES ON RESEARCH ETHICS
[44]

The University’s Policy on Ethical Conduct in Research states:
University expects its members (which include faculty, students and anyone holding a
University post or any office that has University status, such as that of a fellow or
research associate), the highest standards of ethical conduct at every aspect of research
including applications, proposals, the research itself, reports and publications. Term
“research” is broadly defined and is intended to include both scientific and non-

scientific research and research that is not grant supported.
[45] The Faculty of Medicine’s Principles and Responsibilities regarding Conduct of Research
in section 4.4 provides as follows:
The students, post-doctoral fellows, research associates, and research support staff, have
a responsibility for the ethical conduct of research by becoming knowledgeable about the
norms of good science and by acting in accordance with them. These norms should be
understood as applied to research in the basic, clinical sciences, and community health.
In addition, the ethical considerations of research involving human and animal subjects
are areas that need to be addressed. In particular, students, post-doctoral Follows,
research associates, and research support staff must be familiar with relevant ethical
codes and guidelines governing medical research (e.g. University guidelines Tri-Council
Policy Statement: Ethical Conduct for Research Involving Humans…).

[46] The Tri-Council Policy Statement of Ethical Conduct for Research Involving Humans
provides in part as follows:
However, researchers and institutions also recognise that with freedom comes
responsibility, including the responsibility to ensure that research involving
human subjects meets high scientific and ethical standards. The researchers
commitment to the advancement of knowledge also applies duties of honesty and
thoughtful enquiry, rigorous analysis, and accountability for the use of
professional standards.
[47] The University of Toronto has its own policy titled Research Involving Human Subjects
– School of Graduates Studies Student Guide on Ethical Conduct, which provides as follows:
35904 v2

9
Every researcher conducting research involving human subjects has the obligation to be
familiar with the Tri-Council policy statement as well as the University of Toronto
policies on research. Researchers are encouraged to take the TCPS on-line tutorial found
at http://www.pre.ethics.gc.ca/English/tutorial/. Graduate students engaged in human
subjects research are responsible for the ethical conduct of the projects, as are their
supervisors. It is vital that both parties are aware of what these responsibilities entail.

THE TRIBUNAL’S CONCLUSION AS TO THE APPROPRIATE PENALTY
[48] The Student’s conduct violated all of the University’s policies and guidelines with respect
to ethical research. The Tribunal considers the violation of these policies to be serious and
warrants a serious sanction in order to maintain the integrity of the reputation of the University.
We consider The Student’s conduct to be at the more serious end of the scale of academic
offences.
[49] We were presented with numerous cases before other panels of the University Tribunal
and cases that considered the appropriate sentencing guidelines in matters of academic offences.
The most comprehensive decision is the decision in the matter of the appeal by Mr. C.,
November 5, 1976. This case sets out the following sentencing criteria:
(a)

the character of the person charged;

(b)

the likelihood of a repetition of the offence;

(c)

the nature of the offence committed;

(d)

any extenuating circumstances surrounding the commission of the offence;

(e)

the detriment to the university occasioned by the offence;

(f)

the need to deter others from committing a similar offence.

[50] Counsel for the University acknowledged that no one criteria outweighs the others. We
believe that the principles of general deterrence are the most important consideration when
dealing with falsified research because of the obvious impact that this conduct has on the
reputation of the University, particularly as a centre for research.
[51] If we were dealing with the criterion of general deterrence in isolation, there is no
question that the circumstances of this case would warrant the most serious sanction available to
the University, which is expulsion. However, in the circumstances of this particular case, we do
not believe that expulsion is the most appropriate sanction. We believe that there are mitigating
circumstances that would make it unfair and inappropriate to impose the most serious sanction of
expulsion as this would, in effect, deny The Student the opportunity to pursue studies at any time
in the future. Under the Code, an expulsion would be recorded on The Student’s academic
record permanently.
[52] We have reviewed the other cases where the sanction of expulsion was imposed and,
usually, there is a serious offence such as this (often a second or third offence) combined with
evidence of a complete lack of remorse leading to the inescapable conclusion that there is a
35904 v2

10
likelihood of a repetition of the offence and no possibility of rehabilitation of the offender. We
do not believe that this is such a case.
[53]

35904 v2

The Tribunal considered, in particular, the following facts:
1.

The falsified data was not published in a peer-reviewed journal or thesis in which
case there would be a greater risk of harm to the research community.

2.

The Student is a first time offender.

3.

The Student showed genuine remorse.

4.

The Student understands the seriousness of his conduct. He did not attempt to
minimize the seriousness of his conduct.

5.

The Student pleaded guilty at the hearing.

6.

The Student openly acknowledged his conduct.

7.

The Student made a sincere attempt to remedy the situation and comply with the
Tribunal process.

8.

The Student did not offer any excuses for his conduct.

9.

We do not believe that there is any possibility of repetition of an offence such as
this by The Student.

10.

The Student acknowledged his guilt at an early stage, namely, the first meeting
with Dr. Maki. Although he did not come forward and acknowledge his guilt, he
did acknowledge his guilt at a very early stage.

11.

The Student believed, based on Dr. Maki’s discussions with him and Dr. Maki’s
e-mails, that he was being given a second chance.

12.

On July 25, 2005, Dr. Maki acknowledged to the other researchers in the lab that
he had told The Student that he had given him a second chance and that he was
hopeful that The Student had learned from this experience.

13.

The Student was, in effect, put on probation and instructed to perform very
specific tasks in order to clean up the research for the purposes of a subsequent
presentation in Cleveland based on the same abstract.

14.

On August 4, 2005 he was permitted to attend and make a presentation in
Cleveland to a reputable international organization based on the same abstract.

15.

On the same day that he was making that presentation he was advised by Dr.
Maki that he was being put on a leave of absence. He has been effectively
suspended since that date.

11
16.

Although his apology to his colleagues and fellow researchers came after that
presentation and after he was put on a leave of absence, his apology was genuine
and abject. He acknowledged his remorse and demonstrated that he understands
the seriousness of his actions. He was under no compulsion to apologise as he
did.

17.

The Student openly acknowledged his wrongdoing when he met with the Dean of
Graduate Studies.

18.

The Dean’s conclusion that the matter should be referred to the Provost for
disciplinary action was based, in part, on her conclusion that she “did not find any
indication of The Student feeling guilty”. Further she was unsure whether The
Student should receive a second chance given “the absence of apparent remorse”.
We believe that the Dean correctly concluded that the absence of apparent
remorse is an aggravating factor which would militate against a second chance.
However, we have concluded there is clear evidence of remorse and a recognition
of the seriousness of his conduct.

CONCLUSION
[54] We believe that the appropriate penalty is one that balances the seriousness of the offence
with the opportunity for The Student to be given a second chance. We believe that the most
serious penalty of expulsion should be reserved for the most serious cases where there is no
possibility of rehabilitation and a real likelihood of repetition of the offence. This is not such a
case.
[55]

Accordingly we would make the following order:
1.

The Student is suspended from the University for a period of five years from
August 4, 2005.

2.

The record of the sanction shall be imposed on the student’s academic record for a
period of five year from August 4, 2005.

3.

There will be a grade of zero assigned to course No. RST9999Y.

4.

This matter should be reported to the Provost to be published and the notice of
decision and the sanctions imposed in the University’s newspaper with the name
of the student withheld.

DATED at Toronto
February 22, 2006
__________________________________
Chair

35904 v2

