Case 462

DATE:

   February 22, 2006

PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v. The Student

Hearing Date(s):

   January 18 and January 25, 2006

Panel Members:

   John A. Keefe, Chair
   Melanie A. Woodin, Faculty Panel Member
   Matto Mildenberger, Student Panel Member

Appearances:

   Lily Harmer for the University
   Jeremy Glick, law student, Downtown Legal Services for The Student
   Chris Burr, law student, Downtown Legal Services for The Student

   Student charged under s. B.i.1(f), and alternatively, under s. B.i.3(b)
   of the Code. The charges related to allegations that the Student
   submitted an abstract and presented a podium presentation at an
   international conference which contained references to fabricated,
   falsified and misrepresented research data. The Student pleaded guilty
   to the charge under s. B.i.3(b) of the Code and not guilty to the
   charge under s. B.i.1(f) of the Code. The parties submitted an Agreed
   Statement of Facts. The Panel considered the Agreed Statement of Facts
   and accepted the guilty plea. The matter proceeded as a contested
   hearing on sanction. The Panel considered testimony and email
   correspondence from the Studentâs academic supervisor, testimony from
   the Dean of the School of Graduate Studies, Meeting Notes of the
   Studentâs meeting with the Dean, the Studentâs file, and testimony from
   the Studentâs father. The Panel considered the Universityâs Policy on
   Ethical Conduct in Research, s. 4.4 of the Faculty of Medicineâs
   Principles and Responsibilities regarding Conduct of Research, the
   Tri-Council Policy Statement: Ethical Conduct for Research Involving
   Humans; and the School of Graduates Studies Student Guide on Ethical
   Conduct and found that the Studentâs conduct violated all of the
   Universityâs ethical research policies and guidelines. The Panel found
   the Studentâs conduct to be at the more serious end of academic
   offences. The Panel considered previous Tribunal cases and found that
   the principles of general deterrence were the most important
   consideration when dealing with falsified research because of the
   impact that such conduct had on the reputation of the University as a
   centre for research. The Panel found that mitigating circumstances made
   it unfair and inappropriate to impose the sanction of expulsion. The
   Panel found that the falsified data was not published in a
   peer-reviewed journal or thesis; the Student was a first time offender;
   the Student showed genuine remorse; the Student understood the
   seriousness of his conduct and did not attempt to minimize the
   seriousness of his conduct; the Student pleaded guilty at the hearing;
   the Student openly acknowledged his conduct; the Student made an
   attempt to remedy the situation and comply with the Tribunal process;
   the Student did not offer any excuses for his conduct; there was no
   possibility of repetition of a similar offence by the Student; the
   Student acknowledged his guilt at a very early stage; the Student
   reasonably believed, based on his discussions and e-mail correspondence
   with his academic supervisor, that he was being given a second chance;
   the Studentâs academic supervisor acknowledged to the other researchers
   in the lab that he had offered the Student a second chance; the Student
   had been, in effect, put on probation and instructed to perform
   specific tasks in order to clean up the research for the purposes of a
   subsequent presentation at a second conference based on the same
   abstract; the Student was permitted to attend and make a presentation
   to a reputable international organization at the second conference
   based on the same abstract; that on the same day that he had made the
   presentation to the second conference he was advised by his academic
   supervisor that he was being put on a leave of absence and had been
   effective suspension since that date; that although his apology to his
   colleagues came after the second presentation and after he was put on a
   leave of absence, his apology was genuine and abject, and he
   acknowledged his remorse and demonstrated that he understood the
   seriousness of his actions, despite being under no compulsion to
   apologise as he did; the Student openly acknowledged his wrongdoing
   when he met with the Dean of Graduate Studies; the Deanâs conclusion
   that the matter should be referred to the Provost for disciplinary
   action was based, in part, on her conclusion that the absence of
   apparent remorse was an aggravating factor which militated against a
   second chance, however, the Studentâs file did not support the Deanâs
   conclusion that there was no indication of the Studentâs guilt or
   remorse, and there was in fact clear evidence of remorse and a
   recognition of the seriousness of the Studentâs conduct. The Panel
   imposed a five-year suspension; a five-year notation on the Studentâs
   academic record and transcript; a grade of zero in the course; and that
   a report be issued to the Provost.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12730
