Case 991

DATE:

   July 6, 2020

PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v. Y.W.

HEARING DATE:

   January 29, 2020 in person, May 7, 2020, via Zoom

Panel Members:

   Ms. Lisa Talbot, Chair
   Professor Margaret MacNeill, Faculty Panel Member
   Mr. Jin Zhou, Student Panel Member

Appearances:

   Ms. Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg
   Rothstein LLP
   Ms. Megan Phiffer, Law Student, Paliare Roland Rosenberg Rothstein LLP
   Ms. Olivia Eng, Law Student, Paliare Roland Rosenberg Rothstein LLP
   The Student

In Attendance:

   Ms. Krista Kennedy, Administrative Clerk & Hearing Secretary, Appeals,
   Discipline and Faculty Grievances (January 29, 2020 & May 7, 2020)
   Mr. Christopher Lang, Director, Appeal, Discipline and Faculty
   Grievances (May 7, 2020)

   TheÂ StudentÂ wasÂ initiallyÂ charged withâ¯fiveÂ counts under
   s.Â B.i.1(b)Â of theâ¯Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters, 1995â¯(the
   âCodeâ)Â forÂ knowingly usingÂ or possessingÂ anÂ unauthorized aid or
   aids or obtainingÂ unauthorized assistanceÂ from a teaching
   assistantÂ in connectionÂ with a programming course.Â The
   UniversityÂ subsequently withdrewÂ threeÂ of these
   charges.Â Alternatively,Â she was charged with one count underÂ s.
   B.i.3(b) ofÂ theÂ CodeÂ for knowingly doing or omitting to do something
   to engage in a form of cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct,
   fraud or misrepresentationÂ in order toÂ obtain academic credit or
   other academicÂ advantage.Â This was charge wasÂ alsoÂ withdrawn.

   TheÂ StudentÂ did not attend the hearingÂ on January 29, 2020.Â Based
   onÂ various affidavits andÂ the UniversityâsÂ Policy on Official
   Correspondence with Students, the Panel found thatÂ sheÂ had
   beenÂ served with theÂ charges and the Notice of Hearing
   andÂ hadÂ received reasonable notice of the hearing.
   TheÂ PanelÂ ordered that the hearing proceed in her absenceÂ and found
   her guiltyÂ of two counts of knowingly obtaining unauthorized
   assistance, contrary to s. B.i.1(b) of theÂ Code.Â Following the
   Universityâs submissions on penalty, the Panel adjournedÂ the hearing
   to afford theÂ StudentÂ a furtherÂ opportunity to makeÂ submissions on
   penalty.Â The
   PanelÂ acceptedÂ theÂ StudentâsÂ subsequentÂ adjournmentÂ requestÂ andÂ
    reconvenedÂ on May 7,Â 2020Â with her in attendance.

   TheÂ StudentÂ admitted that sheÂ hadÂ engaged in misconduct and
   accepted the Universityâs sanctionsÂ set out in the JSP.Â The Panel
   found thatÂ sheÂ exhibited dishonesty and unethical character
   becauseÂ she was prepared on two occasions toÂ take unauthorized
   assistance and to copy the instructorâsÂ solutions,Â andÂ was prepared
   to exploit her relationship with aÂ teachingÂ assistant to obtain
   unauthorized assistance in a course in which she was registered. The
   Panel highlighted thatÂ theÂ StudentâsÂ actions were not isolated, but
   repeated, indicating thatÂ sheÂ did not suffer a momentary lapse
   ofÂ judgment andÂ was prepared to mislead and lie repeatedly to the
   University about the misconduct when confronted.Â Furthermore,
   theÂ PanelÂ notedÂ that sheÂ had onlyÂ admitted her misconduct,
   expressed remorse and indicated that she was prepared to accept the
   consequencesÂ at the continuation hearing, after having engaged in a
   conspiracy to mislead the University over many months.Â According to
   the Panel, the factÂ that sheÂ originally conspired with other students
   to avoid sanction for herself and for theÂ teachingÂ assistant suggests
   she would likely commit such an offence if she thought she would not
   get caught or to protect another student engaging in misconduct. It
   alsoÂ notedÂ that theÂ StudentÂ sees a distinction between cheating on
   a lab and cheating on an exam suggests she would likely cheat again if
   she thought it wasnât âseriousâ.Â HerÂ engagementÂ in multiple breaches
   of theÂ CodeÂ also contributedÂ to theÂ Panelâs view that there is a
   likelihood of theÂ StudentÂ committing ethical breaches again.

   The Panel characterized theÂ offencesÂ asÂ seriousÂ because
   theÂ StudentÂ was aware of what she was doing and aware that her
   actions were in breach of theÂ Code.Â It also noted that she then
   deliberately misled the University in its investigation.Â According to
   the Panel,Â the Studentâs admissionÂ andÂ her expression
   ofÂ remorseÂ constituted mitigating factors.Â The fact
   thatÂ theÂ StudentÂ knowingly committed multiple offences and engaged
   in a scheme to cover-up the true facts from the University wasÂ viewed
   as aggravating factors.Â TheÂ University has an important interest in
   protecting the integrity of the institution. Such integrity is
   fundamental to the academic relationshipÂ important that students are
   deterred from committing academic dishonesty. Students must know that
   knowingly breaching theÂ CodeÂ will not be tolerated.Â They must also
   know that they cannot seek to obtain unfair benefits from teaching
   assistants with whom they share a social network, or at all, and that
   doing so constitutes a breach of trust by everyone involved.

   TheÂ Panel imposed the following sanctions:Â aÂ grade assignment of
   zeroÂ inÂ the course;Â up toÂ five-year
   suspension;Â aÂ recommendationÂ to the PresidentÂ that theÂ StudentÂ be
   expelledÂ further toÂ s.Â C.ii.(b)(i) ofÂ Code;Â reportÂ to Provost for
   publication of a notice of the decision and sanction imposed, with the
   name of theÂ StudentÂ withheld.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/29386
