Case 1541

   DATE:

   April 18, 2024

   PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v. X.Z. ("the Student")

   HEARING DATE:

   December 1, 2024, via Zoom

   PANEL MEMBERS:

   Johanna Braden, Chair
   Professor Kevin Wang, Faculty Panel Member
   Alwin Xie, Student Panel Member

   APPEARANCES:
   William Webb, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg
   Rothstein LLP

   HEARING SECRETARY:

   Nadia Bruno, Special Projects Officer , Office of Appeals, Discipline
   and Faculty Grievances

   The Student was charged with two counts of knowingly using or
   possessing an unauthorized aid and/or obtaining unauthorized assistance
   in connection with a final exam, contrary to sections B.i.1(b) and
   B.II.2. The Student was also charged with one count for knowingly
   attempting to represent as their own an idea or expression of an idea
   or work in connection with a final exam, under B.i.1(d). In the
   alternative, the Student was charged with knowingly engaging in a form
   of cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or
   misrepresentation not otherwise described in the Code in order to
   obtain academic credit or other academic advantage of any kind in
   connection with a final exam.

   The Student signed a consent form in which they attested (among other
   things) that they had signed an Agreed Statement of Facts (‚ASF‚), an
   Agreed Statement of Facts on Penalty (‚ASFP‚), and a Joint Submission
   on Penalty (‚JSP‚), and that they did not wish to attend or participate
   further in the proceeding. On that basis, the Tribunal proceeded in the
   absence of the Student.

   As part of a course, the Student was required to write a final exam
   worth 50%. Students were prohibited from using aids or obtaining
   assistance on the exam. During the exam, the chief presiding officer
   (‚CPO‚) noticed that the Student had a miniature, concealed camera
   poking through a hole in their sweater, and inferred that the Student
   had been recording their final exam with the camera. The CPO
   subsequently discovered that the Student was in possession of a
   miniature camera, headphones, phone (powered on), as well as a battery
   pack. The Student attended a Dean‚s Designate meeting to discuss the
   allegations that the Student was in possession of an unauthorized aid
   during the exam, and the Student admitted that they had used a camera
   and an earpiece that allowed her to communicate with someone else
   during the final exam. The Student subsequently admitted to all of the
   charges in the ASF. On the basis of the ASF and the admissions of the
   Student contained therein, the Panel found the Student guilty of the
   first and second charges. The remaining two charges were withdrawn by
   the University.

   In determining the appropriate sanction, the Panel considered the
   evidence supplied in the ASFP. In particular, the Panel reviewed
   evidence that the Student had committed a prior academic offence for
   possession of an unauthorized aid in connection with a midterm exam.
   The Panel also reviewed a medical note, provided by a hospital in the
   months following the commission of the current offences, indicating
   that the Student had been diagnosed with depression. The Panel noted
   that these facts presented a mix of aggravating and mitigating factors.
   The Panel considered the evidence in light of the facts and principles
   relevant to sanctions as set out in the decision of University of
   Toronto and Mr. C (Case No. 1976/77-3, November 5, 1976), as well as
   sanctions imposed in other recent decisions. The Panel found that the
   fact that the University and the Student were able to agree on a JSP
   was strong evidence that the appropriate balancing of the sanctioning
   factors had occurred. Ultimately, the Panel deferred to the parties‚
   joint submission on penalty having found that doing so would not bring
   the administration of justice into disrepute.

   The Panel imposed the following sanction: a final grade of zero in the
   course; a suspension from the University for a period of 5 years; a
   six-year notation on the Student‚s academic record and transcript; and
   a report to the Provost for publication.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/31636
