Case 606

DATE:

   February 14, 2012

PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v. A.L.

Hearing Date(s):

   December 5, 2011, January 17,Â 2012

Panel Members:

   Mr. Clifford Lax, Chair
   Prof. Miriam Diamond, Faculty Member
   Mr. Chris Feng, Student Member

Appearances:

   Ms. Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel for the University
   Mr. Glenroy Bastien, Counsel for the Student
   Dr. Eleanor Irwin, Dean's Designate
   Dr. Vincent Murphy, Psychologist

In Attendance:

   Mr. A.L., the Student
   Mr. Deepshika Dutt
   Ms. Natalie Ramtahal, Coordinator, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty
   Grievances

   Note: Overturned on appeal.

   Student charged under s. B.i.1(a) and s. B.i.3(a) of the Code . The
   charges related to allegations that the Student submitted his forged
   transcript to ten employers and falsely claimed to have received an
   entrance scholarship and a study skills success certificate. The
   Student pleaded guilty to the charges. The Panel found the Student
   guilty under s. B.i.1(a) and s. B.i.3(a) . The Student submitted that
   he suffered from a learning disability and met the criteria for ADHD.
   The Panel rejected that such suffering from a learning disability can
   partially justify the misconduct as the misconduct was willful and
   deliberate and displayed none of the traits associated with ADHD or a
   learning disability. The Panel considered a five-year suspension to be
   a more appr/opriate sanction even though the University sought
   expulsion. The Panel found that it was not proven that the deterrent
   effect of expulsion exceeded that of a five-year suspension: there was
   no scientific evidence. Also, the embarrassment of having to explain
   the gap between the end of studies and his graduation would act as a
   deterrent. In fact, if deterrence is the prime justification for
   expulsion, then serious sanctions should result in naming the guilty
   student rather than using initials to grant the student anonymity as
   the practice would reduce the effectiveness of deterrence. The Panel
   found the statement of remorse by the Student to be relevant but it
   would have had a larger effect if it had come at an earlier stage. The
   factors that the Panel considered in imposing a five-year suspension
   were (1) the Student had not committed any prior offence; (2) even
   though he submitted the transcript to ten employers, all ten instances
   were part of one continuing offence; (3) the Student in fact had
   completed sufficient academic credits to earn a degree; and (4) there
   was credible evidence that the Student felt significant remorse for his
   actions and was motivated to learn from his mistake. As for prior
   decisions, the Panel considered CHK (Case No. 596, 597 & 598) and found
   that expulsion was not the only justifiable sanction for serious
   offences without a previous academic offence. The Panel did not
   consider prior decisions involving joint submissions as joint
   submissions indicated studentsâ agreement to the sanction and thus were
   not useful precedents. The Panel specifically focused on A.K.G. (Case
   No. 508). In A.K.G. , the student submitted his forged transcript to
   employers but his offence was not discovered until after graduation. He
   did not attend the hearing, and the Board suspended his degree for five
   years and entered a permanent notation on his transcript. The Panel
   stated that if a five-year suspension was an appropriate sanction for
   A.K.G. , a more severe sanction was not justified in this case, in
   which the Student attended the hearing, giving the Panel an opportunity
   to assess his character. The Panel accepted the Studentâs
   psychologistâs testimony that the Student described his behaviour as a
   âsignificant lapse in judgment,â these charges acted âas a huge wake-up
   call,â and that he had learned from his mistake. The Panel imposed a
   five-year suspension; a five-year notation; and a report be issued to
   the Provost. Finally, the Panel reiterated its recommendation that
   names of students who were suspended or expelled be disclosed.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12784
