THE UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
OF THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
IN THE lVIATTER OF charges of academic dishonesty filed on September 29, 201 0;
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic
1vfatters, 1995;

AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Act, 1971, S.O. l971, c. 56 as amended
S.0. 1978, C. 88

BETWEEN:
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO

- and -

Dates of Hearing: December 5, 2011 and January 17, 2012

Members of the Panel:
• Mr. Clifford Lax, Q.C., Barrister and Solicitor, Chair
• Professor Miriam Diamond, Department of Geography and Planning, Faculty Panel Member
• Mr. Chris Feng, Student Panel Member
Appearances:
• Ms. Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel for the University, Paliare Roland Barristers
• Mr. Glenroy Bastien, Counsel for the Student, Bastien's Prnfessional Corporation
• Dr. Eleanor Irwin, Dean's Designate, University of Toronto, Scarborough
• Dr. Vincent Murphy, Psychologist
In Attendance:
• Mr.
the Student
• Ms. Deepshika Dutt, Articling Student, Bastien's Professional Corporation
• Ms. Natalie Ramtahal, Coordinator, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances

Al 11111,

REASONS FOR DECISION

l.

Mr. admits that he knowingly forged, altered and falsified a university academic
record, namely a transcript, that purported to be his academic history and unofficial
transcript from the University of Toronto. He then submitted the forged transcript to 10
potential employers along with a resume which also did not truly represent his academic
record. He claimed to have received the University of Toronto entrance scholarship
based on academic excellence (which in fact he had not) and to have received a study
skills success certificate, when he had not.

2.

Five of the employment applications were submitted between April and September, 2009
and the temaining five were submitted to employers between January and May, 2010.

3.

This Tribunal found Mr.
guilty of five counts of forgery, altering and falsification
of an academic record and making use of such falsified records, contrary to Section
B 1.3(a) of the Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters (the "Code").

4.

The sole issue for determination on this hearing is the appropriate sanction for such
unacceptable conduct.

LIii

Consideration of the Appropriate Sanction

5.

Mr. TIii displayed a complete disregard of his obligations as a member of the
University community. The offences to which he pled guilty, namely, forgery and fraud,
are amongst the most serious breaches of the Code, which a student can commit.
Counsel for tbe University forcefully argued that such improper conduct required the
imposition of the most serious sanction contemplated by the Code, namely, Mr. ~ s
expulsion from the University.

6.

For the reasons that follow, this Panel concludes that a five year suspension sufficiently
expresses the University's condemnation of the student's conduct.

7.

Mr. sought to partially justify his conduct by adducing evidence that he suffers
from a learning disability and that he met the diagnostic criteria for attentiondeficiUhypernctivity disorder (ADHD). This Panel rejected any suggestion that Mr.
~ s conduct could be partially justified, excused, or explained away by a learning
disability or by an attention-deficit disorder. The impugned conduct was willful and
deliberate, well planned and methodically carried out and displayed none of the traits said
to be associated with ADHD or a learning disability.

8.

Counsel for the University when urging the Panel to impose the most serious sanction
(expulsion) for these most serious offences, offered two supporting rationales for the
sanction, namely:
(1) that the deterrent effect of expulsion is greatet· than the deterrent effect of a lengthy
suspension~ and

-3(2) that in most (but not all prior decisions of this Tribunal), forgery and fraud of an
academic record have resulted in the expulsion of the student from the University.

The Deterrent Effect of Expulsion
9.

Prior decisions of this Tribunal and of the Appeals Board refer to the expected deterrent
effect of expulsion. The anticipated deterrent effect acquires a measure of credibility,
merely through frequent repetition, but without any suppotiing factual evidence. While it
might be inferred that in some cases expulsion could deter other potential student wrongdoing, that inference is not based on any scientific analysis or empirical study. Simply
repeating the claim that the most serious offence calls for the most serious sanction, does
not establish a factual underpinning for the alleged result of expulsion.

10.

The detetTent effect of any sanction requires both analysis and supp01i. In a different but
relevant context, scientific evidence cast doubt on the perceived wisdom that capital
punishment acted as an effective deterrent for serious criminal offences involving human
death.

11.

Indeed, if deterrence is the prime justification for a recommendation to expel the
,.vrongdoer, then serious sanctions (including expulsion and suspension) should result in
orders from Governing Council, which actually name the guilty student, rather than

continuing the cmTent practice of granting the guilty student anonymity. The use of
initials to shield the identity of the guilty student, undercuts the effectiveness of the
sanction as a deterrent to others.
12.

In the matter of (Case 572; January 5, 2010), the Tribunal noted its concern
over the existing provision of the Code, granting a disciplined student anonymity. Now
two years later this Tribunal respectfully repeats its request to the Provost and to the
Governing Council that at least those students expelled or suspended from the University,
are no longer entitled to anonymity. They are being expelJed or suspended from the
University community and upon conviction have lost any rights to anonymity accorded to
them by the Code.

13.

Furthermore, while there can be no argument that expulsion results irt a final and lasting
impact on the student's life, can it not be equally said that a lengthy suspension (in this
case five years) brings with it a serious condemnation of the student's unacceptable
behavior? Mr. ~ had earned enough academic credits to graduate. His graduation
will of necessity be delayed for five years. Any perceptive person subsequently
reviewing his transcript will seek an explanation for this gap between the end of his
studies and his graduation. Mr. must explain to family members and to friends
why his graduation from the University was delayed for five years. The embarrassment
that will accompany such an explanation forms a necessary element of the deterrent
factor of the sanction imposed.

14.

Even though M r . ~ initially denied his guilt and attempted to mislead the University
as to how and what he had done, he ultimately did plead guilty. He belatedly exhibited
some measure of remorse. We note however that it is typical for a gtlilty plea to be

- 4.

11111

accompanied by a statement of remorse and therefore, while we believe that Mr.
has learned his lesson, his expression of remorse would have been a larger factor in our
deliberations if it had come at a much earlier stage of the University's investigation.
15.

In deciding that the appropriate sanction for Mr. I,111 is a suspension of five years,

rather than expulsion from the University, the Panel took a number of factors into
consideration including:
(1) Mr.

11111 had not committed any prior offences;

submitted forged transcripts to ten potential employers, it could be
said that all ten instances were actually pa1t of one continuing offence;

(2) While Mr. ~
(3) Mr.

11111 had in fact completed sufficient academic credits to earn a degree; and,

(4) There was credible expert evidence that Mr. ~ felt significant remorse for his
actions and was motivated to learn from his mistake.
Prior Decisions on the Appropriate Sanction

16.

The decision by the Di~~e-~feals Board of the University Tribunal in ~

9 ,

~ I - and~ ~ •
issued November 23, 2011 was considered with great
interest. In that appeal, the students were caught cheating by purchasing essays. Each of
the students had committed two prior academic offences. At the University Tribunal
level, the Panel had split 2 to 1 in favour of a five yeai· suspension, rather than expulsion.
The Provost appealed the decision solely on the issue of sanction. The Discipline
Appeals Board overruled the Tribunal decision and recommended that the students be
expelled from the University.

17.

In the Appeal Decision, the Chair, Mr. R.G. Slaght comprehensively reviewed a number
of earlier decisions which considered the appropriate sanction for the most serious
academic offence. Mr. SlaghCs analysis suggests the following conclusions:
1. Where the students have no prior convictions (see decisions in ~ and
. , _ H■\ the Tribunal could reasonably reject a sanction of expulsion and
opt to suspend the sn.tdents for a five year suspension.
2. In cases of cheating involving purchased essays, (another serious offence), Mr. Slaght
accepted the evidence that 14 prior cases of similar cheating had resulted in 4
expulsions, 8 five year suspensions (including the three in the case before him), 1
three year Sllspension and 1 two year suspension. In other words, suspension, not

1

See Book of Authorities, Tab I.
See Book of Authorities, Tab I, paras. 77-79.
3
See Book of Authorities, Tab I, paras. 80-85.
2

-5expulsion, was considered to be the most appropriate sanction, even for serious cases
of academic wrongdoing. 4
3. Prior academic offences could justify expulsion, where it was clear that the student
had learned nothing from the prior convictions and that their apologies and
expressions of remorse, were simply repetitions of similar statements made on the
earlier convictions.
4. It should be noted that the Provost's Guidelines on Sanctions provides that even a
student previously convicted under the Code and found guilty of another offence
should face a recommended sanction that falls between two years' suspension and
expulsion from the University. 5
5. Both the Provost and Mr. Slaght's reasons recognize the wide latitude available to the
Panel in choosing the appropriate sanction. Each case must be judged on its own
facts and every student is entitled to have their personal circumstances considered.
As the Provost's Guidelines explicitly contemplate, the Panel is entitled to impose a
penalty within a reasonable range of sanctions.
6. There is no absolute rule regarding the appropriate sanction. An analysis and an
understanding of the facts of each pai1icular case are the prime factors. Mr. Slaght
posits these questions for consideration of an appropriate sanction:
a. Under what circumstances did the impugned behavior take place?
b. What degree of intent and deliberation was involved?
c. Did the student recognize that the conduct was grave and wrong?
d. Was anyone else involved?
e. Were there influences that can legitimately affect the penalty?
f.

Did the student admit guilt?

g. Is there anything particularly egregious or saving about the case or are there
other facts that might ameliorate conduct that would otherwise be
condemned?
h. Has the student learned anything from the conviction?
1.

Are there true expressions of remorse and regret?

4 See Book of Authorities, Tab 1, para. 99.
5 See Provost's Guideline on Sanctions, Offences and Suggested Penalties, Appendix "C" to Code ofBehaviour on

Academic Matters.

-6-

J.

Are there prior academic offonces?6

18.

Mr. Slaght acknowledges that in cases without a previous academic offence and with an
otherwise positive record, expulsion is not the only justifiable result7, but he goes on to
point out that in a case of serious wrongdoing where expulsion is not the imposed
sanction, it would be rnre for a suspension of less than five years to be imposed. 8

19.

Counsel for the University also relied upon a number of prior decisions in which the
parties made a j oint submission on sanction. Because the j oint submission necessarily
indicates the student's agreement to the sanction (expulsion), we did not consider these
cases to be useful precedents. 9 The student's decision to accept expulsion could be a
highly individual choice, made for any number of possible reasons.

20.

The Panel considered the principles outlined by Mr. John Sopink.a, as he then was, in his
reasons for decision in the University of Toronto and A1r. C., issued November 5, 1976.
These factors include:

i) the character of the person changed;
ii) the likelihood of repetition of the offence;
iii) the nature of the offence committed;
iv) any extenuating circumstances surrounding the commission of the offence~
v) the detriment to the Univet·sity caused by the offence; and,
vi) the need to deter others from committing a similar offence.
21.

~ ~~ant importance on the decision of a Judicial Board in the matter of

~ ~ . 10 Mr. ~ admitted that he had forged and falsified his academic
record (his transcript) and submitted the falsified transcript to prospective employers.
Thus his offence was precisely the same as that committed by Mr.
However, Mr.
~ • s fraudulent conduct was not discovered until after he had received his degree
from the University.

LIii•

22.

In such a circumstance, one would have expected the University to have sought the
revocation of the degree it had granted. After the fact revocation, would have been a
sanction equivalent to expulsion, prior to graduation.

23.

Mr. ~ declined to attend the hearing either in person or by video conference,
Therefore the Judicial Board was unable to make any assessment of the genuineness of
his remorse or the prospects for his rehabilitation.

24.

Notwithstanding the evidentiary shortcomings, the Judicial Board accepted the
submission of University Counsel that the appropriate sanction was to suspend Mr.

6

See Book of Authorities, Tab I, paras. 136-141.
See Book of Authorilies, Tab I, para. 139.
8
See Book of Authorities, Tab I, para. 143.
9
See
Book of Authorities, Tab 3; } Book of Authorities, Tab 5; ~ Jf., Book of
Authorities, Tab 13;
Book of Authorities, Tab 14.
10
See Book of Authorities, Tab 9.

1

1-_, .A,_...,

Al,

-7-

cal's degree for five years and to enter a permanent notation of the $Uspension on his
record.

Application of the Principles of Sanction to this Case

25.

The student did not testify. However, we heard evidence from an experienced
psychologist Dr. Vincent Murphy, who assessed Mr.
Dr. Murphy reported that
Mr. ~ described his behavior as a ''significant lapse in judgment'\ which he deeply
regrets. Dr. Murphy had absolutely no doubt about Mr.
sincerity in this regard. 11

26.

Dr. Murphy explained that these charges acted "as a huge wake•up call" and that Mr.
had learned from his mistake. The misconduct did not appear to be part of a
chronic behavior pattern. 12

27.

The Panel is somewhat heartened by Dr. Murphy's opinions and believe that Mr.
deserves another chance to prove himself worthy of being a graduate of the University,
but only after he has completed a lengthy term of suspension reflecting the seriousness of
his misconduct.

28.

If a five year suspension was the appropriate sanction for the cal case, we are unable

LIiiIlllll's

ial

rJIIII

to conclude that a more severe sanction is justified in the present case. The offence was
the same and the fact that Mr. ~
did not attend the hearing (while Mr. ~
did)
and therefore deprived the Judicial Board of an opportunity to assess the sincerity of his
expression of reg,rets, all suggest that Mr. ~ should not be treated any more harshly
than Mr. ~
- Finally, this Panel accepts the psychological evidence that the charges
have acted as a "wake-up" calJ and that Mr.
acknowledged the need to change his
ways.

rJIIII

29.

rtlllll

For all of the above reasons, we find that Mr.
should be suspended from the
University for a period of five years commencing January l 7, 2012. Further, that the
suspension be recorded on Mr.
academic record and transcript for a period of
fiv~ years commencing January 17, 2012, to the effect that be was sanctioned for
academic misconduct. Finally, that this case shall be repol'ted to the Provost for
publication of a notice of the decision of the Tribunal and the sanction imposed. For
reasons previously stated, it is hoped that the name of the student shall no/ be withheld.

Llllts

Dated at Toronto, this 14th day ofFebruary, 2012.

~
'

~ Q

.

r.'furdlax, Q.C., Chair

11
12

Exl1ibit 4, Student's Book of Docume.nts, Tab 3.
IBID, Tab 3, page 3.

