Case No.: 872

THE UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
IN THE MATTER OF charges of academic dishonesty made on May 31, 2016,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters,
1995,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Act, 1971, S.O. 1971, c. 56 as amended S.O.
1978, c. 88

B E T W E E N:
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
- and -

--

C

D

(

)

Hearing Date: October 13, 2016
Members of the Panel:
William C. McDowell, Lawyer, Chair
Professor Maria Rozakis-Adcock, Faculty Panel Member
Ms. Amanda Nash, Student Panel Member
Appearances:
Ms. Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Barristers
Dr. Leanne Carroll, Course Instructor for FAH102H1-S, (via Skype)
Ms. Heather Huckfield, Program Director, John H. Daniels Faculty of Architecture,
Landscape and Design
In Attendance:
Ms. Krista Osbourne, Administrative Assistant, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty
Grievances
Mr. Sean Lourim, Technology Assistant, Office of the Governing Council
Mr. Dave Vanderploeg, Audio Technician, Live Media

-

Not In Attendance:
Ms. C
D
, Student
1

REASONS FOR DECISION
1.

~

[Ill ("the Student") was charged with the following offences

pursuant to the Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters, 1995 ("the Code"):
1.

"In or about February 2014, you knowingly represented as your
own an idea or expression of an idea, and/or the work of another in
an essay titled "Visual Analysis Paper" ("Essay"), which you
submitted for academic credit in FAH 102H 1S: The Practice of Art
History in the Winter 2014 Session (the "Course"), contrary to
section 8.i.1 (d) of the Code.

2.

In the alternative, in or about February 2014, you knowingly
engaged in a form of cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct,
fraud or misrepresentation not otherwise described in the Code in
order to obtain academic credit or other academic advantage of any
kind in connection with the Essay, which you submitted for
academic credit in the Course, contrary to section B.l.3(b) of the
Code.

The particulars related to the charges are as follows:
a) At all material times, you were a registered student at the
University of Toronto in the Daniels Faculty of Architecture and
Design.
b) In Winter 2014, you enrolled in the Course.
c) Students in the Course were required to submit a visual analysis
paper in partial completion of the Course requirements. In or
about February 2014, you submitted the Essay to complete this
requirement.
2

d) You submitted the Essay knowing that it contained ideas, the
expression of ideas, and verbatim or nearly verbatim text from
publications and articles (the "Sources") which were not written
by you.
e) You knowingly represented the work of another person, or
persons, who wrote the Sources as your own. You knowingly
included in the Essay ideas and expressions that were not your
own, but were the ideas and expressions of another person, or
persons,

who

wrote

the

Sources,

which

you

did

not

acknowledge in the Essay.
f)

For the purposes of obtaining academic credit and/or other
academic advantage, you knowingly committed plagiarism in
the Essay."

3.

For the reasons that follow, we found Ms.

i=-i guilty of one count of

plagiarism contrary to s. B.1.1 (d) of the Code.

Service and Jurisdiction
4.

The Student did not appear at the hearing before the Tribunal. Counsel for

the Provost filed the affidavit of Virginia Fletcher, a Law Clerk at Paliare Roland.
The Student proved very difficult to reach at all stages of the University process.
Ms. Fletcher outlined the steps which had been taken to reach the Student. It will
suffice to say that service of documents was made to the Student's utoronto.ca
email address, which she had placed on ROSI.

5.

Pursuant to the University's policy on Official Correspondence With

Students, the Student is held to be responsible to monitor and retrieve her mail

3

from her "University issued electronic mail account". The Notice of Hearing and
the correspondence were sent to her at that address.
6.

We also note that Dr. Leanne Caroll, the instructor for the Course, met

with the Student on March 3, 2014 and in the course of that meeting showed the
Student how to check her utoronto email.
7.

Given these facts, we found that we had jurisdiction to proceed, and that it

would be appropriate to proceed in the Student's absence.
The Facts

8.

Dr. Caroll testified before the Tribunal via Skype from Mount Allison

University in Sackville, New Brunswick where she now teaches as a lecturer. The
Student registered for the course, the Practice of Art History FAH102H1S ("the
FAH Course"). Dr. Caroll taught the course with the aid of a number of teaching
assistants.
9.

Dr. Caroll required that students submit an essay ("the Essay") described

in the syllabus as a "visual analysis paper". The Essay was to be a brief
assignment of two to three pages and would be worth 20% of the course grade.
10.

Early in the term, Dr. Caroll taught a class focussed on effective writing.

In addition to other topics covered during this lecture, students were given careful
instruction concerning proper paraphrasing, and were warned of the dangers of
plagiarism. Dr. Caroll also required that students submit with their written work a
document entitled "Academic Integrity Checklist" in which the student certified

4

that authenticity of the assignment submitted, for example, by confirming that "I
have acknowledged the use of another's ideas with accurate citations".
11.

The Student submitted the Essay on February 13, 2014. She failed to

submit the Academic Integrity Checklist with the Essay. Accordingly, when her
paper was returned to her, marks had been deducted from it at the rate of 2% per
day. The Student ultimately submitted a signed Academic Integrity Checklist on
February 27, 2014.
12.

The paper was somewhat incoherent, and the teaching assistant who

graded it provided some constructive commentary, including "I encourage you to
visit your College's writing centre ... to learn how an English language learning
resource is available at U of T". The teaching assistant was also concerned
about the authorship of the paper, and drew these concerns to the attention of
Dr. Caroll. Ultimately, Dr. Caroll and the teaching assistant compared the Essay
to an online chapter entitled "Modern Art in Europe and the Americas, 1900 to
1950", which formed part of an art history text (Art History, Vol. 2, 4th ed. by
Marilyn Stokstad, and Michael W. Cothren).
13.

We reviewed the passages highlighted at Tab 5 of Exhibit 3 and are

satisfied that these were taken without attribution from the Stokstad text. In
several instances the Essay contains whole paragraphs ostensibly lifted from
Stokstad, with no attribution whatsoever. Of course, the Student was not present
to provide any explanation for her failure to provide citations or indeed other
attribution for the impugned passages. We accepted the evidence outlined

5

above. We found the Student guilty of one count of plagiarism contrary to Section
B.1.1 (d) of the Code.
Penalty

14.

The University submitted that the following penalty was appropriate:
•

That the Student receive a final grade of zero in FAH102H1 S in
Winter 2014;

•

That the Student be suspended from the University for a period of
two years, commencing on October 13, 2016 and ending on
October 12, 2018;

•

That the sanction be recorded on the Student's academic record
and transcript to the effect that she was sanctioned for academic
misconduct, for a period of three years from the date of our Order
until October 12, 2019; and

•

That the case be reported to the Provost for publication of a notice
of the decision of the Tribunal and the sanction or sanctions
imposed, with the name of the Student withheld.

15.

Counsel for the Provost reviewed a number of authorities with us, and we

are satisfied from a review of such authorities as The University of Toronto and

M. L. (June 27, 2016, Ms. Roslyn M. Tsao, Chair, Case No.: 850), and The
University of Toronto and Y. G. (July 14, 2014; Ms. Sarah Kraicer, Chair, Case
No.: 802), that the University's proposed sanctions were appropriate.
16.

As the Tribunal noted in the Y.G. case at paragraph 32:

6

The determination of an appropriate penalty in every
case by the Tribunal will depend on an assessment of
[the principles and factors described in The University
of Toronto and Mr. C, bearing in mind the individual

circumstances of the case]. At the same time, it is
important that there is general consistency in the
approach of Tribunals to sanction, so that students
are treated fairly and equitably. [citations omitted]

17.

We are satisfied that the sanction proposed in the present case meets

these goals. It is well within the range of penalties imposed recently in similar
matters.
Order of the Tribunal

18.

We issued the following order:
1.

THAT the hearing may proceed in the absence of the Student;

2.

THAT the Student is guilty of one count of plagiarism contrary to

section B.1.1 (d) of the Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters;
3.

THAT the Student receive a final grade of zero in FAH102H1S in

Winter 2014;
4.

THAT the Student be suspended from the University for a period of

two years, commencing on October 13, 2016 and ending on
October 12, 2018;
5.

THAT the sanction be recorded on the Student's academic record

and transcript to the effect that she was sanctioned for academic
misconduct, for a period of three years from the date of this Order
until October 12, 2019; and
7

6.

THAT this case shall be reported to the Provost for publication of a

notice of the decision of the Tribunal and the sanction or sanctions
imposed, with the name of the Student withheld.

DATED at Toronto, this

~ f January, 2017.

~/
William C. McDowell, Chair

8

