Case #872

   DATE: January 24, 2017
   PARTIES: University of Toronto v. C.D. ("the Student")

   Hearing Date(s): October 13, 2016

   Panel Members:
   William C. McDowell, Lawyer, Chair
   Professor Maria Rozakis-Adcock, Faculty Panel Member
   Ms. Amanda Nash, Student Panel Member

   Appearances:
   Ms. Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland
   Barristers
   Dr. Leanne Carroll, Course Instructor for FAH102H1-S (via Skype)
   Ms. Heather Huckfield, Program Director, John H. Daniels Faculty of
   Architecture, Landscape and Design

   In Attendance:
   Ms. Krista Osbourne, Administrative Assistant, Appeals, Discipline and
   Faculty Grievances
   Mr. Sean Lourim, Technology Assistant, Office of the Governing Council
   Mr. Dave Vanderploeg, Audio Technician, Live Media

   Not in Attendance:
   The Student

   Trial Division - s. B.i.1(d) of Code - plagiarism - student submitted
   essay worth 20% with substantial unattributed copying - student did not
   appear at hearing - proceeding in student's absence on basis of e-mail
   service - finding of guilt - zero on course, two year suspension, three
   year notation,Â publication of the decision with the name of the
   Student withheld

   The Student was charged with plagiarism under s. B.i.1(d) of the Code,
   and in the alternative of academic dishonesty under s. B.i.3(b) of the
   Code. The Student submitted an essay in a course, worth 20% of the
   final grade, containing entire paragraphs unsourced from an on-online
   reference. The Student had received specific instruction about
   plagiarism and proper citation in the course and submitted a signed
   academic integrity checklist.

   The Student did not appear at the hearing. The University had affidavit
   evidence showing that Student had been served the relevant notices by
   e-mail to their utoronto.ca address. Following the University's Policy
   on Official Correspondence the Tribunal determined that this was
   satisfactory service and proceeded in the Student's absence. The
   Student was found guilty of the forgeries on the basis of testimony
   from the course instructor and a comparison of the essay and the
   on-line reference.

   The University sought and obtained a mark of zero in the course, a two
   year suspension, a three year notation, and report of the decision to
   the Provost with the name of the Student withheld. The Tribunal found
   that this penalty met the goals of the sentencing factors used by the
   Tribunal (asÂ enunciated in the Mr C case) and was well within the
   range of penalties imposed recently in similar matters.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/13035
