Case #535

   DATE: November 26, 2009
   PARTIES: University of Toronto v. Z.C.
   Hearing Date(s): September 16, 2009
   Panel Members:
   Mr. John A. Keefe, Chair
   Prof. Graeme Hirst, Faculty Member
   Ms. Elena Kuzmin, Student Member
   Appearances:
   Mr. Robert Centa, Assistant Discipline Counsel for the University
   In Attendance:
   Ms. Lucy Gaspini, Academic Affairs Officer, University of Torointo
   Mississauga
   800x600

   Normal 0 false false false EN-CA X-NONE X-NONE
   MicrosoftInternetExplorer4 /* Style Definitions */ table.MsoNormalTable
   {mso-style-name:"Table Normal"; mso-tstyle-rowband-size:0;
   mso-tstyle-colband-size:0; mso-style-noshow:yes; mso-style-priority:99;
   mso-style-parent:""; mso-padding-alt:0in 5.4pt 0in 5.4pt;
   mso-para-margin:0in; mso-para-margin-bottom:.0001pt;
   mso-pagination:widow-orphan; font-size:10.0pt;
   font-family:"Calibri","sans-serif"; mso-bidi-font-family:"Times New
   Roman";}

   Trial Division â s.B.i.1(d) of Code â plagiarism â course work â
   Student did not attend Hearing â agreed statement of facts â joint
   submission on penalty â joint book of documents â Student acknowledged
   receipt of reasonable notice â Student advised to obtain legal advice â
   Student proceeded without legal advice â finding of guilt â sentencing
   factors in Mr. C â need for proportionality and consistency in
   sentencing â principle for accepting or rejecting a joint submission on
   penalty in The University of Toronto and Mr. S.M and R. v. Michael
   Tsicos â range of sanctions for plagiarism is from two years for first
   time offences to three years or more for subsequent offences according
   to The University of Toronto and Mr. S.B. â Joint Submission on Penalty
   accepted -- . Tribunal ordered: a grade of zero in the course; a four
   year suspension; a four year notation; and a report to the Provost.

   The Student was charged under section B.i.1(d) of the Code . The charge
   stemmed from allegations of plagiarizing an essay. The Student did not
   attend the hearing. The hearing proceeded based on Agreed Statement of
   Facts (ASF), Joint Submission on Penalty (JSP) Joint Book of Documents
   (JBD). The Student acknowledged receiving reasonable notice of the
   hearing and requested that the hearing proceed in his absence due to
   his being out of the country at the time of the hearing. The Student
   had been advised to obtain independent legal advice but proceeded with
   the Agreed Statement of Facts without legal representation. In the ASF
   the Student admitted plagiarizing from online sources and failing to
   properly cite sources. The Tribunal found this to be a serious case of
   plagiarism due to the extent of plagiarism and found the Student
   guilty. The Panel noted that the Student had two prior offences for
   which he was sanctioned. The Panel noted the sentencing factors in Mr.C
   (November 1976). The Tribunal noted the need for proportionality and
   consistency in sentencing. No mitigating factors were available due to
   the Studentâs absence. The Panel referred to the principles to be
   applied in accepting or rejecting a JSP noted in The University of
   Toronto and Mr. S.M and R. v. Michael Tsicos , CAO, Oct. 11, 2006,
   Docket: C45531, which noted that a joint submission should be accepted
   unless it is contrary to the public interest or bring the
   administration of justice into disrepute. The Panel noted the
   seriousness of the offence of plagiarism and the detriment caused to
   the University as stated in The University of Toronto and Mr. S.B.
   (November 14, 2007). The Panel considered The University of Toronto and
   Mr. N.H.H. where a Student received a three year suspension for two
   counts of plagiarism, and The University of Toronto and Mr. S.B., where
   the range of sentences was identified as two years for first time
   plagiarism offences and three years of longer for subsequent offences.
   The Tribunal found that the two prior offences were two separate
   offences and that therefore this was the Studentâs third offence
   although he had not been previously suspended for plagiarism. The
   Tribunal found that the Student was well aware of the seriousness of
   the offence and that this particular case was on the higher threshold
   of seriousness. The Tribunal noted that the Student was near completion
   of the degree, and that the Studentâs performance had been initially
   successful but suffered in recent years, although there was no evidence
   as to the causal circumstances. The Tribunal accepted the Joint
   Submission on Penalty. The Tribunal ordered: a grade of zero in the
   course; a four year suspension; a four year notation; and a report to
   the Provost.

   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/13003
