Case 1100 - Appeal

   DATE:

   February 8, 2022

   PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v. R.S. ("the Student")

   Motions DATE:

   June 8, 201, via Zoom with written submissions in June and September
   2021

   PANEL MEMBERS:

   Mr. Paul Michell, Associate Chair

   APPEARANCES:

   Ms. Tina Lie, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg
   Rothstein LLP

   NOT IN ATTENDANCE:

   The Student

   HEARING SECRETARY:

   Ms. Krista Kennedy, Administrative Clerk & Hearing Secretary, Office of
   Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances

   The Student appealed the sanction imposed by the Tribunal‚s Trial
   Division to the Discipline Appeals Board (‚Board‚) but took no steps to
   advance his appeal and did not respond to any inquiries. The Provost
   moved to have the Board dismiss the appeal summarily and without formal
   hearing. The Associate Chair noted that the Provost‚s motion raises two
   questions concerning appeals to the Board. First, what is the scope of
   the Board‚s jurisdiction to dismiss an appeal summarily and without
   formal hearing, where the appeal is frivolous, vexatious or without
   foundation? Second, does a single member of the Board have the
   jurisdiction to hear and decide such a motion?

   The Associate Chair outlined that section E.7(a) of the Code of
   Behaviour on Academic Matters, 1995 (‚Code‚) expressly confers
   jurisdiction to a three-member panel of the Board to dismiss an appeal
   summarily and without formal hearing in appropriate circumstances.
   Furthermore, section 7(a) of Appendix A of the Board‚s Terms of
   Reference (‚Terms‚) contains a substantially identical provision. The
   Associate Chair noted that the issue in this motion is whether he may
   exercise this power alone. The Code, the Terms, and to the extent they
   apply, the Tribunal‚s Rules of Practice and Procedure (‚Rules‚), are
   silent on this question. The Associate Chair noted that the Code does
   not define the term ‚Discipline Appeals Board‚ and the Provost argued
   that the division of responsibilities between the chair of a panel of
   the Tribunal and the other members of a panel also applied by analogy
   to panels of the Board hearing appeals from decisions of the Tribunal.
   The Provost further suggested that to dismiss an appeal summarily is,
   in some cases, a ‚question of law‚ that can be determined by the chair
   alone. The Associate Chair was not persuaded by this submission because
   the Code specifies a division of responsibilities for deciding
   different types of questions as between chairs and other members of a
   panel of the Tribunal. However, it does specify that a chair of a panel
   can decide questions of law without a full panel. Furthermore, the
   Associate Chair noted that this motion does not raise a question of law
   alone. The Associate Chair found that the Code itself does not grant a
   single member of the Board the jurisdiction to hear and decide a motion
   to dismiss an appeal summarily and without formal hearing.

   The Associate Chair considered whether another source of law could
   provide some guidance on whether a single member of the Board has
   jurisdiction to hear and decide a motion to dismiss an appeal summarily
   and without formal hearing.¬  Due to the lack of clarity on whether the
   Statutory Powers Procedure Act (‚SPPA‚) applies to appeals to the Board
   from decisions of the Tribunal, the Associate Chair sought additional
   submissions from the parties on this issue. The Provost provided
   additional submissions; the Student did not respond. The Provost
   submitted that the SPPA applies to appeals to the Board from decisions
   of the Tribunal, and that subsection 4.2.1(1) of the SPPA applies. The
   Associate Chair noted that he agreed with both of these submissions.
   The Associate Chair outlined that the basis for these submissions was
   that the Code in section C.II(a)(7) states that the procedures of the
   Tribunal ‚shall conform‚ to the requirements of the SPPA, and section
   C.II(a)11 of the Code defines ‚Tribunal‚ to mean both the trial and the
   appeal divisions of the Tribunal, which includes the Board. The
   Associate Chair noted that the use of ‚conform‚ suggests that the Code
   and the Terms seek to make their procedures consistent with the SPPA,
   whose application normally arises by operation of section 3 of the
   SPPA, not simply because a tribunal chooses to make the SPPA apply to
   it. The effect of the Tribunal‚s use of the ‚conform‚ language in the
   Code and the Terms is to create a legitimate expectation on the part of
   the parties before the Tribunal in the sense employed in Baker v.
   Canada (Minister of Citizenship and Immigration), [1999] 2 S.C.R. 817
   at paras. 26 and 29, and in Canada (Attorney General) v. Mavi, [2011] 2
   S.C.R. 504 at para.68, that the Tribunal will conduct a hearing. The
   Associate Chair further noted that an appeal to the Board falls within
   section 3 of the SPPA, because the SPPA applies to a proceeding by the
   tribunal where the tribunal is required, otherwise by law, to hold or
   afford the parties an opportunity for a hearing before making a
   decision. The Associate Chair outlined that subsection 4.2.1(1) of the
   SPPA applies to this motion because, by designating him to respond to
   the Provost‚s request for a proceeding management conference, the
   Senior Chair assigned him to hear and decide any motions that might
   reasonably arise from it. Furthermore, the University of Toronto Act,
   I97l, as amended by 1978, Chapter 88, contains no requirement that
   appeals to the Board be heard by a panel of more than one person, nor
   does any other statute (including the University of Toronto Act, l947,
   as amended, to the extent it may still be in force). Therefore, there
   is no ‚statutory requirement‚ that appeals (or this motion) be heard by
   a panel of more than one person.

   The Code and the Terms specify that the Board only has the power to
   dismiss an appeal summarily and without formal hearing when it
   determines that an appeal is frivolous, vexatious or without
   foundation. The Associate Chair noted that a similar dismissal power is
   set out in section 4.6 of the SPPA, but this dismissal power differs
   from the Board‚s dismissal power in a critical way. The Associated
   Chair outlined that the Code and the Terms address the issue of
   dismissal of an appeal summarily and without formal hearing, where
   section 4.6 of the SPPA permits dismissal without a hearing. The
   Associate Chair noted that neither the Code nor the Terms define a
   ‚formal hearing,‚ or distinguish it from other types of hearings. In
   the Associate Chair‚s view, the Code and the Terms contemplate that in
   appropriate cases an appeal may be dismissed summarily without an oral
   hearing, not that no hearing is required at all. A motion in writing is
   sufficient. Therefore, the Code and the Terms permit the Board, and
   where a designation has been made, a single member to dismiss an appeal
   summarily by way of a motion in writing, where the appeal is shown to
   be frivolous, vexatious, or without foundation. Furthermore, the Code
   and the Terms contemplate that the Board‚s ability to dismiss appeals
   summarily in appropriate circumstances means that it may do so by way
   of something less than a full formal hearing. The Associate Chair found
   that because the Code and the Terms do not purport to empower the Board
   to dismiss an appeal summarily without a hearing, section 4.6 of the
   SPPA is not triggered, and does not apply to this motion. Therefore,
   the Associate Chair‚s jurisdiction to hear and decide the motion is
   unaffected by section 4.6 of the SPPA. Accordingly, the Associate Chair
   found that he had jurisdiction to hear and decide the Provost‚s motion.

   Regarding the Provost‚s motion to dismiss the appeal, the Associate
   Chair agreed that the appeal was frivolous, vexatious or without
   foundation but for different reasons than those contemplated by the
   Provost in their submissions. The Associate Chair noted that appeals
   from sanction need not be limited to a question of law alone. However,
   the Student‚s proposed grounds of appeal did not identify any errors.
   Instead, the Student claimed that due to the challenges caused by the
   Covid-19 pandemic and the resulting ‚new education model‚ that
   followed, it was difficult for him to adapt in a short period of time.
   The Associate Chair further noted that there was no basis for this
   claim in the evidence that was before the Tribunal. Therefore, the
   Student would need to seek leave to admit new evidence to provide a
   basis for his proposed appeal. The Student had not done so. Section E.8
   of the Code and para. 8 of Appendix A of the Terms provide that the
   Board may allow the introduction of further evidence on appeal which
   was not available or was not adduced at the trial in exceptional
   circumstances. The Associate Chair relied on University of Toronto v.
   M.M. (Case No. 543, April 14, 2011) and University of Toronto v. D.B.
   (Case No. 1107, August 18, 2021) which outline that absent special
   circumstances, a student who fails to appear at a hearing before the
   Tribunal of which they had reasonable notice cannot introduce evidence
   on appeal that they otherwise could have led before the Tribunal.
   Therefore, even if the Student had brought a motion to admit new
   evidence, there would have been no realistic prospect that it would be
   granted. Furthermore, since there would be no realistic prospect that
   the Student could establish an evidentiary basis for his appeal, it
   would fail.

   Based on the foregoing, the Associate Chair found that the appeal was
   frivolous and without foundation. The Associate Chair also concluded
   that the appeal was vexatious because the only reasonable inference to
   be drawn from the Student‚s failure to take steps to advance his appeal
   is that he no longer had a genuine intention to appeal. A party who
   commences an appeal but then takes no steps to advance it ceases to
   have a genuine intention to appeal. Absent a continuing genuine
   intention to appeal, an appeal must be viewed as vexatious. Appeal
   dismissed.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/30269
