THE UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
THE UNIVERSITY 01<' TORONTO

IN THE MATTER OF charges of academic dishonesty made on foly 19, 2010;
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic
Matters, 1995;
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University ofToronto Act, 1971, S.O. 1971, c. 56 as amended
S.O. 1978, c. 88
BETWEEN:

THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
- and -

y

M

Date of Hearing: August 4, 2010
Members of the Panel:
Ms Lisa Brownstone, Ban路ister and Solicitor, Chair
Professor Louis Florence, Department of Management, Faculty Panel Member
Mr. HanifBayat-Movahed, Student Panel Member
Appearances:
Ms Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Banisters
Ms Camille Labclrnk, Legal Case Worker, Downtown Legal Services

In Attendance:
Dr. Kristi Gourlay, Manager of the Office of Student Academic Integrity, Faculty of Arts and
Science
Dr. Ma11ha Harris, Academic Integrity Officer, Faculty of Alis and Science
Mr. Christopher Lang, Director, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances, Office of
Governing Council

Not in Attendance:
The student, Ms Y

M

-I-

Preliminary

[I]

The Trial Division of the University Tribunal was convened on August 4, 20 IO to
consider revised charges under the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on
Academic Mallers, 1995 (the "Code") laid against the student by letter dated July 19,
2010 from Professor Edith Hillan, Vice-Provost, Faculty & Academic Life.

Hearing on the Facts

[2]

The charges facing the student were the following:
(1) In or about April, 2008, you knowingly forged, or in any other way altered or

falsified an academic record, or you uttered, circulated or made use of any such
forged, altered or falsified academic record, namely what purported to be an official
academic record of the University of Regina, contrary to section B.I.3(a) of the
Code.
(2) In the alternative, in or about April, 2008, you knowingly engaged in a form of
cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, frai1d or misrepresentation not
otherwise described in the Code in order to obtain academic credit or othe1路
academic advantage of any kind in connection with the submission of a forged
academic reco1路d that purported to be an official academic record of the University
of Regina, contrary to section B.I.3(b) of the Code.
(3) In or about April, 2009, you knowingly forged, or in any other way altered or
falsified an academic record, or you uttered, circulated or made use of any such
forged, altered or falsified academic record, namely what purported to be an official
academic record of the University of Regina, contrary to section B.1.3(a) of the
Code.
(4) In the alternative, in or about April, 2009, you knowingly engaged in a form of
cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or misrepresentation not
otherwise described in the Code in order to obtain academic credit or other
academic advantage of any kind in com1ection with the submission of a forged
academic record that pm路po1ied to be an official academic record of the University
of Regina, contrary to section B.l.3(6) of the Code,
[3]

Particulars of the charges were as follows:
(5) Yo11 were registered at the University of Toronto at all material times.

-2-

(6)

You applied for admission to the University of Toronto Mississauga in or about
April 2008. In suppo1i of your application, and to support a request for the award of
transfer credits to you by the University, you included a document that purp01ied to
be your official academic record of the University ofRegina ("Regina Transcript").

(7)

You applied for a transfer to the University of Toronto, St. George campus, in or
about April, 2009. In support of that application you again submitted the Regina
Transcript, again representing that it was your official academic record from the
University of Regina.

(8)

You have never been enrolled in or attended the University of Regina.

(9)

The Regina Transcript is a forged academic record. You submitted it to the
University knowing that it was forged, and knowing that it contained false and
misleading information.

(I 0) You purchased the Regina Transcript from a third party for $ l 2,000, knowing that it
was false and a forgery.
(11) Your conduct violated the Code.
[4]

Although the student did not attend the hearing, Ms Labchuk from Downtown Legal
Services attended on her behalf.

[5]

Discipline Counsel for the University, Ms Harmer, introduced a Joint Book of
Documents which contains the charging documents and other relevant information, and
was entered as Exhibit I. The Agreed Statement of Facts was entered as Exhibit 2. The
agreed upon facts are substantially reproduced below:
6.

Ms. M first registered as a student at the University of Toronto
Mississauga ("UTM") in Fall 2008. At all material times, Ms. M
remained enrolled at the University.

7.

In support of her application to UTM prior to the commencement of the
Fall 2008 term, Ms. lvJ provided what purported to be a transcript from the
University of Regina in Saskatchewan ("Regina Transcript"). The Regina
Transcript was provided to the Universit)' in an envelope that contained a
crest and University of Regina address, email address and phone number,
as well as a label that read "University of Regina Office of the Registrar
Official Transcript".

-3-

8.

It showed that Ms. M had enrolled in an economics program at the
University of Regina, that she had earned grades in four courses in the
2007 summer program there, and in another five comses in their 2007 fall
program. In total the Regina Transcript showed that Ms. M had earned the
following:
(a)

Cumulative credit homs earned: 27 .0

(b)

Undergraduate grade point average: 70.35

9.

Ms. M was accepted into the Faculty of Arts & Science at UTlvl, in part,
on the basis of the Regina Transcript.

I 0.

Ms. M also applied for and was granted 1.50 transfer credits for three of
the nine courses reflected in the Regina Transcript. Following the
allegations of academic misconduct that form the basis of the Charges, the
University removed the 1.50 transfer credits from Ms. M 's academic
record.

11.

In 2009, Ms. M applied to be transferred from UTM to the St. George
campus of the University for admission in the 2009 Fall session. To
support that application, she again relied on the Regina Transcript. Ms. M
submitted a letter "To whom it may concern" in which she stated that she
was a student who had transferred from the University of Regina to UTM.
She stated that it was hard for her to obtain another transcript from the
University of Regina due to an unpaid tuition bill there, but that the Regina
Transcript was already on file with the University for its use in assessing
her application.

12.

In April, 2009, Ms. M also applied for and was granted 6.5 transfer
credits. Of those, 1.50 were the Regina transfer credits referred to above,
and 5.0 were for courses she had completed at UTM.

13.

Ms. M was accepted into the Faculty of A1ts & Science at the St. George
Campus.

14.

Ms. lvl admits the following:
(a)

she has never attended the University of Regina;

(b)

the Regina Transcript was forged, and contained false information;

-4-

( c)

she had not taken any of the courses listed in the Regina
Transcript, and she had not received the grades reflected in that
document;

(cl)

she purchased the Regina Transcript for a substantial amount of
money from a commercial vendor;

(e)

she knowingly uttered, used and circulated the Regina Transcript
on two occasions, knowing that it was forged and contained false
information:
(i)

in or about April 2008 to support her initial application
to UTM for admittance in the Fall 2008 term and an
award of transfer credits; and

(ii)

in or about April 2009 to support her request to transfer
to the St. George campus for the 2009 Fall term and an
award of transfer credits; and

(l) the letter that she wrote to support her application to transfer to the St.
George campus contained false information concerning the University
of Regina, the Regina Transcript, and the reasons why she could not
obtain another copy of that transcript.
Admission
[6]

Ms. M acknowledges and admits that the conduct described constitutes academic
misconduct as described in the Revised Charges, and in particular that her conduct is
contrary to section B.l.3(a) of the Code as described in Charges 1 and 3,

Decision of the Tribunal
[7]

On the basis of the Agreed Statement of Facts and the Joint Book of Documents, the
Tribunal accepted the plea and found a contravention of the Code as set out in the first
charge and third charge. At this time, the Provost indicated its intention not to proceed
with charges two and four and these were withdrawn,

Penalty Phase
[8]

The parties submitted a Joint Submission on Penalty, in which the following sanctions
were jointly proposed:
(a)

The Tribunal recommend to the President that he recommend to the
Governing Council that Ms. M be expelled from the University; and

-5-

(b)

Pending the decision of the Governing Council, that Ms. M be immediately
suspended from the University for a period of up to five years and that a
corresponding notation be placed on her academic record and transcript.

[9]

The parties also proposed that the Panel order that this case be reported to the Provost for
publication of a notice of the decision of the Tribunal and the sanctions imposed in the
University newspapers, with the name of the student withheld.

[ 10]

Discipline Counsel reminded the Panel that there is a high threshold for refusing to accept
a joint submission, and that the Panel would have to be of the view that the
administration of justice was brought into disrepute by the acceptance of that joint
submission in order to depart from ii.

[11]

No additional facts were submitted at the penalty stage, such that the Panel was not
provided with any explanation for the student's behaviour, or any mitigating factors,
other than the student's co-operation in admitting her misconduct to the University when
confronted, and pleading guilty in this proceeding.

(12]

University counsel submitted that this was an appropriate case for expulsion, as there is
no reason that the University ought to be prepared to give this student another chance.
Since the student was only there on the basis of a false pretense, the student should not be
permitted to continue at the University. This was similar to the case of Mr. M
(Decision dated April 30, 2009, Case #496) in which the student was admitted under false
pretenses, as his admission was based on forged documents. The panel in M
noted
that that student's admission had negative consequences for the next best legitimate
applicant who was rejected. "In short, the student's admittance to the University of
Toronto is illegitimate and therefore the Tribunal sees no alternative but to recommend
expulsion for one who was admitted under false pretences". (paragraph 13 of the Mr.

M,

)

[ 13]

Counsel submitted that the detriment to the University was enormous, that forgery cmrnot
be accepted in the University environment as it goes against everything that is to be
fostered in the relationship between the University and student, as set out in the preamble
to the Code, which emphasizes integrity and honesty in the dealings between students and
the University.

[14]

Ms Labchuk re-iterated on behalf of the student that she had taken full responsibility
from an early stage, had admitted the offence and co-operated with the University, and
had not made any excuses for her actions.

[ 15]

The Panel agrees that the alteration of University records is among the most serious
offences that a student can commit. The official records of the University, as said by
another Panel in the case of Mr. Y , (Decision undated, Case #467) are the documents by
which the University ce1iifies academic achievement and, in turn, its academic reputation

-6-

and credibility. This misconduct places the student at an undeserved advantage, which is
detrimental both to the University and its integrity, and to the position of other students.
[ 16]

The Panel agrees that general deterrence is extremely important in this case .. As in the
case of Mr. Y , the Panel has not been advised of any extenuating circumstances and has
no evidence attesting to the student's character. The student did co-operate with the
University to the greatest extent, including agreeing to the penalty or expulsion.
However, the act was planned and deliberate, and essentially clone twice. The Panel
agrees with the parties that the sentencing factors support their joint submission and that a
very strong message needs to be sent that this kind of conduct will not be tolerated.

Sanction
[ 17]

In the circumstances, the Panel is of the view that the joint submission is the appropriate
penalty in this case, and accepts the submission. Therefore, the Panel orders:
1) that Ms. M is guilty of two counts of forging, altering or falsifying an academic

record, and making use of such a record, contrary to section B.J.3(a) of the Code of
Behaviour on Academic Matters;

2) that Ms. M be suspended from the University commencing August 4, 20 I 0, for a
period not to exceed 5 years;
3) that the Trib1mal recommends to the President of the University that he recommend to
the Governing Council that Ms. !VJ be expelled from the University; and
4) that this case shall be reported to the Provost for publication of a notice of the
decision of the Tribunal and the sanctions imposed, with the name of the student
withheld.
<ii((

Dated this (_)

day of September, 20 l 0.

I

-7-

,/

