Case #580

   DATE: September 8, 2010
   PARTIES: University of Toronto v. Y.M.
   Hearing Date(s): August 4, 2010
   Panel Members:
   Lisa Brownstone, Chair
   Professor Louis Florence, Faculty Member
   Hanif Bayat-Movahed, Student Member
   Appearances:
   Camille Labchuk, DLS for the Student
   Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel for the University
   In Attedance:
   Dr. Kristi Gourlay, Manager of the Office of Student Academic Integrity
   Dr. Martha Harris, Academic Integrity Officer
   Trial Division â s. B.I.3(a); s. B.I.3(b) of Code â forged documents â
   forged academic record â purchased transcripts â admission to UTM â
   transfer to University of Toronto, St. George â hearing not attended â
   hearing attended by Studentâs legal representative â guilty plea â
   finding of guilt â Joint Submission on Penalty â see case of Mr. M
   (#496)) â see case of Mr. Y (#467)Â  â Joint Submission on Penalty
   Accepted â five-year suspension; recommendation to the President that
   the Student be expelled; and report to Provost
   Student charged with four offences under s. B.I.3(a) and s. B.I.3(b) of
   the Code. The charges related to the allegations that the Student made
   use of a forged academic record on two occasions and knowingly engaged
   in a form of academic dishonesty. The Student allegedly purchased a
   transcript from a third party, knowing it was false and a forgery, and
   used it in support of her application to University of Toronto
   Mississauga and in support of a transfer application to the University
   of Toronto, St. George campus. The matter proceeded on an Agreed
   Statement of Facts. The Student pled guilty to two charges under s.
   B.I.3(a). The University withdrew the remaining two charges under s.
   B.I.3(b). The parties submitted a Joint Submission on Penalty. The
   Panel accepted the Studentâs guilty plea. The Panel agreed with the
   Universityâs submission that the alteration of University records is
   among the most serious offences that a student can commit. Discipline
   Counsel noted the high threshold for refusing to accept a joint
   submission and that the Panel would have to be of the view that the
   administration of justice would be brought into disrepute by the
   acceptance of a joint submission in order to reject it. Discipline
   Counsel submitted that this case was an appropriate case for expulsion
   as there was no reason that the University ought to be prepared to give
   the Student a second change as the Student was only attending the
   University on false pretences. The case of Mr. M was submitted to
   support this submission. The Panel referred to the case of Mr. Y in
   noting that University records are the instruments that the University
   certifies academic achievement and its academic reputation and
   credibility hinges on these records. The Panel accepted the Joint
   Submission on Penalty and imposed an immediate five-year suspension, a
   recommendation to the President that the Student be expelled, and that
   a report to the Provost be issued.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12762
