Case #935

   DATE: August 21, 2018
   PARTIES: University of Toronto v. A.G. (âthe Studentâ)
   Hearing Date(s):Â  Â  July 10 and July 25, 2018
   Panel Members:
   Mr. Bernard S. Fishbein, Chair
   Professor Michael Saini, Faculty Panel Member
   Ms. Natasha Brien, Student Panel Member
   Appearances:
   Ms. Tina Lie, Assistance Discipline Counsel for University, Paliare
   Roland Barristers
   Mr. Thomas MacKay, Director, Faculty Governance & Curriculum, Faculty
   of Arts and Science
   The Student
   In Attendance:
   Ms. Tracey Gameiro, Associate Director, Office of Appeals, Discipline
   and Faculty Grievances
   Mr. Brian Alexic, Technology Assistant, Office of the Governing Council
   Trial Division - s. B.i.1(d) â plagiarismÂ  Â â two prior offences â
   chronic condition required hospitalizationÂ  Â â agreed statement of
   factsÂ  â guilty pleaÂ  â joint submission on penalty â final grade of
   zero in the course; three year suspension; notation on transcript for
   five years or until graduation, whichever is later.
   The Student was charged with representing an expression of an idea or
   work of another in a paper contrary to section s.B.i.1(d) of the Code ,
   or in the alternative unauthorized assistance contrary to s.B.i.1(b),
   or in the further alternative academic dishonesty not otherwise
   described contrary to s. B.i.3(b) of the Code. The charges related to a
   paper that the Student had submitted for course credit that contained a
   number of passages that had been pulled verbatim from unattributed
   sources. The Student pled guilty to the first charge. The University
   withdrew the alternative charges. The matter proceeded by way of an
   agreed statement of facts.
   The parties submitted a joint submission on penalty (JSP) recommending:
   (a) a final grade of zero in the course; (b) a three-year suspension;
   and (c) a notation on the Studentâs transcript for five years or until
   graduation, whichever is later. In deciding whether or not to accept
   the JSP, the Tribunal referred to the cases S.F. (Case No. 690, October
   20, 2014) and M.A . (Case No. 837, December 22, 2016) for the
   proposition that JSPs should only be rejected by a Tribunal when they
   are unreasonable or unconscionable. The Tribunal then considered the
   Mr. C factors (Case No. 1976/77-3, November 5, 1976):Â  a) the
   character of the person charged; b) the likelihood of a repetition of
   the offence; c) the nature of the offence committed; d) any extenuating
   circumstances surrounding the commission of the offence; e) the
   detriment to the University occasioned by the offence; and f) the need
   to deter others from committing a similar offence. The Tribunal found
   that the Studentâs admission of guilt and cooperation of the discipline
   process were mitigating circumstances and that the Studentâs chronic
   condition that required hospitalization was an extenuating
   circumstance. At the same time, the offence was very serious, and was
   becoming increasingly common which made general deterrence an important
   consideration. Further, this was the Studentâs third offence. The
   Student had been sanctioned two previous times for plagiarism, which
   made specific deterrence an important consideration. While the Tribunal
   thought the sanction may have been in the low range, they accepted it
   and ordered: (a) a final grade of zero in the course; (b) a three-year
   suspension; and (c) a notation on the Studentâs transcript for five
   years or until graduation, whichever is longer.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12972
