•

Case No.: 935

THE UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO

IN THE MATTER OF charges of academic dishonesty made on May 26, 2017
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of' Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic
Affairs, 1995 (the "Code")
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University al Toronto Act. 1971. S.O. 1971, c. 56 as
amended S.O. 1978, c.88

BETWEEN:

UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO (the "University")

- and-

~ ~ ( t h e "Student")

Dates of Hearing:

July 10, 2018 and July 25, 2018

Members of the Panel:
Mr. Bernard S. Fishbein, Chair
Professor Michael Saini, Faculty Panel MemberMs. Natasha Brien, Student Panel Member
Appearances:
Ms. Tina Lie, Assistance Discipline Counsel for University, Paliare Roland Barristers
Mr. Thomas MacKay, Director, Faculty Governance & Curriculum, Faculty of Arts and
Science
Ms.
the Student

AIIIIII~,

In Attendance:
Ms. Tracey Gameiro, Associate Director. Office of Appeals, Discipline, Faculty
Grievances
Mr. Brian Alexic, IT Support, Office of the Governing Council

-2-

l.

The Student was charged on or about May 26, 2017 with three charges of

academic misconduct by the Provost of the University ("the Provost") under the Code ol

Behaviour on Academic Matters ("the Code"). The charges were:

1)

on or about March 1, 2017, you knowingly represented as your

own an idea or expression of an idea or work of another in a paper that
you submitted in CRil 300Hl ("the Course"), contrary to section
B.I.l(d) ofthe Code.

2)

In the alternative, on or about March 1, 2017, you knowingly

obtained unauthorized assistance in connection with a paper that you
submitted in the course, contrary to section B.I.l (b) of the Code.

3)

In the further alternative, on or about March 1, 2017, you

knowingly engaged in a form of cheating, academic dishonesty or
misconduct, fraud or misrepresentation not otherwise described in the
Code in order to obtain academic credit or another academic
advantage of any kind in connection with a paper that you submitted
in the Course, contrary to section B.I.3(b) of the Code.

2.

The hearing of these charges was scheduled before this panel tribunal on July

l 0, 2018. Prior to the hearing the University and the Student entered into a written guilty
plea and an agreed statement of facts.

-3-

3.

The Student admitted and agreed that she had received a copy of the charges from

the Provost, she had received a copy of the notice of hearing, and that she had received
reasonable notice of the hearing. She agreed to plead guilty to the first charge. The Provost
agreed to withdraw the second and third charges. The Student acknowledged that she had
received a copy of the affidavit of Professor Vincent Chiao who taught the course, and that
she had been given an opportunity to cross-examine Professor Chiao on that affidavit. but
chose not to do so. The Provost and the Student agreed that the evidence in Professor
Chiao's affidavit was true and agreed to for the purpose of these charges.

4.

The Student acknowledged that she had met on March 31, 2017 with Professor

John Britton, the Dean's Designate for Academic Integrity, to discuss the allegations
against her. The Student acknowledged that Professor Britton gave her the warning that
was required to be given under the Code. During their meeting the Student told Professor
Britton that she did not know that she needed to put quotation marks around material copied
from sources. The Student ultimately acknowledged that there was plagiarism in the paper
but was reluctant to admit to anything more than making a mistake. She asked Professor
Britton for a second chance. The matter was referred to the Provost who filed these charges.

5.

Again, the charges arose out of the course. Theories of Criminal Justice, taught

by Professor Chiao. Students in the course were required to submit two response papers,
the first worth 25% and the second worth 35% of their final grades. The course syllabus
provided to the Students stated as follows with respect to those two papers:
The response papers should aim to (a) represent accurately and fairly
the views of those to whom you are responding, supported by

-4-

citations; (b) critically engage their arguments, for instance by raising
a novel objection, extending their argument to other cases or contexts,
or defending their position from objections raised during class. You
should in every instance endeavor to represent the views of those
whom are you responding to as sympathetically as you can. You
should not rely on caricature or polemic, but rather careful, textually
6rrounded analysis. The subject matter of the papers should be limited
to the readings listed on the syllabus, as well as to the topics discussed
in both the lecture and the class discussion for the relevant day.
6.

In addition, the course syllabus stated as follows with respect to writing support

and academic inte 6rrity:
Writing support. Please visit the website Writing at the University of
Toronto for resources about academic writing, plagiarism, and
workshop series focused on improving your writing. Information
about the English Language Leaming program (ELL) is available
here.
Academic integrity. The University of Toronto treats cases of
academic misconduct very seriously. Academic integrity is a
fundamental value of learning and scholarship at the UofT.
Participating honestly, respectfully, responsibly, and fairly in this
academic community ensures that your UotT degree is valued and
respected as a true signifier of your individual academic achievement.
The University of Toronto's in Code of Behaviour on Academic
1'vfatters outlines the behaviours that constitute academic misconduct,
the processes for addressing academic offences, and the penalties that
may be imposed. You are expected to be familiar with the contents of
this document. Potential offences include. but are not limited to:

In papers and assignments:

-

Using someone else's ideas or words without appropriate
acknowledgement.
Submitting your work in more than one course without the
permission of the instructor.
Making up sources or facts.
Obtaining or providing unauthorized assistance on any
assignment (this includes working in groups on assignments
that are supposed to be individual work).
[... ]

-5-

All suspected cases of academic dishonesty will be investigated
following the procedures outlined in Code of Behaviour on
Academic Matters. If you have any questions about what is or is
not permitted in this course, please do not hesitate to contact the
instructor. If you have questions about appropriate research and
citation methods, you are expected to seek out additional
information from the instructor or other available campus resources
like the College Writing Centers, the Academic Success Centre, or
the U of T Writing Website. [Emphasis in original]

The paper was required to be submitted no later than the beginning of class two weeks
from the date from which the reading was covered in class. The paper was required to be
submitted electronically.

7.

The Student chose to write her first response paper on Brandenburg v. Ohio

which was covered in the class of February 14, 2017. Accordingly her first paper was due
by the beginning of class on February 28, 2017.

8.

On March 1, 2017 Professor Chiao received an email from the Student indicating

that she had tried to upload her assignment the previous day. Professor Chaio checked, and
determined that her first response paper was submitted that morning, March 1, 201 7, at
7:21 a.m. As a result, on March 3, 2017 Professor Chiao responded to the Student
indicating that her paper had been uploaded on March 1, 2017 at 7:21 a.m. Since it was
late it was subject to a l 0% late penalty. Later that day the Student responded stating that
she had tried to upload the assignment twice on February 28, 2017 but "kept getting an
error message" and that it "finally worked" on the morning of March 1, 2017.

-6-

9.

The Student's paper was entitled "Response to KKK's Opponents". Upon

reviewing the paper, Professor Chiao discovered several passages that appeared to have
been drawn from outside sources without appropriate citations and/or quotation marks:

(a) an excerpt of "Ku Klux Klan" from the Wikipedia website
(https://en/wikipedia.orglwiki/Ku Klux Klan);

(b) an excerpt of "Brandenburg v. Ohio" from the Wikipedia website
(https://en.wikipedi a.orglwiki/Brandenburg v. Ohio);
The Wikipedia articles were not cited at all in the paper.

(c) "12 Horrific Crimes Committed by the KKK Between 1921 and
2016" by Rachaell Davis from http://www.essence.com/cultur
e/horrific -kkk-crirnes; and

The citation to this article was included in the text and references list
in the paper, but the verbatim text from the article was not put in
quotation marks.

(d) an excerpt of"Sticks and stones can put you in jail, but can words

increase your sentence'? Constitutional and policy dilemmas of ethnic
intimidation laws" by Susan Gellman.

Again, the Student included verbatim text from this law review article
without attribution. The Student did include a quotation, and citation.
from what appeared to be an op-ed by Susan Gellman from the
Chicago Tribune. Professor Chiao was not able to access the online
source referred to by the Student to determine if the portions from the
law review article were also contained in the op-ed that was cited.
Whether or not the op-ed reproduced those portions of Gellman' s law

- 7-

article, the verbatim text in any event was not placed in quotation
marks and attributed.

10.

Again, in the signed agreed statement of facts, the Student admitted

that she knowingly:
(a) included verbatim or nearly verbatim text and ideas in the paper
that were taken from the sources identified by Professor Chiao;

(b) failed to attribute the verbatim or nearly verbatim text and ideas
appropriately using citations, references or other appropriate means;
(c) represented in the paper the ideas of another person, the
expression of the ideas of another person, or the work of another
person as her own; and

(d) committed plagiarism, contrary to section B.I.l(d) of the code

11.

The Student acknowledged that:
( a) The Provost had advised her or her right to obtain legal counsel;
and

(b) That she had signed the agreed statement of facts freely and
voluntarily, knowing the potential consequences she faced.

12.

In view of the written guilty plea and the circumstances as agreed to, the panel

unanimously found that the University had established a violation of section B.I.l (d) of the
Code. The University withdrew its other allegations.

-8-

13.

The panel was prepared to proceed to the sanction portion of the hearing at that

time. However, the University advised that it had been advised of a factor shortly before
the hearing commenced that it wished to investigate. Accordingly, with the agreement of
the Student, the University requested an adjournment of the sanction portion of the hearing
until July 25, 2018 at 10:00 a.m. Accordingly, the hearing adjourned at that point in time.

14.

By the time of the resumed hearing sanction on July 25, 2018 the University and

the Student had entered into an agreed statement of facts and a supplementary agreed
statement of facts on penalty. Again, the University and the Student had agreed that each
document attached to the agreed statement of facts could be admitted into evidence for all
purposes including for the truth of the document's contents and, if a document indicated it
was sent and received by someone, that was primafacie proof that the document was sent
and received as indicated. The agreed statement of facts consisted of an affidavit of Dr.
Kristi Gourlay, who is the Manager, Office of Student Academic Integrity, Faculty of Arts
at Science at the University. Again, the Student was given an opportunity to cross-examine
Dr. Gourlay and chose not to do so, and again acknowledged that the University advised
her of her right to obtain legal counsel, and that she signed the agreed statement of facts
freely and voluntarily knowing the potential consequences she faced.

15.

The affidavit indicated that the Office of Student Academic Integrity maintains

a record of all Student academic discipline offences involving Students in the Faculty of
Arts and Science, including matters that are resolved at the Dean's level.

16.

The Student had two prior offences, both for plagiarism. The Student had first

enrolled in the Faculty of Arts and Science in the fall of 2004. The Student's first academic

-9-

offence occurred in fall of 2007 in the course PHL271H1F (Law and Morality). The
Student was alleged to have committed plagiarism in two assignments in that course. On
May 16, 2008, the Student met with Professor R.C. Brown, the Dean's Designate. During
their meeting the Student admitted the offence. As a result Professor Brown imposed on
the Student the following sanction:
(a) zero for the two assignments in question, and
(b) annotation on her transcript from December I, 2007 to
November 30, 2009.
17.

In the letter advising the Student of the sanction being imposed, Professor Brown

also wrote:

Academic offences are extremely serious and constitute unacceptable
behaviour in the University. This letter is to serve as a strong warning
to you that any future academic work must be conducted in full
accordance with the rules and regulations of the University. In future
if you are having difficulty with an assignment, please consult your
instructor or Teaching Assistant for help or advice. It may also be
helpful to visit your College Writing Centre for help and advice on
essay writing.
Following our meeting, an appointment was made for you to see Ms.
Anna Kot at the Victoria College Registrar's Office. I encourage you
to keep in touch with Ms. Kot during your time at the University, and
particularly if you encounter any difficulties. She will be expecting to
hear from you.
Finally, while I hope that you have learned from this experience, I
must warn you that a second offence will be treated more severely.

18.

The Student was placed on an academic suspension for one year immediately

following the inter 2008 term. That suspension was unrelated to any academic misconduct
and was due to her cumulative and/or annual GP A's being below the required threshold.

- 10 -

Although the Student was entitled to return from her academic suspension as early as the
summer of 2009, there was a gap and the Student did not enroll in any courses until winter
2013.

19.

The Student's second offence occurred in the fall of 2013 in NMC495YlY

(Independent Studies: The Concept of Jihad). The Student was alleged to have committed
plagiarism in two assignments submitted in that course. The Student met with Professor
Pamela Klassen, then the Dean's Designate, on January 28, 2017 to discuss these
allegations of academic misconduct. During their meeting the Student admitted committing
plagiarism on these two assignments. As a result, by letter dated February 23, 2016,
Professor Klassen imposed the following sanctions on the Student for these admitted
offences:
{a) zero for the course;
(b) suspension for eight months from May 1 to December 31, 2016
("the misconduct suspension"); and
(c)annotation on her transcript from November 17, 2015 to
graduation.
20.

Again, in that letter Professor Klassen also wrote:
Ms. G - it is troubling to me that neither your prior offence of
plagiarism, nor concern for academic integrity, motivated you to take
steps to ensure that you did not make a similar error in judgement
when meeting your academic obligations. Sanctions arc imposed to
ensure that you understand how seriously the University views
academic offences. Not only is such behaviour unethical, it is also a
betrayal of the trust we must have in the integrity of students. As
this is your second offence of plagiarism, and includes multiple
pieces of work submitted to one course, the following sanction will
be imposed:

- 11 -

• You will receive a final grade of zero (o) in the course
NMC495Yl Y (20161)
• You will be suspended from the University for a period of eight
(8) months, from May 1,2016, to December 31, 2016

[... ]
As I explained in our meeting, I am concerned that your essay-writing
methods involve a strong reliance on material copied from the
internet. Preparing essays in this manner is problematic not only as it
puts you at risk for submitting work with work with unattributed
content, but also because it denies you the experience of analyzing
and interpreting primary sources. This is a standard expectation of
upper-year students in the humanities, especially those given the
opportunity to pursue an independent study under the guidance of an
established scholar.
Please remember that in order to acknowledge your sources properly
and thus avoid allegations of plagiarism, you must:
• Take careful and accurate notes, indicating clearly the source
of the material, when you have copied material, and when you
have put material into your own words.
• Identify all borrowed ideas, words, and phrases with an
accurate citation or reference.
• Put exact words taken from a source inside quotation marks to
show that they are not your own.
• List all sources which you use to write your paper in a
Bibliography or Works Cited page.
For further information on how to cite, please consult your
instructor, your college writing centre, or the advice files at
http://www.writing.utoronto.ca.
In future, if you find it difficult to manage your time or academic
obligations, please ask your college registrar for advice or a referral
to the appropriate campus resources. If you have problems with a
particular assignment, please contact your instructor or TA. I urge
you to make use of campus resources such as the Academic Success
Centre, a service for students that hosts workshops on topics such as
time management, effective study skills, and note-taking strategies, in
addition to offering one-on-one consultations. You may also find it
helpful to use the Assignment Calculator to plan the stages of your
research and writing, especially when several assignments are due
within the same period.

- 12 -

Finally, this is a warning that all future academic work must
follow the rules and regulations of the University with which you
are expected to be familiar. I strongly recommend that you ask your
college registrar for advice about your academic goals and how best
to achieve them while keeping the highest standard of academic
integrity. While I hope that you have learned from this experience, if
you should come to OSAI's attention again for another allegation of
academic misconduct it is likely that your case will be submitted
to the Provost for review with the recommenchtion that your case be
heard before the University Tribunal.

2 l.

Following the winter 2016 term, the Student was again placed on an academic

suspension for three years ("the academic suspension"). This academic suspension was
unrelated to any academic misconduct and was due to her cumulative and/or annual GP A's
again being below the required thresholds. That three year academic suspension was to be
served concurrently with the eight month misconduct suspension that Professor Klassen
already had imposed.

22.

On July 27, 2016, the Student filed a petition to the Committee on Standing

requesting a return to the University in winter 2017. By that time the eight month
misconduct had ended, but the three year academic suspension had not. The Student
requested the "lifting" of the academic suspension to pennit her to return in winter 2017.

23.

In the Student's petition she referred to the academic misconduct as follows:

"I would have met the mark requirements for being on probation had
it not been for the academic allegation I have incurred in course
NMC495Y. The reason for me failing NMC495Y was due to
plagiarism found in an essay I submitted. I unknowingly submitted
my essay without proper citation. I acknowledged that I have made a

- 13 -

mistake by not citing my work properly. If given a second chance by
the Faculty and the University of Toronto, I will make sure never to
repeat the same mistake again. I will seek help from my Professors
and writing centers before submitting my work to ensure that my work
is without any errors. I will also use guidelines provided on the
University website regarding proper citation and plagiarism."

24.

The Student's request for an early return from her three year academic

suspension was granted and the Student was permitted to return to the University in the
winter of 2017.

25.

The supplementary agreed statement of facts on penalty indicated that the

Student was given a zero percentage grade on the paper that is the subject of these charges,
and the Student would have failed the course because of her poor marks on the final
examination and her poor marks for participation.

26.

The University and the Student also agreed to file a series of medical notes or

reports concerning the state of the Student's health. In particular there was a medical note
dated July 8, 2018, indicating that the Student suffers from a chronic medical condition for
which she was "under treatment for" in February and March of 2017 which was
approximately the same time that the academic misconduct offences were committed. In
addition there were series of notes from April 12, 2018 to May 31, 2018 indicating that the
Student had been hospitalized with respect to treatment to of a chronic medical condition
and which notes had earlier been produced to the University (leading to the adjournment
of prior hearings scheduled with respect to these charges).

- 14 -

27.

In light of the agreed statement of facts on penalty and the supplementary agreed

statement of facts on penalty, no further evidence was presented to the panel either by the
Student or the University. The University and the Student made a joint submission on
penalty that the following sanctions should be imposed:

(a) a final grade of zero in the course CRI300Hl in Winter 2017;

(b) a suspension from the University from the date the Tribunal

makes its order for a period of three years; and

( c) a notation of the sanction on her academic record and transcript

from the date the Tribunal makes its order for a period of five
years or until graduation, whichever is later.
The parties further agreed that this case be reported to the Provost for publication of a
notice of the decision of the Tribunal and the sanction imposed in the University of Toronto
newspapers, with the name of the Student withheld.

28.

The joint submission on penalty also contained the following acknowledgements

and undertaking by the Student:

Acknowledgment by the Student
l. The Student acknowledges that if she receives a final grade of zero

in the course CRI300H I in Winter 2017, her GPA for the session will
fall below the required threshold in order to remain registered at the
Faculty of Arts & Science (the "Faculty"). In particular, because she
has already received academic suspensions of one-year and threeyears, if her GPA for the session falls below the required threshold,

- 15 -

her academic status with the Faculty will be "Refused Further
Registration".
2. However, the Student will have the opportunity to submit a petition
to her college to register in courses following her suspension. The
Student understands that any such petition will be assessed at the time,
according to the usual policies and practices that apply to petitions
submitted to the Faculty, and any appeal routes that apply to petitions
submitted to the Faculty will apply to any petition submitted by the
Student. For clarity, the University makes no representations
respecting the likelihood of success of such a petition.
3. If the petition submitted by the Student is granted, the Student
further acknowledges that the Faculty may impose such terms or
conditions for her return as are appropriate or required by the
Faculty's policies (including that she will be placed on academic
probation upon her return).

Undertaking by the Student

4. If the Student is granted further registration in any course or
program at the University following her suspension, the Student
undertakes to complete at least six "Writing Plus" workshops offered
by the St. George Campus College Writing Centres within the first
term in which she is next registered for a course at the University. In
the event that such workshops are not available at the time the Student
attempts to complete them, the University will, acting reasonably,
propose alternate and equivalent programs that the Student shall
complete to fulfil her undertaking.
5. The Student further agrees and accepts that the Faculty may restrict
further course enrolment and registration if she fails to fulfil the

- 16 -

undertaking contained in paragraph 7 of the joint submission on
penalty [paragraph 4 above].

Further Acknowledgements
6.The Student acknowledges that:
(a) the Provost has advised her of her right to obtain legal counsel;
and
(b) she is signing this J SP, and giving the undertaking at paragraph
4, freely and voluntarily, knowing of the potential consequences
she faces and knowing that the Tribunal is not bound by this JSP
and has the discretion to impose a different penalty, including one
that is more severe than the JSP recommends.
29.

The University then made submissions as to why the panel ought to accept the

joint submission on penalty as appropriate and follow it.

30.

First, the University pointed to the decisions of the Discipline Appeals Board in

S.F. (Case No. 690, October 20, 2014) and M.A. (Case No. 837, December 22, 2016) for

the proposition that while a panel is not obliged or required to accept the joint submission,
an agreed upon joint submission should not be lightly interfered with. In the words of
paragraph 22 of the S.F. decision:

[22) In an effort to make more specific and understandable the high
burden upon a tribunal which chooses to reject a joint submission,
various expressions of the test have been attempted in a variety of
decisions released by bodies and tribunals bound to apply these
principles. One particularly illuminating expressirn of the concept
is found in a decision of the Law Society Appeal Panel in a case
that came before it on appeal, raising the same issues as this
Appeals Board now has before it. In that matter, that Appeal Panel
stated that only truly unreasonable or "unconscionable" joint

- 17 -

submissions should be rejected.
understandable expression of the test.
31.

We think this a good,

The University then referred to the decision of the Tribunal in Mr. C (Case No.

1976/77-3, November 5, 1976) for its oft quoted criteria that ought to be applied when
imposing sanction:
a) The character of the person charged;
b) The likelihood of a repetition of the offence;
c) The nature of the offence committed;
d) Any extenuating circumstances surrounding the commission of
the offence;
e) The detriment to the University occasioned by the offence;
t) The need to deter others from committing a similar offence;

32.

In terms of the character of the Student, the University pointed out that the

Student has acknowledged her plagiarism. Although at the meeting with the Dean's
Designate she refused to admit anything other than a mistake, at the Tribunal level she
admitted the offence and acknowledged her guilt. The Student has cooperated, agreeing to
statements of facts, and earlier when requesting adjournments, providing supporting
medical evidence. Her cooperation demonstrated that she is "taking ownership" and
responsibility for the offence. The University said that acknowledging that she might not
be successful in being readmitted was further evidence of her taking ownership. As well,
her undertaking to take the writing courses, demonstrated a desire to do so.

33.

In terms of the extenuating circumstances the University pointed out that not

only had the Student cooperated but was subject to chronic medical condition for which
she was receiving treatment at approximately the time of the offences and that ultimately

- 18 -

did lead to her hospitalization. Although that was not an excuse for improper behaviour it
was still a factor to consider.

34.

In terms of the likelihood of the repetition of the offence, the University admitted

to being somewhat troubled. The Student had already committed plagiarism twice before
and the lesser sanctions imposed on those occasions had not been enough to preclude this
third offence. The troubling nature was compounded by her petition to return and the
assertions she had made in order to obtain that. However, in weighing all of this the
University was of the view that a three year suspension (which effectively was almost four
years since the Student had last been at the University) would be sufficient to preclude a
repetition of this misconduct. If the Student ultimately did return in the fall of 2021 and
enrolled in courses to complete her degree (the Student only needed 1.5 credits), it would
have taken her almost 17 years to complete her degree and the University said this would
be a long enough journey.

35.

In terms of the other criteria, the University acknowledged that plagiarism is a

very serious academic misconduct. Plagiarism threatened the academic integrity of the
University. Written assignments and essays are a fact of university life and are essential to
the evaluative process a university must engage in. Plagiarism represented a serious threat
to that evaluative process.

36.

Moreover, plagiarism was becoming increasingly prevalent. It was a regular

offence before the tribunal and general deterrence was important.

- 19 -

37.

Having said that, the University and the Student had agreed to a three year

suspension, a serious penalty and certainly greater than the penalty imposed on the Student
previously. Moreover, the University provided the panel with a Book of Authorities
including University of Toronto and Mr. C. (Case No. 1976/77-3, November 5, 1976);

University °'{Toronto and NA. (Case No. February 29, 2012); University of Toronto and
TI. (Case No. 821, April 28, 2016); University °'{Toronto and R. W (Case No. 896, May
17, 2017); University of Toronto and T-F. (0.) K. (Case No. 495, January 26, 2011 );

University °'/'Toronto and K. P. (Case No. 660, February 6, 2012); University of Toronto
and L. W (Case No. 625, February 13, 2013); University °'{Toronto and A. A. (Case No.
994, March 5, 2018); University of Toronto and J G. (Case No. 753, April 10, 2014);

University of Toronto and S. A. M. (Case No. 657, September 11, 2012); University °'f
Toronto and A. S. (Case No. 835, October 12, 2016); University a/Toronto andJ J (Case
No. 534, April 23, 2010); University °'{Toronto and T. Z. (Case No. 689, April 12, 2013);
and University °'f Toronto and H. M. E.-F. (Case No. 941, February 16, 2018). The cases
demonstrated that a three year suspension, although in the low range, was certainly a
penalty that had been imposed previously and in the extenuating circumstances of this case
was warranted.

38.

After the University completed its submissions in support of the joint submission

on penalty, the Student was asked if she wished to make any submissions. The Student
declined.

•
- 20 -

39.

The panel then recessed to consider the submissions. The panel unanimously

accepts the joint submission on penalty and orders that the sanction previously quoted in
this decision be imposed, specifically:
(a) a final grade of zero in the course CRI300Hl in Winter 2017;

(b) a suspension from the University from the date the Tribunal
makes its order for a period of three years until July 24, 2021; and

( c) a notation of the sanction on her academic record and transcript
from the date the Tribunal makes its order for a period of five
years until July 24, 2023, or until graduation, whichever is later.

Dated at Toronto, this i' \ -of August, 2018.

Bernard Fishbein, Co-Chair

