UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
GOVERNING COUNCIL
Report #307 of the Academic Appeals Committee
January 23, 2006
Your Committee reports that it held a hearing on Thursday January 19, 2006, at which
the following were present:
Assistant Dean Bonnie Goldberg, Chair
Dr. Pamela Catton
Professor Yuki Johnson
Dr. Joel Kirsh
Ms Coralie D’Souza
Dr. Anthony Gray, Judicial Affairs Officer
In Attendance:
the Appellant
Mr Ronald Bohm, counsel for the appellant
Mr Rob Centa, counsel for the Respondent, the Faculty of Applied Science and
Engineering
Ms Barbara McCann, Registrar, Faculty of Applied Science and Engineering
Professor Kim Pressnail, Applied Science and Engineering
Ms Ella Lund-Thomsen, Counsellor, Faculty of Applied Science and Engineering
The Appeal
The student is appealing from a September 16, 2005 decision of the Ombuds Committee
of the Faculty of Applied Science and Engineering (“Faculty”) affirming the July 28,
2005 decision of the Examinations Committee. This decision granted the student
retroactive withdrawal from the 2005 Winter session. The student chose not to accept this
remedy, and instead, asks this Committee to increase the grades from the April 2005
examination period by 10%. In the alternative, he is asking that his sessional average be
increased 1.8% to obtain the requisite 60%, so that he can be allowed to proceed to fourth
year and that the five courses he took in the Fall of 2005 be counted.
Facts
The student enrolled in engineering in the fall of 2001. While the student got off to a
weak start, and has had to repeat a semester, his grades have improved. He received a
65.0% sessional average in the Fall 2004 term, the term prior to which the student
experienced the difficulty that is the subject of this appeal.
The student became ill before and during the April 2005 exam. His physician diagnosed
acute maxillary sinusitis on April 12. He saw the doctor again on April 18. He has two

35779 v2

1

medical certificates from this period, attesting to his illness and inability to write the
examinations. There is no dispute between the parties as to the student’s illness or the
veracity of the medical documentation.
The student was scheduled to write five examinations in April. The student wrote the first
exam on April 11, and the fourth and fifth exams on April 20 and 22 respectively. The
student did not write the second and third exams on April 13 and 18 respectively.
Previous Decisions
On May 17, 2005, the student petitioned to the Faculty’s Examinations Committee for
relief for the two examinations he did not write, and relief for the three examinations he
did write. The Examinations Committee followed its “Guidelines for the Examinations
Committee.” The results of the Committee’s deliberations were communicated to the
student on May 31, 2005.
With respect to ECE315 and ECE 335, which were not written, the Examinations
Committee “assessed” the student’s results according to a Faculty-endorsed formula. The
assessed grade formula considers the student’s term work and the class average on the
exam. The result was that the student received an assessed grade of 64.6% in ECE315
and an assessed grade of 52% in ECE335.
With respect to ECE 331, ECE 371 and ECE 311, which were written, the Examinations
Committee again turned to their Guidelines. In this situation, an assessed grade is
calculated based on the same formula but is then compared to the actual grade; the
student is granted the higher of the two. In each case, the student’s actual grades were
higher than the assessed grades and the student received final grades of 53% in ECE 331,
50% in ECE 371 and 75% in ECE 311.
The combined effect of the assessed and actual grades as determined by the Examinations
Committee was a sessional average of 59.2%. This was below the 60% average necessary
to permit the student to proceed to fourth year engineering.
Another issue arose during the summer, which resulted in a second petition to the
Examinations Committee. The Committee includes the details of this incident for two
reasons. First, the student relied on this incident to petition again, and it is this petition
and its result that form the basis of this appeal. Second, the outcome of this incident had a
direct bearing on the student’s sessional average.
The student was alleged to have committed an academic offence during a mid-term
examination in ECE 331, a course in which the student wrote the final examination. He
met the Acting Vice-Dean on June 22, 2005 as required under the University’s Code of
Behaviour on Academic Matters. The bare bones of this allegation are that the student’s
calculator was found to have formulae pencilled onto its case, and this calculator and case
were brought into the examination. The meeting concluded with an academic sanction
imposed on the mid-term mark, which when factored into his term results, further
lowered the student’s sessional average to 57.2%.

35779 v2

2

By June 2005, the student was denied further enrollment in the engineering program.
On July 5, 2005, the student filed a second petition to the Examinations Committee in
light of the academic sanction imposed and other personal and financial concerns. He
requested that his sessional average be calculated without reference to the course in
which he was alleged to have committed an academic offence, that he be permitted to
repeat that course, and that he be allowed to proceed to fourth year.
The Examinations Committee granted the petition in part on July 28, 2005. The
Examinations Committee refused the student permission to enter fourth year, but granted
him retroactive withdrawal from the entire Winter 2005 session. This would permit the
student to maintain the credit he earned across five completed academic terms, and would
permit his re-enrolment in January 2006 to repeat the second term of his third year.
The student appealed to the Ombuds Committee on September 16, 2005 which dismissed
the appeal, holding that the result was “entirely equitable and fair” and that proceeding to
fourth year was not advisable given the student’s weak academic background.
Concurrently, the student took the position that he had not admitted an academic offence
and therefore the imposition of the academic sanction could not stand. Accordingly, The
Vice-Provost Academic communicated the student would be charged under the Code of
Behaviour on Academic Matters. The student was charged, and the charges were resolved
through Minutes of Settlement on December 23, 2005. The student admitted the
academic offence and was subjected to a 50% reduction in the grade on the mid-term.
The student’s sessional average for Winter 2005 was recalculated to 58.2%.
The Student’s Current Status
The student and the Faculty agreed via counsel to an arrangement wherein the student
would be allowed to attend courses pending the resolution of the charges under the Code
and this appeal. The parties agreed that if this appeal is dismissed, the student would
receive no credit for these courses. The student took course in the Fall 2005 term
applicable to the fourth year of the program.
Interim Motion
As part of the agreement between the parties to allow the student to take fourth year
courses pending the resolution of his appeals, the Faculty agreed to provide the term
results and final grades to the student. Prior to the hearing, and at the hearing, the Faculty
provided the student’s average and final grade in each course.
Prior to the hearing, counsel for the student indicating he would be bringing a motion for
an order compelling the University to produce the additional information about the
student’s performance and an adjournment to consider the information when it was
produced. Counsel for the student requested more detailed information from the Faculty
about each course’s marks breakdown, contested the veracity of the specific information
that was provided, and he also contested the lack of timely production of the grades.

35779 v2

3

Counsel for the student argued that this information was critical for the student to assess
his current performance in the program and to dispute the Faculty contention that the
student’s poor academic performance required him to repeat a term.
The Committee heard lengthy submissions from both sides on this matter and deliberated
in camera. Because both parties indicated that they were prepared to proceed with the
submissions on the merits of the case regardless of the outcome of this dispute, the
Committee decided to hear submissions and to reserve its decision as to the relevance of
the grades.
Regarding the relevance of the grades, the Committee found as follows. The majority of
the Committee was of the view that while it welcomes any and all material relating to a
student’s academic record while deliberating an appeal, the student’s performance in
courses subsequent to the events central to this appeal was not relevant to the
Committee’s ability to consider the appeal. One member of the Committee considered the
grades relevant to the deliberations, but was satisfied with the information provided by
the Faculty.
In light of this decision, there is no need to compel the further production of grades for
courses that the student was permitted to take pending the outcome of this appeal or to
make a determination as to whether the agreement between the parties on this matter was
followed. The Committee wishes to note that it is unusual for a student to be allowed to
continue in a program, when a student is contesting a Faculty decision that he has not met
the academic standards of the program. This was an ill-advised interim arrangement.
Decision
First, the Committee rejects the student’s request to raise his grades because he was sick.
The Faculty accepted that the student was ill, took into account his illness through its
formula and its adherence to its own guidelines. The Faculty provided the relief it would
provide to any other student in the program. The Committee wishes to state its discomfort
with the mechanistic nature of assessing grades by formula when a student is unable to
perform due to reasons beyond his control. The Committee is troubled that the Faculty of
Engineering persists in using an approach that provides accommodation in the form of
assessed or inferred examinations rather than supplemental examinations. However,
whether or not we agree with the Faculty policy is immaterial to the fact that Faculty
applied its policy fairly and properly.
Second, the Committee rejects the student’s request for a remedy that raises his average
so that he can proceed. This remedy is well beyond the scope of both what any Faculty
affords a student who is incapacitated during the examination period and what this
Committee is empowered to do. This Committee does not and should not substitute its
discretion for that of the instructors. We may, if we choose, vacate a grade, substitute an
academic penalty for another, allow late withdrawal without academic penalty, or award
aegrotat standing. But in the normal course of its duties, this Committee does not add
percentages to grades to craft an average that would unlock an academic barrier to
proceeding in a program.

35779 v2

4

Third, the Committee rejects the student’s request for some other type of exceptional
relief that would let him continue. In the academic world, the awarding of retroactive
withdrawal without academic penalty is an extraordinary remedy. This allows a student
“to wipe the slate clean” and possibly gain a competitive advantage by re-taking the
material. It is very clear that the student was committed to proceeding to fourth year, and
therefore chose to appeal the remedy of retroactive withdrawal without penalty rather
than repeat another term. It is clear that he did not want any further delay in his program
and would exhaust all avenues to that end. There is some dispute as to whether the
Faculty was willing to offer the student an appropriate selection of third year courses, but
this seems peripheral to the student’s desire not to repeat the entire term.
In the second petition to the Examinations Committee, affirmed by the Ombuds
Committee, the Faculty revisited its original decision, and provided constructive relief.
The combination of continued poor performance, an academic sanction, and an illness
could have resulted in the student leaving the program altogether; instead, he was given
an opportunity to repeat and then proceed. The Academic Appeals Committee has, on
numerous occasions, granted withdrawal without academic penalty to remedy unfair
results in exceptional cases. In this case, the Examinations Committee pre-empted us and
awarded this relief.
Accordingly, the Committee unanimously decides to dismiss the appeal and restore the
remedy of retroactive withdrawal without academic penalty from the Winter 2005 term as
provided by the Examinations Committee and affirmed by the Ombuds Committee. The
Faculty has a positive onus to ensure that the student can complete an entire term of third
year courses and proceed to fourth year in September 2006 (anticipated graduation June
2007). The onus is on the student to perform well enough academically to continue in his
program and meet the Faculty’s requirements. But the Faculty must work with the student
to provide the opportunity to move forward. Given that the student has missed the first
few weeks of term, we recommend that the Faculty proactively arrange academic
accommodations to this student, such as deferred examinations and deadlines, and
additional instruction and academic counselling. Although the Committee wishes the
student had accepted the remedy offered to him by the Ombuds Committee and started
his term in January 2006, he chose to exercise his right to appeal to this Committee.
Therefore, in light of this Committee’s decision to dismiss the appeal and affirm the
remedy given by the Ombuds Committee, it is imperative that this remedy be real and not
illusive. As per the parties’ agreement, he is to receive no credit for the courses taken in
the Fall 2005 session. Further, if the student does not accept this remedy, his status
reverts to that of “denied further registration” based on the 58.2% sessional GPA and
previous performance.
The appeal is dismissed.

35779 v2

5

