Report 307

DATE:

   January 23, 2006

PARTIES:

   The Student Appellant v. the Faculty of Applied Science and Engineering

Hearing Date(s):

   January 19, 2006

Committee Members:

   Assistant Dean Bonnie Goldberg, Chair
   Dr. Pamela Catton
   Professor Yuki Johnson
   Dr. Joel Kirsh
   Ms Coralie D‚Souza

Judicial Affairs Officer:

   Dr. Anthony Gray

In Attendance:

   The Appellant
   Mr Ronald Bohm, counsel for the appellant
   Mr Rob Centa, counsel for the Respondent, the Faculty of Applied
   Science and Engineering
   Ms Barbara McCann, Registrar, Faculty of Applied Science and
   Engineering
   Professor Kim Pressnail, Applied Science and Engineering
   Ms Ella Lund-Thomsen, Counsellor, Faculty of Applied Science and
   Engineering

   Request to increase the grades from the examination period by 10%. In
   the alternative, The Student requested that his sessional average be
   increased 1.8% to obtain the requisite 60%, so that he could proceed to
   fourth year, and that the five courses he took in the following term be
   counted. The student had become ill with acute maxillary sinusitis
   before and during the exam period. The Faculty granted the student
   assessed grades for the exams written and not written during the term.
   Following allegations that the Student committed an academic offence
   during a mid‚term examination, the Student submitted a second petition
   the Faculty, on the grounds of the academic sanction imposed and
   personal and financial concerns. The Faculty had granted the Student
   retroactive withdrawal from the term. The student chose not to accept
   that remedy, appealing the decision and refuting the imposition of the
   academic sanction. Accordingly, the Faculty charged the Student under
   the Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters. The Faculty allowed the
   Student to attend courses pending the resolution of the charges under
   the Code and the appeal. The parties agreed that if the appeal was
   dismissed, the student would receive no credit for the courses. The
   Student brought a motion for an order compelling the University to
   produce additional information about the student‚s performance in the
   courses he was taking pending the resolution of his appeal, and an
   adjournment to consider the information. The Committee deliberated in
   camera regarding the relevance of the grades. The Committee found that
   the student‚s academic performance subsequent to the events at issue in
   the appeal were not relevant and therefore there was no need to compel
   the production of the information or to make a determination as to
   whether the agreement between the parties was followed. A minority of
   the Committee found that the grades were relevant to the deliberations,
   but was satisfied with the information provided by the Faculty. The
   Committee observed that it was an ill‚advised interim arrangement for a
   student to be allowed to continue in a program when contesting a
   Faculty decision that he has not met its academic standards. The
   Committee found that that the Faculty took into account the Student‚s
   illness through its formula and its adherence to its own guidelines and
   provided the relief it would provide to any other student in the
   program. The Committee stated its discomfort with the mechanistic
   nature of assessing grades by formula when a student is unable to
   perform due to reasons beyond his control. The Committee stated that it
   was troubled that the Faculty persists in providing accommodation in
   the form of assessed or inferred examinations rather than supplemental
   examinations, but found that the Faculty applied its policy fairly and
   properly in regard to this accommodation. The Committee found that in
   the normal course of its duties, it does not add percentages to grades
   to craft an average that would unlock an academic barrier to proceeding
   in a program. With reference to the second petition, the Committee
   found that, in revisiting its original decision, the Faculty provided
   constructive relief to the Student. Appeal dismissed. Divisional remedy
   of retroactive withdrawal without academic penalty from the term
   affirmed. The Committee ordered that the Student was to receive no
   credit for the courses taken in the following term. The Committee
   recommended that the Faculty arrange academic accommodations for the
   Student given that he had missed the first few weeks of the term.
   [1]View Report

References

   1. file:///media/12563
