Case #896

   DATE: May 17, 2017
   PARTIES: University of Toronto v. R.W. ("the Student")

   Hearing Date(s): February 22, 2017

   Panel Members:
   Ms. Michelle S. Henry, Lawyer, Borden Ladner Gervais LLP, Chair
   Dr. Maria Rozakis-Adcock, Faculty Panel Member
   Ms. Natasha Brien, Student Panel Member

   Appearances:
   Ms. Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg
   Rothstein LLP

   In Attendance:
   Professor Michael Georges, Dean's Designate (via Skype)
   Ms. Lucy Gaspini, Manager, Academic Integrity & Affairs, Office of the
   Dean, University of Toronto, Mississauga
   Mr. Ted Flett, Student at Law, Borden Ladner Gervais LLP
   Ms. Tracey Gameiro, Associate Director, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty
   Grievances
   Mr. Sean Lourim, Technology Assistant, Office of the Governing Council

   Not in Attendance:
   The Student

   Trial Division - s. B.i.1(d) of Code - plagiarism - unattributed
   quotations from internet sources in essay - University provided
   reasonable notice of hearing - proceeding in student's absence -
   finding of guilt - zero on course, three year suspension, four year
   notation, publication of decision with name of the Student withheld

   The Student was charged with knowingly representing another's idea or
   work as their own under s. B.i.1(d) of the Code, and alternatively,
   academic dishonesty under s. B.i.3(b) of the Code. The Student
   submitted a final essay using unattributed verbatim and near-verbatim
   quotations from several internet sources.

   The Student did not attend the hearing. The Tribunal found that the
   University had discharged its obligation to provide the Student
   reasonable notice of the hearing. Notice was sent to the student by
   courier to their home address and by e-mail to their e-mail address as
   recorded on ROSI, in accordance with the University's Policy on
   Official Correspondence. The Tribunal thus decided to proceed in the
   Student's absence.

   The Tribunal found the student guilty of the plagiarism charges, and
   the University withdrew the academic dishonesty charge. In determining
   the penalty, the Tribunal noted that the Student had two prior
   admissions of guilt for academic offences in two other courses, and had
   been warned not to re-offend by letter just weeks before the present
   offence. This suggested that the Student had not learned from their
   mistakes. Lack of participation in the hearing demonstrated that the
   Student had not taken responsibility. The Tribunal considered the
   sentencing factors from the case of Mr C and the importance of
   consistent sentencing. The Tribunal found that a three-year suspension
   was consistent with past sentences for plagiarism where there was at
   least one prior offence. Accordingly, the Tribunal ordered that the
   Student receive a grade of zero the course, a three year suspension,
   and a four year notation, and that the decision be published with the
   name of the Student withheld.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/13038
