Case No.: 896
THE UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
IN THE MATTER OF charges of academic dishonesty made on November 11, 2016,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic
Matters, 1995,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University ofToronto Act, 1971, S.O. 1971, C. 56 as amended
S.O. 1978, c. 88
BETWEEN:
UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO (the "University")
-andR

W

(the "Student")

REASONS FOR DECISION

Hearing Date: February 22, 2017
Panel Members:
Ms. Michelle S. Henry, Lawyer, Borden Ladner Gervais LLP, Chair
Dr. Maria Rozakis-Adcock, Faculty Panel Member
Ms. Natasha Brien, Student Panel Member
Appearances:
Ms. Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg Rothstein LLP
In Attendance:
Professor Michael Georges, Dean's Designate (via Skype)
Ms. Lucy Gaspini, Manager, Academic Integrity & Affairs, Office of the Dean, University of
Toronto, Mississauga
Mr. Ted Flett, Student at Law, Borden Ladner Gervais LLP
Ms. Tracey Gameiro, Associate Director, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances
Mr. Sean Lourim, Technology Assistant, Office of the Governing Council
Not in Attendance:
The Student

1

1. A Hearing of the Trial Division of the University Tribunal convened on February 22,
2017, to consider charges of academic dishonesty brought by the University against the
Student under the Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters, 1995 (the "Code"). The
Student was informed of the charges by letter dated November 11, 2016, from Professor
Sioban Nelson, Vice-Provost, Faculty & Academic Life.
PRELIMINARY ISSUE: PROCEEDING IN THE ABSENCE OF THE STUDENT
2. The hearing was scheduled to commence at 1:45 p.m. The Tribunal waited until 2:00
p.m. before commencing the hearing. The Student did not appear at the hearing.
3. Pursuant to sections 6 and 7 of the Statutory Powers Procedure Act(the "Act"), and Rule
17 of the University Tribunal Rules of Practice and Procedure (the "Rules"), where
reasonable notice of an oral hearing has been given to a party in accordance with the Act
and the party does not attend at the hearing, the Tribunal may proceed in the absence of
the party, and the party is not entitled to any further notice in the proceeding. In this
case, the University requested that the Tribunal proceed with the hearing in the absence
of the Student.
4. Pursuant to Rule 9, a Notice of Hearing may be served on a student by various means,
including by: sending a copy of the document by courier to the Student's mailing address
contained in ROSI (the Repository of Student Information); or emailing a copy of the
document to the student's email address contained in ROSI.
5. The University's Policy on Official Correspondence with Students expressly states that
students are responsible for maintaining on ROSI a current and valid postal address and a
University-issued email account. The Policy also makes it clear that students are
expected to monitor and retrieve their mail, including electronic messaging account(s)
issued to them by the University, on a frequent and consistent basis.
6. Counsel for the Provost also filed the Affidavit of Virginia Fletcher, a Law Clerk at
Paliare Roland, sworn on February 21, 2017 ("Fletcher Affidavit"). The Fletcher
Affidavit confirmed the steps taken to contact the Student. The University filed affidavit
evidence demonstrating that, on November 11, 2016, the Student had been served with
the charges by way of email to the Student at his Utoronto address, and by courier to the
mailing address the Student had provided on ROSI. Further, the Student was provided
with the Notice of Hearing dated January 4, 2017, by way of email to the Student at his
Utoronto address and by courier to the mailing address the Student had provided on
ROSI. A reminder email was also sent to the Student on February 16, 2017.
7. Having reviewed the evidence and heard the submissions of counsel for the Provost, the
Tribunal concluded that the Student was given reasonable notice of the hearing in
2

accordance with the notice requirements set out in the Act and the Rules. The University
has proven that it provided reasonable notice of the hearing to the Student. Accordingly,
the Tribunal proceeded to hear the case on its merits in the absence of the Student.

THE CHARGES AND PARTICULARS
8. At all material times, the Student was a registered student at the University of Toronto
Mississauga. The University alleges that the Student engaged in the following offences:
I.

On or about November 30, 2015, the Student knowingly represented as his own
an idea or expression of an idea or work of another in an essay that he submitted
in CIN101H5F (the "Course") entitled Narrative Structure as a Literary Style
("Essay"), contrary to section B.I.1(d) of the Code.

II.

In the alternative to charge 1, on or about November 30, 2015, he knowingly
engaged in a form of cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or
misrepresentation not otherwise described in the Code in order to obtain academic
credit or other academic advantage of any kind in connection with the Essay that
he submitted in the Course, contrary to section B.I.3(b) of the Code.

9. The Particulars for the charges are as follows:
a) At all material times, the Student was enrolled at the University of Toronto
Mississauga. In Fall 2015, the Student enrolled in the Course, which was taught
by Professor Meghan Sutherland.
b) Students in the Course were required to submit an essay assignment. On or about
November 30, 2015, the Student submitted the Essay to complete this
requirement.
c) He submitted the Essay knowing that it contained ideas, the expression of ideas,
and verbatim or nearly verbatim text from several publications and articles (the
"Sources") which were not written by him.
d) He knowingly represented the work of another person, or persons, who wrote the
Sources as his own. He knowingly included in the Essay ideas and expressions
that were not his own, but were the ideas and expressions of another person, or
persons, who wrote the Sources, which he did not acknowledge in the Essay.

3

e) He knowingly submitted the Essay with the intention that the University of
Toronto Mississauga rely on it as containing his own ideas, expressions of ideas
or work in considering the appropriate academic credit to be assigned to his work.
f) For the purposes of obtaining academic credit and/or other academic advantage,
he knowingly committed plagiarism in the Essay.
THE EVIDENCE
10. The Tribunal received evidence of three witnesses on behalf of the Provost.
1 1. Professor Meghan Sutherland provided evidence by way of Affidavit, sworn January 25,
2017, as she was on sabbatical at the time of the hearing. The evidence of Professor
Sutherland was as follows.
a) In the 2015 Fall Semester, the Student was enrolled in CIN101H5F, An
Introduction to Cinema Studies (the "Course"). The Course was taught by
Professor Sutherland. The Course syllabus included the University's statements
on academic honesty and plagiarism, and special tutorials were held to ensure that
students understood the University's policy regarding plagiarism. The Student
was required to submit an essay, worth 25% of his final grade, to turnitin.com by
12:00 pm on November 30, 2015 (the "Final Paper").
b) On November 30, 2015 at 5:36 a.m., the Student submitted the Final Paper to
turnitin.com. A turnitin report revealed that the Student's essay had a 16%
similarity index.
c) Professor Sutherland compared the Final Paper against the internet source
identified in the turnitin report which revealed that the essay contained several
passages of text from the website www.examiner.com. The Student did not use
quotation marks and did not attribute this text to any of the sources identified.
d) A Google search conducted by Professor Sutherland revealed two additional
internet sources from which substantial passages of text were taken without
appropriate attribution. Words and phrases were moved around and substituted
but many of the words and ideas are the same as represented on
www.wikipedia.com and www.oprah.com. Professor Sutherland's Affidavit
included printed evidence of the original internet source and the essay, indicating
the similarities.
e) Professor Sutherland issued a final grade of 45% for the Final Paper and a final
course grade of 45%. She explained that, absent a plagiarism violation, the grade
for the Student's Final Paper would be 45%, and his final course grade in the
4

Course. Professor Sutherland met with the Student on December 14, 2015 to
discuss the Final Paper. The case was then forwarded to the Dean to address the
academic misconduct.
12. Professor Michael Georges, Dean's Designate, gave evidence regarding his meeting with
the Student. He confirmed that he met with the Student on April 14, 2016, and the
Student admitted to the plagiarism. A copy of the Student's Admission of Guilt was
submitted into evidence.
13. Ms. Lucy Gaspini, Manager, Academic Integrity & Affairs also provided evidence during
the hearing regarding the Student's Academic History on ROSI and the Student
Information Printouts.
DECISION OF THE TRIBUNAL ON CHARGES
14. Having considered all the evidence heard during the hearing and the Affidavit evidence,
the Tribunal found that the Student knowingly represented the work of other persons as
his own, and knowingly included in his essay ideas and expressions that were not his
own, but were the ideas and expressions of other persons.
15. The Student's admission of guilt at the Dean's Designate meeting also supports a finding
of guilt.
16. Consequently, the Tribunal finds that Charge 1 (as outlined in paragraph 81) above) had
been proven with clear and convincing evidence on a balance of probabilities. The Panel
was advised that if the Tribunal convicts the Student on Charge 1, outlined above in
paragraph 811), the University would withdraw the alternative charge. The Panel
therefore makes no findings with respect to Charge 2.
PENALTY
17. The University sought the following penalties:
a) That the Student receive a final grade of zero in C1N101H5F in Fall 2015;
b) That the Student be suspended from the University for a period of three years,
commencing on February 22 and ending on February 21, 2020;
c) That the sanction be recorded for a period offour years on the Student's academic
record and transcript to the effect that he was sanctioned for academic
misconduct, commencing on February 22, 2017 and ending on February 21, 2021;
and,

5

d) That this case shall be reported to the Provost for publication of a notice of the
decision of the Tribunal and the sanction or sanctions imposed, with the Student's
name withheld.
18. The University led additional evidence with respect to sanctions. In particular, the
University provided evidence that the Student had been found guilty of an academic
offence regarding two separate courses.
19. The first offence relates to a course, Mathematical and Computational Sciences, in which
he was enrolled in Spring 2015 (STA258H5S). The Student admitted that he was guilty
of possessing a cell phone in a quiz that was submitted for credit for the course.
20. By letter dated April 29, 2015, Yael Karshon, Professor and Chair of the Department of
Mathematical & Computational Sciences, advised the Student that he had imposed a
mark of zero for the quiz as the sanction. The letter expressly advised the Student that
"any subsequent allegations of academic misconduct are usually referred directly to the
Office of the Dean or the Tribunal for investigation."
21. The second offence relates to a course Economics, in which he was enrolled in Fall 2014
("EC0100Y5Y"). The Student admitted that he was guilty of academic misconduct for
plagiarizing an assignment which he submitted as his own work and for credit in the
course.
22. By letter dated November 16, 2015, Kelly Hannah-Moffat, Vice-Dean, Undergraduate,
advised the Student that he was given a mark of zero for the quiz in question and an
annotation on his transcript of"Mark Reduced in EC0100Y5Y,2014(9) due to academic
misconduct", for 24 months,from November 2, 2015 to November 2, 2017.
23. The letter recommended that the Student contact a staff member from the University's
Robert Gillespie Academic Skills Centre to ensure that he has a strategy in place to help
with his future academic work and goals. He was also warned that any subsequent
allegations of offence are usually referred directly to the Tribunal for investigation.
24. Counsel for the Provost noted that the Student had committed a prior offence just weeks
before this more recent offence and was provided with letters indicating the serious
consequences of future offences. Counsel further submitted that this present offence
suggests that he had not learned from his prior mistakes. Further, his lack of participation
in this disciplinary process demonstrates that he has not taken full responsibility for his
misconduct.

6

DECISION OF THE TRIBUNAL ON PENALTY
25. The Tribunal considered the principles and factors relevant to sanction set out in
University ofToronto and Mr. C(Case No. 1976/77-3, November 5, 1976).
a) The character of the Student: as the Student did not participate in the proceeding,
there was no evidence before the Tribunal regarding the Student's character other
than the facts relating to this offence and the prior offences.
b) The likelihood of a repetition of the offence: the Student has a prior record of
academic offences. Given the two recent prior offences, the Panel accepts the
University's submission that the Student does not appear to have learned from his
prior mistakes.
c) The nature of the offence committed: As noted in a number of Tribunal decisions,
including University of Toronto v. Y.G., (Case No 802, September 28, 2015),
plagiarism is considered a very serious offence given its negative impact on
academic integrity at the University. Plagiarism also undermines the relationship
of trust between the University and its students. As such, it warrants a serious
penalty.
d) Any extenuating circumstances surrounding the commission of the offence: the
Student did not participate in this hearing. Accordingly there is no evidence
before the Tribunal of mitigating or extenuating circumstances.
e) The detriment to the University occasioned by the offence: As noted above, such
offences pose a serious concern and are detrimental to the academic integrity of
the University.
1) The need to deter others from committing a similar offence: this is an important
factor in in plagiarism cases. Plagiarism is a constant threat to the University,
especially given the increased access to and availability of online sources.
26. As established in that case and other cases to follow, the determination of an appropriate
penalty in every case by the Tribunal will depend on an assessment of these principles
and factors in the individual circumstances of the case. However, the Discipline Appeals
Board has stressed the importance of a general consistency in the approach of Tribunals
to sanction, so that the students are treated fairly and equitably. (Discipline Appeal
Board, University ofToronto v. D. S., Case No 451, August 24, 2007).
27. A review of similar cases provided by Counsel to the University indicates that a student
who commits plagiarism usually receives the sanction of a zero grade in the course. With
respect to the length of the suspension, a three-year suspension is generally consistent
7

with the sanctions granted in similar circumstances where there is at least one prior
offence, although there have been cases where a suspension of five years was
administered.
28. Having regard to the cases, the submissions of the University, and the relevant factors
outlined above, the Panel agrees that the recommended sanctions are appropriate.
29. At the conclusion of the hearing, the Panel made the following order:
• That the hearing may proceed in the absence of the Student;
• That the Student is guilty of one count of plagiarism, contrary to section B.I.1(d)
of the Code ofBehaviour on Academic Matters;
• That the Student receive a final grade of zero in CIN101H5F in Fall 2015;
• That the Student be suspended from the University for a period of three years,
commencing on February 22, 2017 and ending on February 21, 2020.
• That the sanction be recorded for a period of four years on the Student's
academic record and transcript to the effect that he was sanctioned for academic
misconduct, commencing on February 22, 2017 and ending on February 21, 2021;
and
• That this case shall be reported to the Provost for publication of a notice of the
decision of the Tribunal and the sanction or sanctions imposed, with the name of
the Student withheld.
30. An Order was signed at the hearing by the Panel to this effect.

DATED at Toronto, May17,2017.

8

