Report 405

   DATE:Â Â August 27, 2019
   PARTIES: R.M. (the âStudentâ) v. Faculty of Arts and Science

   HEARING DATE: N/A (Written Submissions Only)

   Committee Member:
   Professor Hamish Stewart, Senior Chair

   For the Faculty of Arts and Science:
   Mr. Thomas MacKay, Director, Faculty Governance and Curriculum Services
   (the âFacultyâ)

   The former Student in this case sought to appeal a decision of the
   Committee on Standing of the Faculty of Arts and Science (the
   âFacultyâ) made on April 24, 1991. Although there was no record of the
   Student having pursued the next level of appeal (to the Facultyâs
   Appeal Board) at the time, the Committee decided to deal with the
   matter as if there had been an unsuccessful appeal to the Appeals
   Board. The former Student and the Faculty agreed to have the issue of
   the timeliness of the appeal decided by the Senior Chair of the
   Committee on the basis of written submissions.

   The former Student had been enrolled in the course in question in the
   Winter 1990 session. The former Student stated in his original petition
   to his college registrar, dated June 27, 1990, that a power blackout
   had occurred during the final examination. The examination was
   rescheduled, but the Student was unable to attend on the rescheduled
   date and did not write the examination or hand in the final essay. The
   Facultyâs Committee on Standing ruled that the Student would not be
   granted any extension to submit course work, but that he would be
   permitted to write a special examination on a later date. The Student
   also stated that he destroyed his final paper for the course and
   regretted doing so. The Student wrote the special examination and
   received a final grade of D- on the course. The remedies sought by the
   Student included that he be awarded a final grade of 100% on his final
   (destroyed) paper for the course.

   The Committee determined that there were two reasons, each sufficient
   on its own, to refuse to hear an appeal from a decision made more than
   28 years ago. First, the Committee stated that it agreed with the
   Faculty that there was no sufficient record on which the Committee
   could properly decide the appeal, owing to the passage of time and to
   the Facultyâs reasonable retention protocol (whereby records of
   received petitions are destroyed five years after the date of the
   petition decision). The Committee noted that the materials available to
   it did not include any information about the position the Faculty took
   or the reasons supporting its decision. In particular, no information
   was available about how the Studentâs position compared to that of
   other students who were affected by the blackout, which the Committee
   noted would be highly relevant to its assessment of the reasonableness
   of the decision. Secondly, the Student offered no explanation
   whatsoever as to why he waited 28 years to appeal from the Facultyâs
   decision. The Committee was satisfied that the Student had not shown
   any exceptional circumstances to justify a lengthy extension from the
   90-day deadline for an appeal specified in the Committeeâs Terms of
   Reference.

   The Committee accordingly dismissed the appeal.
   [1]View Report

References

   1. file:///media/28550
