Case 01-02-05

DATE:

   April 9, 2002

PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v. P.M.

Hearing Date(s):

   March 28, 2002

Panel Members:

   Kirby Chown, Co-Chair
   Michael Kohler, student, OISE/UT
   Anne Marie Salapatek, Faculty of Medicine

Appearances:

   Salim Hirji, for the Student
   Lily I. Harmer, for the University

In attendance:

   Mr. P.M.

   Student charged under s. B.i.3(c) of the Code. The charges related to
   allegations that the Student had another person impersonate him at a
   final examination. The parties submitted an Agreed Statement of Facts.
   The Student pleaded guilty to the charge. The Panel accepted the guilty
   plea. The Parties Submitted a Joint Submission on Penalty. The Panel
   considered the sentencing principles enunciated in the case of Mr. C
   and found that while the Studentâs act was a deliberate and
   premeditated attempt to cheat, he expressed remorse to the Panel
   directly and his early admission of guilt was significant. The Panel
   found that the offence was the Studentâs first and that the sanction
   would have an effect on him and his family; and that the offence was
   serious and constituted a breach of trust between the Student and his
   faculty. The Panel found that the Studentâs individual circumstances,
   with respect to his family background and the pressures he felt to
   complete his studies should be taken into account. The Panel found that
   the offence was a violation of the trust that must exist within the
   University community, and that severe sanctions attached to such an
   offence would add to the deterrence of students and demonstrate that
   such behaviour was not tolerated. The Panel considered previous
   Tribunal cases involving impersonation and stated its desire that a
   consistent message be sent for the type of offence. The Panel imposed a
   grade of zero in the course; a five-year suspension; a five-year
   notation on the Studentâs academic record and transcript; and that a
   report be issued to the Provost.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/28425
