Case No.: 967
UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO

IN THE MATTER OF charges of academic dishonesty made on January 23, 2018,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic

Matters, 1995,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Act, 1971, S.O. 1971 , c. 56 as amended
S.O. 1978, C. 88
BETWEEN :
UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO (the "University" )
- AND -

YI _ _ "'I (the "Student")
REASONS FOR DECISION
Hearing Date: April 3, 2018
Panel Members:
Ms. Roslyn M. Tsao, Chair
Professor Graeme Hirst, Faculty Panel Member
Mr. Eric Bryce, Student Panel Member
Appearances:
Ms. Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel for University, Paliare Roland Barri sters
Mr. Yj
\\I, the Student

Ill-

In Attendance:
Professor Luc De Nil, Vice-Dean, Students, School of Graduate Studies
Ms. Krista Osbourne, Administrative Clerk and Hearing Secretary, Office of Appeals, Discipline
and Faculty Grievances

Charges and Appearances

1.

The Trial Division of the Tribunal heard this matter on April 3, 2018. The Student
was charged on January 23, 2018 with 7 charges which relate to his providing
unauthorized assistance to another student, F J, in the summer term of 2017 in Course
ECO407HlF, by writing the majority of 3 assignments for FJ. The three charges of
which the Student is found guilty herein relate to aiding or assisting another person
contrary to Section B.11.l(a)(ii) to commit an offence under Section B.1.l(b) of the
Code (obtain unauthorized assistance).

2.

Three other charges laid, which were withdrawn by the University following
sanctioning, related to aiding or assisting another person contrary to Section
B.11.l(a)(ii) to commit an offence under Section B.I.l(d) of the Code (plagiarism).
The last charge, also withdrawn by the University, related to assisting another person
to commit an offence under Section B.1.3(b) of the Code (any form of cheating or
academic dishonesty).

3.

The Student attended at the hearing without representation and confirmed that he was
aware that Downtown Legal Services could assist him.

4.

The Student and University tendered an Agreed Statement of Facts ("ASF") signed by
the Student on April 2, 2017 for a guilty plea.

Facts

5.

Pursuant to the ASF, the Student admitted 1 the following facts:
•

The Student first registered at the University of Toronto in the Faculty of Arts
& Science in Fall 201 2. The Student graduated with an Honours Bachelor of
Science in November 20 15 with high distinction. The Student also received a

At the Hearing, the Student advised of a correction to the ASF at the hearing to Paragraph 13 to advise that it was
in the "Winter" not "Summer" of 20 17 when he was the T.A. in the Course. The University concurred.
1

2

Masters of Arts degree in Economics on June 8, 2017. As such, the Student
had graduated with a Masters degree at the time of the hearing.
•

The Student entered into a Teaching Assistant ("T.A .") contract with the
University on August 19, 2016 for the period January 1 to April 30, 2017 for
ECO349H1S.

•

The Student entered into a second T.A. contract with the University on April
27, 2017 for the period May 1 to June 30, 2017 for the Course, ECO349H1F.

•

The T.A . contracts made it clear that the Student would be subject to and
bound by all applicable University policies of general application.

•

As a T.A. employed by the University Department of Economics, the Student
attended training sessions. The Conflict of Interest policy for T.A.s states that
if a T.A . has a close personal relationship with any student in a course for
which the T.A. is employed the T.A. is required to make this relationship
known to his/her supervisor (who is normally the instructor of the course).
The Code, the Office of Student Academic Integrity, and what constitutes
academic misconduct was also reviewed. Assisting another student to commit
an offence was specifically identified as academic misconduct.

•

In Winter 2017, FJ, who was the Student's girlfriend, enrolled in the
ECO349H1S Course. the Student was the T.A. for the ECO349H1S Course
but failed to report his personal relationship with FJ to the Course Instructor.

•

In Summer 2017, FJ enrolled in ECO407H1F (the "Course").

•

The Student was not a T.A. in the Course.

•

FJ submitted three assignments in the Course (the "Assignments"), as follows :
•

Critical Review I on May 25, 2017, w011h 12.5% of the Course mark;
3

•

Critical Review II on June 1, 2017, worth 12.5% of the Course mark;
and

•
•

Term Paper on June 22, 2017, worth 30% of the Course mark.

The electronic document properties of the Assignments all indicate the Student
as the "Author".

•

FJ admitted at her Dean's meetings on August 1 and 15, 2017 that she had
committed the offence of obtaining unauthorized assistance in connection with
academic work, specifically that she had asked the Student to complete each of
the Assignments for her and that the Student had done so. FJ received a final
grade of zero in the Course and she was suspended from the University for a
period of six months, from July I, 2017 to December 31 , 2017.

•

On September 29, 2017, Professor Luc De Nil, Dean' s Designate for
Academic Integrity, sent a Letter of Allegation to the Student to advise him
that he had received a report alleging that he had committed a possible
academic offence.

The Student attended the resulting Dean's meeting on

October 10, 2017 to discuss the allegations against him.

The Student

acknowledges that this meeting took place in a manner consistent with the
requirements of the Code.
•

At the October 10, 2017 Dean's meeting, the Student admitted to having
provided assistance to FJ in the Course and that over 90% of the work in the
three Assignments submitted by was his work.

The Student admitted to

knowingly violating the Code.
•
6.

The matter was referred to the Tribunal by the Dean's Designate.

The following documents were also admitted by the Student as evidence:
(a)

copies of the Assignments, namely:
4

(b)

(i)

Critical Review 1 submitted by Student FJ in the Course;

(ii)

Critical Review 2 submitted by the Student FJ in the Course; and

(iii)

Term Paper submitted by the Student FJ in the Course;

Properties "Details" from Word for above 3 submitted Assignments indicating
the Student as "Author" for each;

(c)

Letter dated August 21, 2017 from Office of Student Academic Integrity to
Student FJ confirming that FJ admitted that she submitted the Assignments
which were authored by the Student, her boyfriend, and was sanctioned for
such offences; and

(d)

Letter dated October 12, 2017 from School of Graduate Studies to the Student
confirming the Student's admission to commission of offence of assisting
another student in committing an offence at a meeting on October 10, 201 7
with the Professor and Vice-Dean.

Decision of the Tribunal

7.

Based on the ASF and the Panel's review of the documentary evidence, the Student is
found guilty of Charges 1, 3 and 5 being three counts of knowingly aiding and
assisting a student to obtain unauthorized assistance in connection with the three
Assignments contrary to the Code.

8.

The University has withdrawn Charges 2, 4, 6 and 7.

Penalty

9.

The Student and University submitted a Joint Submission on Penalty ("JSP") m
support of the following penalty:

5

(a)

that the Student's Master of Arts Degree conferred June 2017 be suspended for
a period of three years, commencing on April 3, 2018 and ending on April 2,
2021 2 ,•

(b)

a notation be recorded for a period of four years on the Student's academic
record and transcript to the effect that he was sanctioned for academic
misconduct, commencing on April 3, 2018 and ending on April 2, 2022

10.

The Student has no prior history of academic misconduct and admitted guilt at the
earliest possible stage at the Dean's Designate meeting.

11 .

As indicated above, the Student has graduated with his Master's Degree from the
University. His academic transcript is very strong. He is 23 years old and is currently
employed in Toronto.
proceedings.

His employer is aware of the within academic discipline

The Student has no current plans to pursue further post-graduate

studies.
12.

The Panel was concerned that the Student was a T.A. in the term before the Course in
another course in which his girlfriend, FJ, was enrolled. The Student was well aware,
through training, that such a conflict of interest with a student in a class, was required
to be disclosed but he failed to do so.

13.

The following term, FJ enrolled in the Course but the Student was not the T.A. in that
course. The Student's failure to disclose the conflict of interest in the earlier course
gives the impression of a deliberate attempt in that earlier course to skirt around the
academic dishonesty safeguards put in place for T.A.s.

14.

The Panel notes that the impugned conduct by the Student did not directly provide
him with personal gain in his own academic record. That said, the Student was

2

Upon reviewing the Code and draft Order, the jurisdiction of the Tribunal with regard to a suspension of a degree
is set out in Section C.ii.(b). I U)(i) and permits the Tribunal to recommend same to Governing Council.,

6

cautioned that where there is a conflict of interest, errors in judgment can occur which
can jeopardize one's own reputation and achievements.
15.

There is a very high threshold for departing from a joint submission on penalty
requiring the Panel to find that the acceptance of same would be contrary to the public
interest and bring the administration of justice in to disrepute.

16.

A review of the cases provided by the University demonstrate that the requested
penalty is in the appropriate range of sanctions in similar circumstances.

The

penalties available for this Student who has graduated are more limited than for a
current Student but the more serious sanction of revocation of the Student's degree
was not appropriate given that it was a first offence, that the Student had admitted
guilt early in the process and has acknowledged his misconduct in a frank and
fulsome manner.
17.

The Panel has also reviewed the ~

factors as they apply to this Student and finds

the joint submission on penalty appropriate in these circumstances.
18.

An Order was signed at the hearing by the Panel on the following terms:
(a)

THAT the Student is guilty of three counts of unauthorized assistance,

contrary to sections B.11.1 (a)(ii) and B.1.1 (b) of the Code of Behaviour on

Academic Matters;
(b)

THAT the panel recommends to Governing Council that the Student's Master

of Arts Degree conferred June 2017 be suspended for a period of three years,
commencing on April 3, 2018 and ending on April 2, 2021;
(c)

THAT the sanction be recorded for a period of four years on the Student's

academic record and transcript to the effect that he was sanctioned for
academic misconduct, commencing on April 3, 2018 and ending on April 2,
2022;and
7

(d)

THAT this case shall be reported to the Provost for publication of a notice of
the decision of the Tribunal and the sanction or sanctions imposed, with the
name of the student withheld.

-rt,

Dated at Toronto, this

6 day of June, 2018

//

47/t#t ?-Roslylrsao, Co-Chair

8

