Case 967

DATE:

   June 6, 2018

PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v. Y.W. (âthe Studentâ)

Hearing Date(s):

   April 3, 2018

Panel Members:

   Ms. Roslyn M. Tsao, Chair
   Professor Graeme Hirst, Faculty Panel Member
   Mr. Eric Bryce, Student Panel Member

Appearances:

   Ms. Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel for University, Paliare
   Roland Barristers
   The Student

In Attendance:

   Professor Luc De Nil, Vice-Dean, Students, School of Graduate Studies
   Ms. Krista Osbourne, Administrative Clerk and Hearing Secretary, Office
   of Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances
   The Student had recently obtained his Master of Arts degree from the
   University and was working as a teaching assistant. The charges related
   to his providing unauthorized assistance to a student enrolled in the
   course by writing the majority of her assignments in the course. The
   matter proceeded by way of an agreed statement of facts (ASF), a guilty
   plea and a joint submission of penalty (JSP). The Student pled guilty
   to three of the charges which related to aiding or assisting another
   person contrary to Section B.ii.l(a)(ii) to obtain unauthorized
   assistance contrary to Section B.i.l(b) of the Code . The University
   withdrew the other four charges.
   The Partiesâ JSP requested: (1) that the Student's degree be suspended
   for a period of three years; (2) that the sanction be recorded for a
   period of four years on the Student's academic record and transcript;
   and (3) that the case be reported to the Provost with the Studentâs
   name withheld.Â  The Panel noted that there is a very high threshold
   for departing from a JSP; that the Panel would need to find that its
   acceptance would be contrary to the public interest and bring the
   administration of justice into disrepute.Â  The Panel was referred to
   other cases which showed that the penalties available to impose on a
   student who has graduated are more limited than for a current student
   but the more serious sanction of revocation of the Student's degree was
   not appropriate given that it was a first offence, that the Student had
   admitted guilt early in the process and acknowledged his misconduct.
   The Panel found the JSP was reasonable in these circumstances and
   ordered: (1) that the Student's degree be suspended for a period of
   three years; (2) that the sanction be recorded for a period of four
   years on the Student's academic record and transcript; and (3) that the
   case be reported to the Provost with the Studentâs name withheld.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12968
