Case 1586

   DATE:

   July 5, 2024

   PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v. M.C. ("the Student")

   HEARING DATE:

   May 22, 2024, via Zoom

   PANEL MEMBERS:

   Omo Akintan, Chair
   Professor Pascal Can Lieshout, Faculty Panel Member
   Giselle Sami Dalili, Student Panel Member

   APPEARANCES:
   Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg
   RothsteinÂ LLP
   Janet Song, Co-Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg RothsteinÂ LLP
   Calvin Zhang, Counsel for the Student, Starkman Lawyers

   IN ATTENDANCE:

   The Student

   HEARING SECRETARY:

   Samanthe Huang, Quasi-Judicial Coordinator and Hearing Secretary,
   Office of Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances

   The Student was charged with two counts of knowingly forging or in any
   other way altering, or falsifying documents or evidence required by the
   University of Toronto, or uttered, circulated or made use of such
   documents in connection with a petition to submit work after a course
   deadline in two courses, contrary to section B.i.1(a) of the Code.Â  In
   the alternative, the Student was charged under s. B.i.3(b) of the Code
   for knowingly engaging in a form of cheating, academic dishonesty or
   misconduct, fraud or misrepresentation not otherwise described in the
   Code in order to obtain academic credit or other academic advantage.

   The hearing proceeded on the basis of an Agreed Statement of Facts
   (âASFâ) accompanied by a Joint Book of Documents, tendered as evidence
   by the University. The ASF detailed that the Student was required, in
   each of the courses, to complete a final paper. The Student did not
   submit the paper in either of the courses by the specified deadline.
   The Student subsequently submitted a petition to submit work after the
   course deadline in each of the courses, citing a sickness as the reason
   for their inability to submit the papers on time. In support of the
   petitions, the Student submitted a Verification of Illness or Injury
   Form (âVOIâ) stating that the Student had a diagnosis for
   gastroenteritis. The Student also submitted a letter purporting to be
   from a pharmacy â purportedly addressed to the Student â listing the
   uses, instructions and side effects of a drug used to treat certain
   stomach and esophagus problems (the âLetterâ). The University attempted
   to verify both the VOI and the Letter and was advised that the Student
   was neither a patient of the doctor named in the documents nor had they
   been seen by that doctor. Similarly, the pharmacy identified in the
   documents advised that they had not dispensed any medication to the
   Student. The Student denied the allegations that that the documents
   were forged in a meeting with the Deanâs Designate. However, in a
   subsequent email to the Academic Integrity officer, the Student
   admitted that the documents submitted were forged, and expressed
   remorse.

   Based on the evidence contained in the ASF, including the Studentâs
   admission, the Panel concluded that the charges under s. B.i.1(a) had
   been proven with clear and convincing evidence on a balance of
   probabilities, and accepted the Studentâs guilty plea. The University
   withdrew the alternative charge.

   In determining the appropriate sanction, the Panel considered joint
   submissions made by the parties. The Panel noted that in determining
   penalty, it is directed to consider the factors outlined in the
   decision in University of Toronto and Mr. C (Case No. 1976/77-3,
   November 5, 1976) including reformation, deterrence and protection of
   the public. The Panel noted that while forgery is a serious academic
   offence, the Studentâs admission of guilt and cooperation with the
   proceeding was a mitigating factor. However, the Panel considered the
   fact that the offence at issue was the second offence for the Student
   within two years to be an aggravating factor. Having regard to the
   mitigating and aggravating factors in the case, the Panel was satisfied
   that the recommended sanctions in the JSP were appropriate.

   The Panel imposed the following sanction: a final grade of zero in the
   Courses; a three-year suspension; a four-year notation on the Studentâs
   academic record and transcript; and a report to the Provost for
   publication.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/31804
