Case 523

DATE:

   January 14, 2009

PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v. Ms. A.K.

Hearing Date(s):

   November 11, 2008

Panel Members:

   Mr. Andrew Pinto, Chair
   Professor Marc Lewis, Faculty Member
   Ms. Elena Kuzmin, Student Panel Member

Appearances:

   Mr. Robert Centa, Asstant Discipline Counsel
   Ms. Tina Lee, Associate to Mr. Centa
   Professor Donald Dewees, Deanâs Designate, Faculty of Arts and Science
   Mr. Isaac Tang, Student Representative, DLS
   Ms. A.K., the Student (present)
   The Student was charged with four offences under s. B.i.1(a) and,
   alternatively, two offences under s. B.i.3(b) of the Code. The charges
   related to allegations that the Student falsified an application form
   submitted to the Academic Bridging Program at Woodsworth College, which
   failed to disclose that she had previously attended a post-secondary
   institution; and allegations that she knowingly submitted a forged
   transcript and course descriptions from a foreign university in support
   of her request for post-admission transfer credits. The Student pleaded
   guilty to the charges under s. B.i.1(a) of the Code. The matter
   proceeded based upon an Agreed Statement of Facts. The Student admitted
   to paying an individual in Turkey to forge the documents. The Panel
   accepted the Studentâs guilty plea to the charges under s. B.i.1(a) of
   the Code. At the onset of the Studentâs evidence, a Book of Documents
   (Penalty Phase) was provided for the first time to the University and
   the Panel. The Student claimed that she did not list her post-secondary
   attendance at the foreign university in the application form because at
   the time she did not understand the proper meaning of âabroadâ and
   because she did not complete her degree at the university. The Student
   claimed that she had faced financial, health and child-care challenges
   since immigrating to Canada. She supported her claim of illness with
   letters from an endocrinologist and a psychological consultant.Â  The
   Student claimed that a friend in Turkey had arranged for an individual
   to help her obtain her Transcript from the foreign university. The
   Student claimed that in desperation she agreed to purchase the
   fraudulent documentation from the individual. The Student claimed that
   with the exception of a cover letter, she did not know what false
   documentation had been sent to the University. The Panel observed that
   the Studentâs misconduct occurred during two different time periods and
   found that it undermined the Studentâs claim that her circumstances
   were relevant mitigating factors. The Panel found that the Studentâs
   claim that she misunderstood the meaning of âabroadâ was contradicted
   by her understanding of the term in other parts of the application.Â
   The Studentâs claim that she did not list her studies at the foreign
   university because she did not complete her degree was undermined by
   the fact that the application provided for applicants to distinguish
   between post-secondary degrees sought and those actually conferred and
   because the Student indicated that she was employed in London around
   the time that she was actually enrolled at the foreign university. With
   respect to the forged documents, the Panel found that a material
   distinction should not be made in sanction between a student who
   directly perpetrated a fraud and one who contracted out the fraudulent
   activity to a third party and claimed ignorance. The Panel observed
   that the Student did not disclose her misconduct at the first
   opportunity or early in the discipline process. The Panel found that
   the commercial aspect of the fraud was an aggravating factor that
   supported expulsion because it related to the professionalization of
   the academic forgery business. The Panel considered The University of
   Toronto v. Student, Case No. 499 (2008-2009), and found that the
   nearness to completion of a degree was a relevant but not determinative
   factor in respect to sanction. The Panel stated that it advocated an
   approach that neither penalized nor rewarded a student in terms of
   sanction for the nearness to completion of a degree and that a better
   approach was for the Tribunal to have greater information on the
   consequences of the proposed sanction. The Panel found that the
   endocrinologistâs letter provided little evidence that the Studentâs
   illness manifested in a way that would have impaired her judgment or
   provide a sufficient nexus to her misconduct. The Panel stated that the
   tentative conclusions of the psychological consultantâs report
   minimized the reliance it placed on it as evidence of mitigation in
   respect of the Studentâs psychological frame of mind. The Panel stated
   that it was unable to have a greater appreciation of any mitigating
   factors without additional evidence about the Studentâs character or
   the challenges she faced. The Panel considered the Studentâs claim that
   she would be forced to return to Turkey if she was expelled and found
   that the outcome was based on a mix of personal and other factors that
   were not disclosed. The Panel considered University of Toronto v.
   Student, Case No. 440 (2006-2007), and found that while the Student
   appeared to be remorseful for her conduct and was unlikely to repeat
   the offence, there was insufficient evidence of a nexus between the
   adverse circumstances faced by the Student and her impugned conduct to
   impose a sanction other than expulsion. The Panel recommended to the
   President, further to s. C.ii.(b)(i) of the Code, that the Student be
   expelled from the University; that a permanent notation of the
   expulsion be recorded on her academic record and transcript; and that a
   report be issued to the Provost.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/13062
