Case 1102

DATE:

   November 5, 2021

PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v. J.P. ("the Student")

HEARING DATE:

   July 26, 2021, via Zoom

Panel Members:

   Ms. Johanna Braden, Chair
   Professor Ernest Lam, Faculty Panel Member
   Ms. Parsa Mahmud, Student Panel Member

Appearances:

   Ms. Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg
   Rothstein LLP
   Mr. Nick Di-Biase, Representative for the Student, Downtown Legal
   Services
   The Student

Hearing Secretary:

   Ms. Carmelle Salomon-Labbe, Associate Director, Office of Appeals,
   Discipline and Faculty Grievances

   Theâ¯Studentâ¯was chargedÂ with two countsÂ under s. B.i.1(b)Â andÂ one
   count under s.Â B.ii.1(a)(ii)Â of theÂ Code ofÂ BehaviourÂ and Academic
   Matters, 1995Â (the âCodeâ)Â forÂ knowingly usingÂ or possessingÂ an
   unauthorized aid or aids or obtainingÂ unauthorized assistance in a
   final exam,Â andÂ knowingly aidingÂ and assistingÂ other
   studentsÂ inÂ a courseÂ to use or possess an unauthorized aid or aids
   or obtain unauthorized assistance.Â InÂ addition and theÂ alternative,
   theâ¯Studentâ¯was charged under s.â¯B.i.3(b) of
   theâ¯Codeâ¯forÂ knowingly engagingÂ in a form of cheating, academic
   dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or misrepresentationâ¯in order
   toâ¯obtain academic credit or other academicÂ advantage inÂ connection
   with a finalÂ exam.

   The Student attended the hearingÂ with his representative. The Student
   and the University submitted an Agreed Statement of Fact (âASFâ).Â The
   Panel noted that the ASF outlined that the StudentÂ admitted to all the
   charges.Â At the hearing, the Student agreed that he understood the
   charges and the nature and effect of his plea.Â The evidence before the
   Panel was outlinedÂ in the ASF and the Joint Book of Documents (âJBDâ).
   The ASF outlinedÂ that the StudentÂ had writtenÂ the final examÂ in the
   courseÂ and submitted itÂ within the allotted time. Soon after
   submission, the Professor who taught the courseÂ for which the exam was
   submitted searched the text of the exam onlineÂ to ensure no students
   in theÂ course had posted it online. The Professor discovered
   thatÂ nine outÂ of the eleven exam questions had been posted on
   Chegg.com (âCheggâ).Â This search also uncovered that question
   2Â ofÂ the exam was answered by a Chegg user. When the Professor
   checked the exam, he noted that the Student and another
   studentÂ hadÂ submitted identical answersÂ forÂ question 2.Â The
   identical answers also matchedÂ theÂ visible portionÂ of the answer on
   Chegg.Â The ASF further outlined that the Student attended an initial
   meeting with the Deanâs DesignateÂ at which time the meeting was
   adjourned to allow the Student to contact the Professor who taught the
   course.Â The Student attended a continuation of his meeting with the
   Deanâs Designate at which time he admitted to accessing and receiving
   unauthorized assistance from CheggÂ with respect to question 2 of the
   exam.Â The Panel noted that the ASF furthered to indicate thatÂ at a
   later dateÂ the Student Conduct & Academic Integrity Officer requested
   that Chegg provide the solutions posted to the website for the exam,
   and toÂ identify the users that posted, answered, and accessed the
   questions.Â Upon receipt of the data from Chegg, the Academic Integrity
   Officer forwarded this to the Professor who taught the course.Â An
   analysis of this data indicated that three students (including the
   Student) postedÂ multiple questions to Chegg seeking answers.Â The
   Panel noted thatÂ the ASF indicated that in the Professorâs view, it
   wasÂ highly unlikely that the similaritiesÂ in the answersÂ occurred by
   coincidence, given the length, level of detail, and unusual phrasing of
   theÂ exam answers as well as the fact that many of them were wrong in
   the same specific ways.Â The PanelÂ was satisfied that the Studentâs
   admissions were voluntary,Â informedÂ and unequivocal.Â Upon review of
   the evidence contained in the ASF and JBD, theÂ Panel found that the
   Student used anÂ unauthorized aid and obtained unauthorized assistance
   when he turned to Chegg for assistance with his final
   exam.Â Further,Â the Panel noted thatÂ although the Student may not
   have necessarily intended to aid other students,Â it acceptedÂ that by
   posting exam questions and seeking input on how to answer them, the
   Student effectively aided and assisted other students in the course who
   subscribed to Chegg. Accordingly, the PanelÂ returned a finding of
   guiltÂ with respect to the charges under ss.Â B.i.1(b) and
   B.ii.1(a)(ii) of the Code. Given this finding, the University withdrew
   the alternative charge.

   In determiningÂ sanction,Â theâ¯PanelÂ received, on consentÂ of the
   parties,Â further evidence that the Student had previously admitted to
   academic misconductÂ on one prior occasion.Â The Student and the
   UniversityÂ submittedÂ a Joint Submission on Penalty (âJSPâ).Â The
   Panel noted that itÂ should only depart fromÂ a JSPÂ where the proposed
   sanction is so far outside the range of appropriate outcomes that it
   would bring the administration of justice into disrepute.Â The Panel
   considered the factors and principles relevant to sanction set out
   inÂ University of Toronto and Mr. CÂ (Case No. 1976/77-3, November 5,
   1976).Â The Panel noted that the Student attended the hearing and
   admitted to his wrongdoing,Â which shows some insight and
   remorse.Â Further, the Student has earned all his credits to graduate
   and improved his grades as he progressed in his courses. Balanced
   against these mitigating factors was the Studentâs prior act of
   plagiarism.Â The Panel furtherÂ noted that by cheating on his exam, the
   Student undermined the grades-based system of evaluation and broke the
   honour code that is essential to online learning.Â Regarding the need
   to deter others from committing similar offences, the Panel noted that
   cheating on exams must always be denounced and deterredÂ in order
   toÂ protect the academic integrity of the University.Â It furthered by
   outlining that in todayâs online world, it is too easy for students to
   find new outlets forÂ unauthorizedÂ assistanceÂ and students must
   understand that this kind of misconduct will have serious
   repercussions.Â In addition to the factors outlined inÂ University of
   Toronto and Mr. CÂ (Case No. 1976/77-3, November 5, 1976)Â (âMr. C.
   factorsâ), the Panel reviewed and considered the other cases of the
   Tribunal in similar circumstances.Â Upon review of the additional cases
   and consideration for the Mr. C. factors, the Panel noted that
   theÂ JSPÂ was squarely within the range of sanctions imposed in similar
   cases, it does not bring the administration of justice
   intoÂ disreputeÂ andÂ is not otherwise contrary to the public
   interest.Â Â The Panel imposed the following sanctions:Â final grade of
   zero in the course;Â three-year suspension;Â four-year notation on
   transcript; and a report to the Provost for publication.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/30089
