Case No.: 2002/03-1

UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
TRIAL DIVISION
Members of the Panel:
Janet E. Minor, Associate Chair
Chris Ambidge, faculty member, Department of Chemical Engineering
Maria Kang, student member, Faculty of Arts and Science
IN THE MATTER of the University of Toronto Act, 1971, S.O. 1971, c. 56, as
amended;
AND IN THE MATTER of the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on
Academic Matters, 1995;
AND IN THE MATTER of disciplinary charges against S.R.
Shaun Laubman, Downtown Legal Services, for S.R.
Lily I. Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel, for the University of Toronto
Appearances:
Eric Moore, Senior Lecturer, University of Toronto at Scarborough
Diane Kruger, Forensic Document Examiner
S.R., accused
BACKGROUND
[1]
A hearing of the Trial Division of the University Tribunal was convened at 5:00
p.m. on Tuesday, January 21, 2003, in the Falconer Room, Simcoe Hall, to consider the
following charges laid against S.R. under the Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters,
1995, [the “Code”] by the Vice-President and Provost, Professor Shirley Neuman:
1.

In or about December 2001, you did knowingly forge or in any
other way alter or falsify any academic record, and/or did utter,
circulate or make use of any such forged, altered or falsified

IN THE MATTER of disciplinary charges against S.R.
record, whether the record be in print or electronic form contrary to
Section B.I.3.(a) of the Code.
2.

In the alternative, in or about December 2001, you did knowingly
forge or in any other way alter or falsify any document or evidence
required by the University, or to utter, circulate or make use of any
such forged, altered or falsified document, whether the record be in
print or electronic form contrary to Section B.I.1(a) of the Code.

3.

In the alternative, in or about December 2001, you did knowingly
engage in a form of cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct,
fraud or misrepresentation not otherwise described in order to
obtain academic credit or other academic advantage of any kind
contrary to Section B.I.3.(b) of the Code.

[2]
The following particulars were included with the charges laid by Professor
Neuman:
1.

At all material times you were a student in MATB24H3F taught by
Professor Eric Moore and others in the fall of 2001.

2.

On or about October 17, 2001 you wrote a mid-term test in
MATB24H3F.

3.

After receiving the marked term test back you altered the answer
given by you to question number 8, and the marks given to you for
question 8, as well as the marks reflected on the front page of that
term test, and submitted the altered test paper to the University,
claiming that an error had occurred in the marking of the mid-term
examination such that you should have received a mark of 87/100.

[3]
After several hours of evidence followed by extensive argument, the panel retired
to consider its verdict. The panel returned and delivered an oral verdict convicting Mr.
S.R. The hearing was then adjourned to Wednesday, February 26, 2003 at 5:30 p.m. in
the Falconer Room to hear submissions on sanction.
REASONS FOR DECISION (Delivered Orally)
[4]
We find Mr. S.R. guilty of the charge in paragraph one, that is, that he on or about
December 2001 did knowingly forge or in some other way alter or falsify an academic
record and did utter, circulate or make use of such forgery, altered to falsify the record,
contrary to section B.I.3.(a) of the Code.

-2–

IN THE MATTER of disciplinary charges against S.R.
[5]
It is acknowledged by Mr. S.R. that page seven, question eight of the exam
document is false and was added after the original test was submitted, marked and
returned. We conclude that the substitution was done by Mr. S.R. We do not find his
explanation that a mysterious, but malicious, monitor of his e-mail managed to obtain his
paper and forge a substitute back page at all credible.
[6]
We agree with the University’s submission that the substituted document was
made to support a grade of ten out of ten on question eight (an improvement of nine
marks on the originally assigned mark of one out of ten). This in turn would support a
final mark of eighty-seven on that test. We do not find credible Mr. S.R.’s explanation
that an error had been made by the markers that resulted in the eighty-seven rather than
seventy-eight. However, even if there were an error, we could not accept Mr. S.R.’s
claim that he would not notice such an error or that he would not have detected it. His
evidence was that he is a fighter for every mark and repeatedly resubmitted test results in
order to obtain increased marks. In this particular case he asked for the addition to be
checked.
[7]
We find his position and his evidence not credible by any standard. As a result of
our finding on section B.1.3.(a), we do not find it necessary to deal with the alternative
charges.
[8]
Following the oral delivery of the verdict, the hearing was adjourned to February
26, 2002. At that time the panel heard submissions on sanction. The Assistant Discipline
Counsel, on behalf of the University, submitted that the following sanctions would be
appropriate:
1.
2.
3.
4

A grade of zero in the course;
Suspension from the University of Toronto for a period of two years;
A notation on Mr. S.R.’s transcript for three years;
Publication in the University newspapers with Mr. S.R.’s name withheld;

Mr. Laubman, on behalf of Mr. S.R., submitted that the following sanctions would be
appropriate:
1.
2.
3.

A grade of zero in the course;
A suspension from the University of Toronto for a period of one year
commencing January 1, 2003; and,
A two-year notation commencing January 1, 2003.
REASONS FOR SANCTION (Delivered Orally)

[9]
Altering or falsifying an academic document is a very significant academic
offence. The University relies on the integrity of its students and scholars to maintain its
own standards and its institutional integrity. This particular offence was one that

-3–

IN THE MATTER of disciplinary charges against S.R.
demonstrated premeditation; it took considerable effort to commit. It wasn’t committed
in one brief moment of misjudgment.
[10] It was submitted on behalf of the student that the fact the test was not an
extremely significant part of the final mark should result in a lighter sanction. However,
in this case, the fact that the student made so much effort to advance his position through
dishonesty is of great concern to us. In our view, a significant sanction is required to
deter future occurrences.
[11] Mr. S.R. is obviously a very able and gifted student who will be given time
through this penalty to reflect on the significance of integrity and its role in personal
achievement. We sincerely urge him to so reflect and to recommence his academic
career, when possible, with these values in mind.
[12]

We impose the following sanctions:
1.

Suspension from the University of Toronto commencing January 1, 2003
through to August 31, 2004. It is the intent of the Tribunal to permit Mr.
S.R. to recommence his studies in September 2004;

2.

A notation on Mr. S.R.’s academic record for three years, commencing
January 1, 2003 through to December 31, 2005;

3.

This case is to be reported to the Provost who may publish it in accordance
with the Code without use of Mr. S.R.’s name;

4.

A grade of zero is to be recorded on Mr. S.R.’s transcript for the course
MATB24H3F taken in the fall of 2001.

I certify that this is the decision of the panel:

March 18, 2003

Janet E. Minor

Date

Janet E. Minor
Associate Chair

-4–

