Case #02-03-01

   DATE: March 18, 2003
   PARTIES: University of Toronto v. S.R. Hearing Date(s): January 21, and
   February 26, 2003
   Panel Members:
   Janet E. Minor, Associate Chair
   Chris Ambidge, faculty member
   Maria Kang, student member
   Appearances:
   Shaun Laubman, DLS, for S.R.
   Lily I. Harmer, for the University
   Eric Moore, Senior Lecturer, UTSC
   Diane Kruger, Forensic Document Examiner
   S.R., accused
   Trial Division - s. B.i.3(a) of Code â forged document - resubmitted
   altered mid-term test - individual monitored e-mail, obtained test and
   forged substitute document â alleged error by markers of test â
   position and evidence not credible â finding of guilt â premeditation
   and considerable effort - test not significant part of final mark â
   significant sanction required to deter future occurrences - grade
   assignment of zero for course; 18-month suspension; three-year notation
   on transcript; and report issued to Provost
   Student charged under s. B.i.3(a), and alternatively, under s. B.i.1(a)
   and s. B.i.3(b) of the Code. The charges related to allegations that
   the Student resubmitted an altered mid-term test paper. The Student
   claimed that an individual monitored his e-mail, obtained his test
   paper and forged a substitute back page. The Student also claimed that
   an error had been made by the markers of the test. The Panel found that
   even if there were an error, it could not accept the Studentâs claim
   that he would not notice have noticed it. The Panel found that the
   Studentâs position and his evidence were not credible by any standard.
   The Panel found the Student guilty of the charge under s. B.i.3(a) of
   the Code. The Panel found that the offence demonstrated premeditation
   and took considerable effort to commit. The Panel found that despite
   the fact that the test was not a significant part of the final mark in
   the course, the fact that the Student had made such effort to advance
   his position through dishonesty required a significant sanction to
   deter future occurrences. The Panel imposed a grade of zero in the
   course; an 18-month suspension; a three-year notation on the Studentâs
   academic record and transcript; and that a report be issued to the
   Provost.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12716
