THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
THE GOVERNING COUNCIL
REPORT # 340 OF THE ACADEMIC APPEALS COMMITTEE

January 29, 2010

Your Committee reports that it held a hearing on Monday, January 11, 2010. The
following members were present:
Professor Emeritus Ralph Scane (Chair)
Mr. Kenneth Davey
Ms. Min Hee Margaret Kim
Professor Ronald Kluger
Professor Elizabeth Smyth
Secretary: Ms. Natalie Ramtahal, Coordinator, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty
Grievances

Appearances:
For the Student Appellant:
Mr.M

S - (the Student)

For the University of Toronto at Scarborough:
Professor John Scherk
This is an application for leave to file an appeal late. The Notice of Appeal in the
substantive appeal to this Committee, from a decision of the Sub-Committee on
Academic Appeals (the Subcommittee) of the University of Toronto at Scarborough
(UTSC), dated November 17, 2004, was filed at the Office of the Governing Council on
December 1, 2008. The Student had communicated with staff at that office with respect
to filing an appeal near the end of September, 2008, and had filed a statement with
respect to his intended appeal on November 24, 2008.
The Terms of Reference of your Committee, as approved by the Governing Council on
December 12, 2005, provide:
"3.1.6. An appeal to the Committee shall, except in exceptional
circumstances, be commenced by filing a Notice of
Appeal in accordance with the rules of the Academic

2

Appeals Committee no later than 5:00 p.m. on the
ninetieth (90 th) calendar day after the date of the decision
from which the appeal is being taken. Where this deadline falls
on a day when the University is closed, the deadline shall be
deemed to fall on the next regular business day of the University
at 5:00 p.m.
In view of the great lapse of time from the date of the decision being appealed to the
filing of a Notice of Appeal to your Committee, the then Senior Chair of your Committee
(who is also the Chair of this panel) directed that the question whether "extraordinary
circumstances" existed which would justify an extension of time to file an appeal should
be heard by a full panel of your Committee. He also directed that, ifleave to file the
appeal late should be granted, the substantive appeal should be heard and determined by a
differently constituted panel of your Committee.
The appeal to the Subcommittee was from the denial of the Student's petition to be
allowed late withdrawal without academic penalty from all courses taken in the Fall,
2003 and Winter, 2004 sessions. The Student had petitioned and been permitted to defer
his Winter term examinations to August, 2004, in circumstances which are at the core of
his substantive appeal, and which will be adverted to later. He did very poorly in those
examinations, resulting in very low sessional GP As, which of course severely affected his
cumulative GPA over his total program. However, he did receive credit for four courses
towards the requirements for his B.Sc. degree. He ultimately graduated in June, 2008. He
has found his overall results an impediment to hopes of entering a medical degree or
postgraduate program, and now regards his 2004 decision to petition to defer his
examinations, rather than to seek late withdrawal from his entire program as taken to that
time, rather than writing the examinations and doing poorly, as an error of inexperience,
compounded by extraordinary stress which he was then suffering, and his worries about
extending his need for student loans. His petition and subsequent appeal to the
Subcommittee in 2004 were attempts to repair this perceived error, by allowing him to
retake the terms in question under better circumstances. Your Committee notes that,
given the views of the Petitions Committee and the Subcommittee at UTSC on the
petition he launched after receiving the results of the August, 2004 examinations, to
withdraw from the entire 2003 - 2004 academic year, the chance that he would have
obtained the same relief he was refused on his actual petition and appeal had he
petitioned for the same relief before taking the August examinations, instead of
petitioning for deferral of his examinations, is very speculative, at best.
The basis of the Student's appeal to the Subcommittee was that, on March 26, 2004, the
Student was arrested and charged with a serious criminal offence. Following his arrest, he
was detained in custody for about one month, and then released on bail under onerous
restrictive conditions, which kept him confined to his home, and only allowed to leave it
in the presence of his mother, even to attend classes. In January, 2005, the bail conditions
were modified to permit him to attend University classes without his mother. The Student
has always denied any involvement in the crimes in question. In May, 2005, all charges
against him were dropped. The Student alleged that, due to the effects of his confinement

3

and subsequent onerous restrictions upon his movements, certain medical problems
resulting from injuries allegedly suffered shortly following bis arrest, and subsequently
from attacks by other inmates, and the high degree of stress he was undergoing during
this period, his ability to function academically at his normal level was seriously impaired
when he wrote the deferred examinations in August, 2004. As mentioned above, the
Subcom..rnittee, while sympathizing with the Student over a situation over which it
acknowledged he had no control, found that the circumstances did not justify granting the
requested relief.
Whether, had the Student made a timely appeal to your Committee from the
Subcommittee's decision, or, in the present circumstances, if your Committee gives leave
for this appeal to proceed late, and it is subsequently heard and determined by another
panel of your Committee, the Student would be successful, is speculative. Your
Committee's view is that success was and is not impossible, but by no means certain.
The Student's grounds for arguing that he should be permitted to proceed with his appeal
to your Committee at this late date are that he discussed his situation, including the
possibility of a further appeal with an academic advisor at UTSC after receiving the result
of his appeal to the Subcommittee. He states that he was told that the likelihood of such a
sweeping request being granted was small, that delay in his program while waiting for a
result might result, and that he would probably be better off putting the unfortunate
episode completely behind him and doing the best he could with the remainder of his
program. He also states that he remained at that time under the same stress level, and that
he "was simply too exhausted to fight the University's decision."
In opposing the application, UTSC notes that, if the substantive appeal were to be
granted, the results actually obtained in the 2003 - 2004 academic year would have to be
vacated, to be replaced by the results obtained on the prospective rewriting of the
examinations. This would leave the Student short of the number of credits required for
the degree he presently holds. The Student has told your Committee that he is in fact
prepared to surrender his existing degree if his appeal should be successful, and he is
allowed to attempt to replace his 2003 -2004 academic year. Your Committee was not
given any advice as to whether such a surrender procedure exists. While this would
primarily be a matter for a panel considering the substantive appeal to consider, if leave
to proceed were to be given, it is also a consideration when determining the issue of leave
to proceed.
Your Committee considers that provision for extension of the stipulated time to institute
appeals is chiefly intended to protect against situations where appeals are not filed in
timely fashion due to mishap or inadvertence, where a genuine intention to appeal was
formed within the allowed time, or where some major event of illness or other
incapacitating situation prevented or seriously impeded a student's ability to formulate or
effectively implement an intention to appeal. That is not this case. While the Student was
still suffering some adverse effects from his unfortunate situation following his arrest,
these did not affect his ability to determine to, and to effectuate a petition for relief and
appeal to the Subcommittee from the de:rial of that petition in 2004. Your Committee

4

sees no reason to find that they so affected his ability to determine to, a..'ld to effectuate a
further appeal to your Corr.unittee ,vithin the allowable period following receipt of the
Subcommittee's decision.
Your Committee does not absolutely rule out the possibility that some other extraordinary
circumstances might also give rise to an extension for time to appeal, but it does not find
such circumstances here. The allegation that the Student was given misleading advice on
appealing to your Committee by an advisor at UTSC's Advisory Service does not meet
that requirement. No evidence was tendered by UTSC to contradict the Student's
allegations, and no explanation was offered as to why this evidence was not available to
be tendered. Accordingly, your Committee is entitled to assume that such evidence, if
tendered, would not assist the University's position. Nevertheless, even on that basis,
your Committee does not consider that such advice as described could give rise to relief
here, in the circumstances of this case. In hindsight, given the Student's present desire to
apply to a medical school, it might have been better for the Student to try his hand at a
final appeal. He might have succeeded on his appeal, and he might then have raised his
sessional and cumulative GP A sufficiently for a medical school or a graduate program to
admit him at the present time. However, advice as to the future lacks the benefit of
hindsight. Even with the present benefit of such hindsight, your Committee does not find
that the advice given at the time was wrong, or ill-advised. Stressed as he might have
been, the Student must still take responsibility for acting on the advice given.
Furthermore, your Committee has grave concerns as to the policy implications of
allowing a former student who has accepted his or her degree from returning thereafter,
long after the time for launching an appeal from a pre-degree academic decision has
passed, to appeal for the purpose of improving the appearance of the transcript of the
academic record leading to the degree he or she has accepted. Although it might be
conceivable that there could be circumstances so egregious that such relief should be
given, this is not such a case.

Decision
The application for permission to file a late Notice of Appeal is denied. The appeal is
quashed.

