Report 340

DATE:

   January 29, 2010

PARTIES:

   M.S.,Â  (the Student) v. UTSC

Hearing Date(s):

   January 11, 2010

Committee Members:

   Prof. Emeritus Ralph Scane, Chair
   Kenneth Davy
   Min Hee Margaret Kim
   Prof. Ronald Kluger
   Prof. Elizabeth M. Smyth

Appearances:

For the Student Appellant:

   M.S. (the Student)

For the University of Toronto at Scarborough:

   Professor John Scherk

   Application for leave to file a late appeal. The appeal related to a
   substantive appeal from a decision approximately four years prior
   issued by the Subcommittee on Academic Appeals at UTSC. The Student
   filed a statement with respect to his intended appeal to the Academic
   Appeals Committee on November 24, 2008. The Committee noted the Terms
   of Reference which stated appeals must be made within 90 calendar days
   after the date of the decision. The Committee examined the issue of
   whether extraordinary circumstances existed which would justify an
   extension of time. The Student had previously petitioned and been
   permitted to defer Winter term examinations in 2004 to August, 2004.
   The Student did poorly in those examinations resulting in low sessional
   GPAs, affecting the Studentâs cumulative GPA. The Student graduated in
   June, 2008 but found their overall results an impediment to hopes of
   entering a medical degree or postgraduate program. The Student regarded
   the 2004 decision to defer examinations rather than seek late
   withdrawal from the entire program as an error of inexperience
   compounded by extraordinary stress and worries about student loans. The
   basis of the Studentâs original appeal related to the Studentâs arrest
   and charge with a criminal offence. All charges against the Student
   were eventually dropped. The Student had always denied involvement with
   the crimes in question. The Student alleged that the effects of their
   confinement and arrest, medical problems, and the high degree of stress
   impeded his ability to function academically when he wrote the deferred
   examinations. The Subcommittee sympathized with the Student over the
   situation which it acknowledged the Student had no control, but found
   the circumstances did not justify granting the requested relief. The
   Studentâs grounds for arguing he should be permitted to proceed with an
   appeal at a later date were that he discussed the possibility of a
   further appeal with an academic advisor at UTSC after the initial
   appeal. The Student also stated that he was too exhausted to fight the
   Universityâs decision after the initial appeal. In opposition, UTSC
   noted that if the substantive appeal were to be granted, the Studentâs
   examination results would have had to be vacated and replaced by a
   prospective rewrite of the relevant examinations, leaving the Student
   short of the requisite credits for their degree. The Committee found
   that this issue was primarily a matter for a panel considering a
   substantive appeal, but nonetheless considered when determining the
   application for leave to file a late appeal. The Committee considered
   that the provision for an extension of time for appeals was intended to
   protect against situations where appeals were not filed due to mishap
   or inadvertence, where genuine intention to appeal was formed within
   the allowed time, or where some major event of illness or other
   situation prevented or impeded a studentâs ability to appeal. The
   Committee found that these circumstances did not exist in the Studentâs
   case. The Committee noted that the evidence that the Student was given
   misleading advice regarding his appeal was insufficient to grant the
   remedy he sought. Appeal dismissed.
   [1]View Report

References

   1. file:///media/12588
