Case 1055

   DATE: January 13, 2021

   PARTIES: University of Toronto v. Y.Y. (âthe Studentâ)

   HEARING DATE: October 15, 2020, via Zoom

   Panel Members:
   Ms. Ira Parghi, Chair
   Professor Richard Day, Faculty Panel Member
   Ms. Shirley Deng, Student Panel Member

   Appearances:
   Ms. Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg
   Rothstein LLP

   Not in Attendance:
   The Student

   In Attendance:
   Ms. Krista Kennedy, Administrative Clerk & Hearings Secretary, Office
   of the Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances, University of
   Toronto

   TheÂ StudentÂ was charged underÂ ss. B.i.1(b)Â and B.i.1(d)Â of
   theâ¯Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters, 1995â¯(the âCodeâ) on the
   basis that heÂ knowingly used or possessed an unauthorized aid,Â or
   aids,Â or obtained unauthorized assistanceÂ on an assignmentÂ and
   knowinglyÂ represented an idea or work of another as his own in an
   assignment to obtain an academic credit.Â In the alternative,
   theÂ StudentÂ was charged under s.Â B.i.3(b) of theÂ CodeÂ on the basis
   that theÂ StudentÂ knowingly engaged in a form of cheating, academic
   dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or misrepresentationÂ in order
   toÂ obtain academic credit or other academic advantageÂ in connection
   withÂ an assignment.

   Neither the Student nor a legal representative of
   theÂ StudentÂ appeared at the hearing.Â The UniversityâsÂ Policy on
   Official Correspondence with StudentsÂ provides that students enrolled
   at the University must maintain current contact information in their
   record in the Universityâs record of academic history and student
   information (âROSIâ) andÂ must update that information if it
   changes.Â Rule 9 of theÂ RulesÂ provides thatÂ service can
   beÂ effectedÂ viaÂ email to the studentâs email address in ROSI.Â The
   University provided evidence that theÂ StudentÂ had been served at his
   ROSI-listed email address with theâ¯chargesâ¯and notice of
   hearing.Â The Panel noted that there was evidence that
   theÂ StudentÂ had accessed his email account after service of
   theâ¯charges andÂ after various emails fromÂ Assistant Discipline
   Counsel enclosing disclosureÂ andÂ requests toÂ scheduleÂ the
   matter.Â Further, Assistant DisciplineÂ Counselâs office attempted to
   reach theÂ StudentÂ via telephone, yet their calls and messages went
   unanswered.Â TheÂ StudentÂ was subsequently provided an opportunity to
   provide submissions in relation to the request ofÂ the Provost of the
   UniversityÂ for the hearing to proceed electronicallyÂ due to the
   COVID-19 pandemic. TheÂ StudentÂ did not respond to this request and
   the hearing was ordered to proceed electronically.Â The
   charges,Â notice,Â and other email correspondence to theÂ StudentÂ went
   unanswered.Â Â Relying on RuleÂ 17 of
   theÂ RulesÂ andÂ ss.Â 6Â andÂ 7Â of theÂ SPPA,Â theÂ Panel ordered that
   the hearing proceed in theÂ StudentâsÂ absence as they found that
   reasonable noticeÂ had been provided to theÂ Student.

   Regarding the charges laid under ss.Â B.i.1(b)Â and B.i.1(d)Â of
   theÂ Code, theÂ Panel examined the evidence ofÂ Deanâs
   DesignateÂ andÂ the Professor who taughtÂ the course for which the
   assignment in question was submitted.Â The Panel heard evidence
   thatÂ theÂ work theÂ StudentÂ submitted was ofÂ high qualityÂ and
   sophisticated;Â a quality in which was inconsistent with
   theÂ StudentâsÂ previous work.Â The PanelÂ also received evidence from
   the Deanâs DesignateÂ thatÂ outlined the discussion between the Student
   and the Deanâs DesignateÂ at their meeting to discuss the assignment.
   The PanelÂ further received evidence that theÂ Student, when asked,
   could not define, distinguish or explainÂ certain terminology
   andÂ analysesÂ discussed inÂ his
   assignment.Â TheÂ StudentÂ deniedÂ having committed an academic
   offence.Â On the evidenceÂ presented by the University,Â theÂ Panel
   found thatÂ on the balance of probabilitiesÂ theÂ StudentÂ was guilty
   ofÂ one count of plagiarism and one count of unauthorized assistance,
   contrary to sections B.i.1(d) and B.i.1(b) of the Code,
   respectivelyÂ Given the Panelâs finding, the University withdrew the
   charge underâ¯s.Â B.i.3(b).

   In determining sanction,â¯theÂ Panel considered the principles and
   factors relevant to sanctionÂ discussed inÂ University of Toronto and
   Mr. C.Â (âMr. C. factorsâ)Â and determined thatÂ it was important to
   consider theÂ StudentâsÂ prior offences,Â the serious nature of the
   offence, the great detriment to the University and the strong need to
   deter others from committing similar offences.Â The Panel further
   considered theÂ Tribunalâs case law, including,Â University of Toronto
   and Y.G.Â andÂ University of Toronto and R.W.Â whichÂ indicate that
   plagiarism corrodes academic integrity at the UniversityÂ and
   undermines the relationship of trust between the University and its
   students. The Panel found that, for these reasons, plagiarism is
   considered a very serious offence that requires a serious
   penalty.Â Upon review of the relevant case law and the Mr. C. factors,
   the PanelÂ accepted the sanction proposed by the University.Â Without
   the Studentâs participation,Â the PanelÂ found no evidence of
   mitigating circumstances or factorsÂ that would prevent the Panel from
   imposing a serious penalty.Â TheÂ PanelÂ imposedÂ the following
   sanctions:Â a final grade of zero in the course;Â aÂ three-year
   suspension;Â aÂ four-year notation on the transcript;
   andÂ aÂ publication by theÂ ProvostÂ of a notice of the decision and
   sanctionsâ¯imposedâ¯with theÂ StudentâsÂ name withheld.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/29577
