Case No.: 1055
THE UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
IN THE MATTER OF charges of academic dishonesty made on November 25, 2019
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters, 1995
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Act, 1971, S.O. 1971, c. 56 as amended S.O. 1978,
c. 88
B E T W E E N:
UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
- and Y

Y

(the “Student”)

REASONS FOR DECISION
Hearing Date: October 15, 2020 via Zoom
Members of the Panel:
Ms. Ira Parghi, Lawyer, Chair
Professor Richard Day, Faculty Panel Member
Ms. Shirley Deng, Student Panel Member
Appearances:
Ms. Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg, Rothstein LLP
Hearing Secretary:
Ms. Krista Kennedy, Administrative Clerk and Hearing Secretary, Office of Appeals, Discipline and
Faculty Grievances
Not in Attendance:
The Student

I.

Introduction

1. The Trial Division of the University Tribunal was convened on October 15, 2020 to consider
charges brought against the Student by the University of Toronto (“the University”) pursuant to
the University of Toronto Code of Behavior on Academic Matters, 1995 (“the Code”) on November
25, 2019. The charges alleged that, on or about August 14, 2018, the Student represented as his
own an idea or expression of an idea or work of another in an assignment submitted in course
FAH392H5, entitled Topics in Modern Art and Architecture: Pre-Raphaelite Art in Context.

2. The charges were as follows:
1. On or about August 14, 2018, you knowingly represented as your own an idea or expression
of an idea or work of another in an assignment titled “Pre-Raphaelites: Exhibition
Catalogue Assignment 2.2” (“Exhibition Catalogue”) that you submitted in FAH392H5,
contrary to section B.I.1(d) of the Code.
2. On or about August 14, 2018, you knowingly used or possessed an unauthorized aid or aids
and/or obtained unauthorized assistance in connection with your Exhibition Catalogue,
contrary to B.I.1.(b) of the Code.
3. In addition and in the alternative to charges 1 and 2, you knowingly engaged in a form of
cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or misrepresentation not otherwise
described in the Code in order to obtain academic credit or other academic advantage of
any kind in connection with your Exhibition Catalogue, contrary to section B.I.3(b) of the
Code.

3. The particulars of the offences charged were as follows:
a) At all material times you were a student at the University of Toronto Mississauga.
b) In Summer 2018 you enrolled in FAH392H5, taught by Professor Farrukh Rafiq.
c) Students in FAH392H5 were required to submit an assignment in which you were to work
on your own to create a mini version of an exhibition catalogue in respect of certain art
works. You submitted the Exhibition Catalogue to complete this requirement.
d) You submitted the Exhibition Catalogue knowing that it contained ideas and the expression
of ideas of others.
e) You knowingly represented the work of another person or persons who wrote the Sources
as your own. You knowingly included in the Exhibition Catalogue ideas and expressions
that were not your own, but were the ideas and expressions of another person, or persons,
which you did not acknowledge in your Assignments.
f) You knowingly obtained the unauthorized assistance of another person or persons to write,
or to provide you with significant assistance to help you to write, the Exhibition Catalogue.

II.

Conduct of hearing in absence of Student

4. The Student did not appear at the time scheduled for the commencement of the hearing. Nor did
any representative of the Student. The Tribunal waited 15 minutes after the hearing was scheduled
to commence to allow for the Student to appear. The Student still did not appear.

5. Counsel for the University then sought an order that the hearing be permitted to proceed in the
Student’s absence. To proceed in the absence of the Student, the University was required to
demonstrate that the Student had been given “reasonable notice” of the hearing.
2

6. The University’s Policy on Official Correspondence with Students provides that students enrolled
at the University must maintain current contact information in their record in the University’s
record of academic history and student information (“ROSI”),and must update that information if
it changes. Pursuant to Rule 9 of the Tribunal’s Rules of Practice and Procedures (“Rules”), one
of the ways in which a Notice of Hearing may be served on a student is via email to the student’s
email address in ROSI.

7. Under Rule 17 of the Rules and sections 6 and 7 of the Statutory Powers Procedure Act (“SPPA”),
the Tribunal may proceed with an oral hearing in the absence of a student when reasonable notice
of the hearing has been given to the student in accordance with the Rules or SPPA (as the case may
be) and the student does not attend.

8. The University’s evidence in respect of service and attempts to communicate with the Student was
as follows:
a) On November 25, 2019, the University’s Office of Appeals, Discipline and Faculty
Grievances served the Student with the charges issued against him by Professor Heather
Boon, Vice-Provost, Faculty & Academic Life. These materials were served via email to
the email address that the Student had provided to the University in ROSI (the Student’s
“ROSI email address”).
b) On September 3, 2020, an articling student working with counsel for the University sent
various additional materials to the Student via email to the Student’s ROSI email address.
These materials included a letter from counsel, a disclosure brief relating to this matter,
and a copy of the University’s Policy on Official Correspondence with Students. The
Student was informed that important documents and correspondence would be sent to his
ROSI email address, and that he would be contacted to canvass potential dates for the
hearing.
c) As of October 5, 2020, the Student had last logged onto the online portal for students to
access their student information on September 7, 2020, and had last accessed the email
account corresponding to his ROSI email address on September 16, 2020. Both of these
dates fell after the materials discussed above were sent to the Student via email to his ROSI
email address.
d) On September 25, 2020, the articling student working with counsel for the University sent
a further email to the Student at his ROSI email address. The email re-attached the
disclosure documents, invited the Student to contact counsel’s office, and proposed
potential hearing dates for October 2020, asking the Student to advise if he were not
available on any of those dates.
e) Also on September 25, 2020, the articling student called the phone number that the Student
had provided to the University in ROSI. A message identified the phone number as
belonging to the Student. The articling student left a voice mail message identifying herself
and asking that the Student contact her.

3

f) On September 30, 2020, the articling student called the same phone number for a second
time. Again, a message identified the phone number as belonging to the Student. The
articling student left a voice mail message identifying herself and asking that the Student
contact her.
g) On October 5, 2020, the articling student served the Student with three affidavits and
explained to the Student that the University intended to rely on the affidavits during the
hearing. She invited the Student to advise University counsel if he wished to cross-examine
on any of the affidavits. These affidavits were served via email to the Student’s ROSI email
address.
h) On October 6, 2020, the articling student served the Student with an additional affidavit,
again via email to the Student’s ROSI email address.
i)

In connection with a request by the Provost of the University that the hearing proceed
electronically, I issued a Direction in which I invited the Student to file submissions as to
why the hearing should proceed in person and not by Zoom. I requested that the Student
provide any such submissions by October 7, 2020. A copy of this Direction and
accompanying email correspondence from the University was sent to the Student via email
to his ROSI email address.

j)

On October 7, 2020, having received no submissions from the Student or anyone on his
behalf, I issued a Direction that the hearing proceed electronically. A copy of this Direction
was provided to the Student via email to his ROSI email address.

k) Also on October 7, 2020, the Student was also served with a Notice of Electronic Hearing
and was provided with a Best Practice Guide and instructions relating to the Zoom platform
that would be used to conduct the electronic hearing. These materials were sent to him via
email to his ROSI email address.
l)

On October 8, 2020, the articling student working with counsel for the University served
the Student with a further affidavit in respect of this matter, again via email to his ROSI
email address.

m) As of October 8, 2020, the articling student had not received any “bounce back” messages
indicating that her emails to the Student could not be delivered.

9. In light of the totality of the evidence regarding the efforts made to provide notice to and otherwise
communicate with the Student, the Tribunal concluded that reasonable notice of the hearing had
been provided to the Student in compliance with the Rules and the SPPA. An order permitting the
hearing to proceed in the Student’s absence was therefore granted.

III.

Liability

4

10. Because the Student was not present, the hearing proceeded on the basis that he denied the charges
against him. The onus was on the University to establish on the balance of probabilities that the
Student had committed the offences charged.

11. The Tribunal received evidence from Professor Farrukh Rafiq, a Sessional Instructor in the
Department of Visual Studies at the University, who taught the course during which the Student
allegedly committed the offences at issue. Professor Rafiq’s evidence was as follows:
a) The syllabus for the course expressly discussed the importance of academic integrity and
the issue of plagiarism in writing assignments. It cited the portion of the Code that identifies
as potential academic offences the acts of “[u]sing someone else’s ideas of words without
appropriate acknowledgement” and “[o]btaining or providing unauthorized assistance on
any assignment”. It also stated: “If you have questions or concerns about what constitutes
appropriate academic behaviour or appropriate research and citation methods, you are
expected to seek out additional information on academic integrity from your instructor or
from other institutional resources”.
b) The assignment in respect of which the alleged offences occurred involved the preparation
of an exhibition catalogue. Students were asked to create a small-scale version of an
exhibition catalogue containing an introductory essay and entries on two works of art.
Students were required to read, sign, and attach an Academic Integrity Checklist to their
exhibition catalogue.
c) The Student submitted his Academic Integrity Checklist when he submitted his exhibition
catalogue assignment on August 14, 2018. On his Academic Integrity Checklist, he
confirmed that he had appropriately cited the source(s) of the idea(s) in his exhibition
catalogue and that any proofreading by another was limited to indicating areas of concern
that he then corrected himself. The Student’s exhibition catalogue assignment contained
30 endnotes.
d) The Student’s exhibition catalogue assignment contained an introduction and conclusion,
neither of which were required. This surprised Professor Rafiq, because neither the
instructions for the exhibition catalogue assignment nor the sample exhibition catalogue
that he had provided to his students included an introduction and conclusion.
e) The sophistication and high quality of the Student’s exhibition catalogue assignment also
surprised Professor Rafiq, who by this time had seen and graded several of the Student’s
previous assignments. In Professor Rafiq’s assessment, there was a significant difference
between the writing style shown in the Student’s earlier assignments and that displayed in
his exhibition catalogue assignment. Professor Rafiq’s evidence on this point was concrete
and replete with specific examples, including the following:
i. An earlier essay that the Student submitted on July 16, 2018 contained spelling or
grammar mistakes in most of its sentences, whereas the exhibition catalogue
assignment contained virtually no such errors.

5

ii. The Student’s earlier work demonstrated a simplistic writing style, which the
exhibition catalogue assignment did not. Professor Rafiq pointed to specific
examples of this in his evidence.
iii. The Student’s earlier work relied on what Professor Rafiq characterized as basic
and superficial analysis and observations, whereas the analysis and observations
in the exhibition catalogue assignment were much deeper. Again, Professor Rafiq
pointed to specific examples in his evidence.
iv. The quality of the Student’s writing in the exhibition catalogue assignment was, in
Professor Rafiq’s assessment, above average for a third-year course such as this
one, and was of a much higher quality than the Student’s previous work.
v. After reading the Student’s exhibition catalogue assignment, Professor Rafiq felt
that it was “more likely than not” that parts or all of it had not been authored by
the Student.
f) Based on the Student’s performance in the course overall, a mark of zero on the exhibition
catalogue assignment would have yielded a final mark in the course of 39%.

12. The Tribunal also received the evidence of Professor Charles Elkabas, a Professor in the
Department of Language Studies at the University and the Dean’s Designate in this matter.
Professor Elkabas met with the Student to discuss the exhibition catalogue assignment on
December 10, 2018. Professor Elkabas’ evidence regarding this meeting was as follows:
a) At the start of the meeting, he provided the Student with the standard warning, which
included a warning that, if the Student made any statement or admission in the meeting, it
could be received in evidence against him in the hearing of these charges.
b) The Student initially advised Professor Elkabas that he worked harder on the exhibition
catalogue assignment than he had on previous course assignments, and finished the
exhibition catalogue assignment early. He showed it to a friend who told him that the
grammar was not good. He showed it to a second friend who pointed out sentences that the
Student changed on his own over the span of 10-20 minutes. The Student also used the free
version of Grammarly to check the grammar in the exhibition catalogue assignment.
c) Professor Elkabas then asked the Student why he did not go to the Academic Skills Centre.
The Student stated that he did not have enough time to do so. Professor Elkabas noted that
the Student had indicated that he had finished the exhibition catalogue assignment early.
The Student then responded that he does not go to the Academic Skills Centre and that he
still had 30% of the exhibition catalogue assignment to finish when he met with his friend.
d) Professor Elkabas also asked the Student to explain the meaning of some of the words used
in his exhibition catalogue assignment, and the Student was unable to do so. The specific
examples that Professor Elkabas cited in this regard included the following:
i. When asked about the word “relegated” in the context of the statement “Women
in the Pre-Raphaelite movement society were often relegated to roles that were
6

considered ‘craft’ as opposed to full-blown artists,” the Student stated that
“relegated” meant “strong connection.”
ii. When asked what “patrons” meant, he stated that he did not know.
iii. When asked what “shackles” meant, he stated that he did not know.
iv. When asked to explain the difference between the terms “emigrant” and
“immigrant”, both of which he used in the exhibition catalogue assignment, he
could not.
e) Professor Elkabas asked the Student a number of substantive questions about the discussion
and analysis contained in the exhibition catalogue assignment. In Professor Elkabas’
assessment, the Student’s responses to these questions were not appropriate and did not
reflect the sophisticated nature of the work contained in the exhibition catalogue
assignment. Professor Elkabas gave a number of examples of this in his evidence, including
the following:
i. When asked to explain the concept of “Victorian ideals of life”, the Student stated
that “Victorian time in 19th century is different and at that time they had some
thought about what life should be like. It is high class life.”
ii. When asked “who is Elizabeth?” the Student stated, “PRB [Pre- Raphaelite
Brotherhood]. This brotherhood was founded by some gentleman so they
influenced men and women so they were brotherhood and sisterhood. We always
mentioned other guys work.”
iii. When asked to explain the concept behind the sentence “he demonstrates her
power while also showing her release (hence the title) from the patriarchal bonds
of a terrible marriage”, he stated that “because this painting is all about the strong
man and another way, it all...” but did not finish his explanation.
iv. When asked to explain what he meant by the sentence “Yet the reality is that
emigrants were keenly selected as young and married people, as opposed to deviant
vagabonds”, he stated that it meant “immigration”.
v. When asked to explain the concept of a “sexualized idealization”, he stated that
“in those times sex is now different.”
f) Professor Elkabas asked the Student to explain the bibliography of the exhibition catalogue
assignment. The Student stated that he did not find all of the sources contained in the
bibliography; rather, he found only sentences and paragraphs from the sources. The Student
further stated that he did not remember whether he used every item listed in the
bibliography and that he did not study the content of each such item.
g) The Student confirmed that he understood and was familiar with the academic offence of
obtaining unauthorized assistance and that he was familiar with the Code. He denied having
committed an academic offence.
7

h) In Professor Elkabas’ assessment, the Student’s responses to him during the meeting were
entirely inconsistent with the high quality of the exhibition catalogue assignment that the
Student had submitted.

13. No evidence was tendered on behalf of the Student, either by way of affidavit or in person at the
hearing, which the Student did not attend.

14. The Tribunal found the evidence proffered by the University as to the stark differences between
the Student’s earlier course work, on the one hand, and the exhibition catalogue assignment, on the
other, to be highly compelling. These differences are readily apparent along a number of
dimensions, including the depth and quality of the analysis, the sophistication of expression, the
organization of thought, proper spelling, and correct grammar.

15. The Tribunal was also struck by the evidence regarding the Student’s inability, during his
discussion with Professor Elkabas, to explain or even loosely describe many of the concepts and
terminology that were so central to the analysis contained in the exhibition catalogue assignment.

16. Having considered all of the evidence in the hearing, the Tribunal concluded that, on the balance
of probabilities, the Student was guilty of one count of plagiarism and one count of unauthorized
assistance, contrary to sections B.I.1(d) and B.I.1(b) of the Code, respectively.

17. In light of the Tribunal’s finding on this charge, the second charge, relating to cheating, academic
dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or misrepresentation not otherwise described in the Code in order
to obtain academic credit or other academic advantage of any kind, contrary to section B.I.3(b) of
the Code, was withdrawn.

IV.

Penalty

18. On the issue of sanction, counsel for the University requested the following:
a) that the Student receive a final grade of zero in FAH392H5 in Summer 2018;
b) that the Student be suspended from the University for a period of three years;
c) that the sanction be recorded on the Student’s academic record and transcript to the effect
that he was sanctioned for academic misconduct for a period of four years; and
d) that this case be reported to the Provost for publication of a notice of the decision of the
Tribunal and the sanction or sanctions imposed, with the name of the Student withheld.

19. The Tribunal received evidence from Professor Elkabas regarding the Student’s history of
academic offences at the University. His evidence was as follows:
a) In connection with a fall 2016 course, he admitted to obtaining unauthorized assistance in
an assignment. By way of sanction, in March 2017 he was given a grade of zero for the
assignment in question and a notation on his transcript for 12 months.
8

b) In connection with a second fall 2016 course, the Student admitted to obtaining
unauthorized assistance. In March 2018, he was given a sanction of a grade of zero in the
course and a notation on his transcript for 24 months. This was approximately five months
before the events at issue in this matter.
c) In both cases, the Student was informed that he was being treated leniently because he had
shown remorse and was truthful regarding his conduct. He was urged to seek assistance
from the Academic Skills Centre. He was also warned that any subsequent allegations of
misconduct would usually be referred to this Tribunal.

20. The Tribunal considered previous decisions it had rendered in cases involving academic
misconduct of this nature. In those decisions, the sanctions handed down were consistent with the
one sought by the University in this case. Of note, the Tribunal’s decisions offer considerable
support for the proposition that a first-time plagiarism offence generally results in a two-year
suspension and a second offence of plagiarism generally results in a three-year suspension (e.g.
University of Toronto and Mr. L. (December 3, 2015), University of Toronto and B.S. (January 17,
2014), University of Toronto and S.B. (November 14, 2007), University of Toronto and M.H.H.
(January 12, 2009), University of Toronto and D.O.S. (October 7, 2009), University of Toronto and
M.S.D. (June 24, 2020), University of Toronto and G.Z. (December 3, 2019), University of Toronto
and R.W. (February 22, 2017)).

21. The Tribunal therefore concluded that the sanction sought by the University was consistent with
the case law and would further some sense of uniformity or proportionality so that similar penalties
are imposed on offences committed in similar circumstances.

22. The Tribunal also considered the principles and factors relevant to sanction as articulated in
University of Toronto and Mr. C. (November 5, 1976, Case No. 1976/77-3). The Tribunal
determined that these factors supported the imposition of the usual three-year suspension in cases
of repeat plagiarism, as was the case here. The Tribunal observed the following:
a) Because the Student did not participate in the hearing, there was no evidence before the
Tribunal as to any extenuating circumstances that might have weighed in the Student’s
favour by mitigating or explaining his conduct.
b) Likewise, because the Student did not participate in the hearing, there was no evidence
before the Tribunal as to the character of the Student, other than the facts relating to this
offence and the Student’s two prior offences.
c) The Student has a prior record of academic offences, in the second of which he received
his sanction letter only months before committing the offence now at issue. The Tribunal
accepted the University’s submission that the Student did not appear to have learned from
his mistakes.
d) The offence is serious in nature and causes great detriment to the University and its
students. A number of Tribunal decisions (e.g. University of Toronto and Y.G. (September
28, 2015), University of Toronto and R.W. (February 22, 2017)) have observed that
plagiarism corrodes academic integrity at the University and undermines the relationship
9

of trust between the University and its students. For these reasons, plagiarism is considered
in the cases to be a very serious offence that warrants a serious penalty.
e) There is a strong need to deter others from committing a similar offence, for many of the
reasons noted above. This type of offence poses a grave threat to the integrity of the
University’s processes for evaluating students, is profoundly unfair to other students, and
jeopardizes the University’s reputation.

23. In all of the circumstances, the Tribunal was satisfied that the appropriate sanction was the one
sought by the University.
VI.

Order

24. At the conclusion of the hearing, the Tribunal made the following order:
a) that the hearing may proceed in the absence of the Student;
b) that the Student was guilty of one count of plagiarism and one count of unauthorized
assistance, contrary to sections B.I.1(d) and B.I.1(b) of the Code, respectively;
c) that the Student will receive a final grade of zero in FAH392H5 in Summer 2018;
d) that the Student will be suspended from the University for a period of three years, from the
date of the Order to October 14, 2023;
e) that the sanction will be recorded on the Student’s academic record and transcript to the
effect that he was sanctioned for academic misconduct for a period of four years, from the
date of the Order to October 14, 2024; and
f) that this case shall be reported to the Provost for publication of a notice of the decision of
the Tribunal and the sanction or sanctions imposed, with the name of the Student withheld.

Dated at Toronto, this 13th day of January 2021.

10

Ira Parghi, Chair

11

