Case #595

   DATE: October 12, 2010
   PARTIES: University of Toronto v. S.K.
   Hearing Date(s): September 24, 2010
   Panel Members:
   Bonnie Goldberg, Chair
   Professor Louis Florence, Faculty Member
   Vy Nguyen, Student Member
   Appearances:
   Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel for the University
   Betty-Ann Campbell, Law Clerk, Paliare Roland Barristers
   Professor Eleanor Irwin, Deanâs Designate
   Rita Pearsall, Associate Registrar
   Don MacMilan, Former Registrar
   Elena Maltseva, Teaching Assistant
   Trial Division â s. B.I.1(b); s. B.I.3(b) of Code â unauthorized exam
   aids â exam notes â old exam booklet â peremptory hearing â reasonable
   notice of hearing given â Statutory Powers Procedure Act â hearing not
   attended â finding on evidence of guilt â no prior academic offence â
   University submission on penalty rejected â longer suspension imposed â
   sentencing principle â pre-meditation â possession of an unauthorized
   aid â use of an unauthorized aid â Sopinka principles â expectation of
   knowledge and understanding of academic integrity â failure to
   participate in any stage of the process â nature of the offence â
   importance of deterrence â grade assignment of zero for course;
   three-year suspension; four-year notation on transcript; and report to
   Provost
   Student charged with two offences under s. B.I.1(b) and s. B.I.3(b) of
   the Code. The charges related to the allegation that the Student
   possessed an unauthorized exam aid in the form of an old exam answer
   booklet that contained notes. The Panel was convened on a peremptory
   basis to consider the charges laid against the Student. The University
   introduced the Notice of Hearing given to the Student and advised it
   had had no contact with the Student. The University led evidence in
   form of an affidavit, accompanied by extensive documentation of the
   Discipline Counsel and the Divisionâs attempts to locate the Student.
   The Panel accepted that the Division attempted to schedule a meeting
   with the Student on multiple occasions. After approximately 9 months,
   the Student contacted the Professorâs office. The Student ultimately
   did not attend the meeting. The Panel further accepted that for a
   period of four months Discipline Counsel for the University attempted
   to contact the Student using information she had listed on the student
   information system. The Student was provided with a Notice of Hearing
   for a scheduled hearing date. At the Studentâs request, the hearing was
   adjourned and a later hearing scheduled and made peremptory. A Notice
   of Hearing was sent to the Student regarding this hearing. The Student
   did not attend the hearing. The University submitted that notice given
   to the Student was reasonable and in accordance with the requirements
   of the Statutory Powers Procedure Act. The University relied on a
   University of Toronto policy that students are responsible for
   maintaining a current mailing address on the student information system
   in this matter. The Panel concluded that reasonable notice had been
   provided and proceeded in the Studentâs absence. The University
   submitted that there was enough evidence to conclude that the Student
   more than likely brought the additional answer booklet into the
   examination, that the booklet contained notes, and that the Student
   used these notes to answer examination questions. The Panel found that
   the University proved on a balance of probabilities that the Student
   possessed and used unauthorized aids. The Panel found the Student
   guilty of the offence under s. B.I.1(b). Charges under s. B.I.3(b) were
   withdrawn. The Panel rejected the University Submission on Penalty and
   chose to impose a longer suspension and notation period than that
   requested by the University. The Panel considered the case of Mr. C.
   and the Sopinka principles in its decision on penalty. The Panel noted
   the actions were pre-meditated; the Student both possessed and used the
   unauthorized aid;Â  the Student had been enrolled for several semesters
   and would have been expected to know the Universityâs expectations with
   respect to academic integrity at the time of the offences; the Student
   had failed to participate in any stage of the process and the Panel had
   no evidence of mitigating factors; and that the nature of the offence
   undermines the reputation of the University and the work of other
   students. The Panel imposed a final grade of zero in the Course, a
   three-year suspension, a four-year notation of the academic misconduct
   on the Studentâs academic record, and that a report to the Provost be
   issued.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12755
