THE UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
IN THE MATTER OF charges of academic dishonesty made on May 3, 201 O;
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University o/Toro11t0Act, 1971, S.O. 1971, c.56, as amended
S.O. 1978, c.88
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code ofBehaviour 011 Academic
lvfallers, 1995;
BETWEEN:
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
-and-

s

K

Date of Hearing: September 24, 2010
Members of the Panel:
• Ms. Bonnie Goldberg, Co-Chair
• Professor Louis Florence, Department of Management, Faculty Panel Member
• Ms. Vy Nguyen, Student Panel Member
Appearances:
• Ms. Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Barristers
• Ms. Betty-Ann Campbell, Law Clerk, Paliare Roland Barristers
• Dr. Eleanor Irwin, Dean's Designate, University of Toronto, Scarborough
• Ms. Rita Pearsall, Associate Registrar, University of Toronto, Scarborough
• Mr. Don MacMillan, Former Registrar, University of Toronto, Scarborough
• Ms. Elena Maltseva, Teaching Assistant for POLB92H3: Revolution, Democracy and
Authoritarianism in Modern Europe, University of Toronto, Scarborough
In Attendance:
• Ms. Natalie Ramtahal, Coordinator, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances
Not in Attendance:
• Ms. S
K

, the Student

REASONS FOR DECISION

1. The Trial Division of the University Tribunal was convened on a peremptory basis on
September 24, 2010 to consider charges brought under the Code of Behaviour of Academic
1\1atters, 1995 ("Code") and laid against the Student by letter dated May 3, 2010 from the

Vice-Provost, Fac\llty and Academic Life, Professor Edith Hillan.

Preliminary Issue

2. Neither the Student nor a representative for the Student appeared at the hearing. The
University proposed to proceed in the Student's absence.

3. The University commenced the hearing by introducing the Notice of Hearing, dated August
26, 2010, outlining the charges against the Student arising O\lt of her alleged behaviour on or
about April 14, 2009.

4. The University advised that it had had no contact with the Student since Allgust 6, 2010, and
that was only after extensive attempts made to contact the Student by both Discipline
Counsel and before that, the Student's Division. The University led evidence in the form of
an affidavit from Ms. Betty Ann Campbell, a law clerk at Paliare Roland, the firm that is
counsel to the University. Ms. Campbell attended the hearing to testify as to the contents of
the affidavit. The affidavit was accompanied by extensive doc\lmentation of Ms. Campbell's
attempts to locate the St\ldent and the information provided to Ms. Campbell regarding the
Division's attempts to do the same.

5. The Panel accepts the following chronology of events. With respect to the Divisional meeting
as outlined in the Code, the Dean's Designate, Professor Irwin attempted to schedule a
meeting with or to contact the Student on multiple occasions, beginning on or about April 21,
2009 until December 8, 2009. Throughout this period, all communications were directed to
the Student via her ROSI residential address, email address and telephone numbers. In
January 2010, the Student contacted Professor Irwin's office to arrange a meeting. Professor

Irwin's office made several attempts to arrange a meeting date to accommodate the Student's
attendance in Toronto. The Student did not attend the meeting, ultimately scheduled for
February 23, 2010. The Student had no further contact with the Division. Thus, the Division
referred the matter to the Provost.

6. With respect to the Tribunal hearing, the Panel notes that on May 3, 2010, the Student was
charged with academic offences under the Code. From May 21, 2010 to August 5, 2010, Ms.
Campbell attempted to contact the Student using the information she had listed on the
Student information system ("ROSI"). During this period, the Student was provided with the
University's disclosure, canvassed about her availability to attend the hearing, and provided
with the Notice of Hearing for the hearing's originally scheduled date (August 18, 2010).
Throughout this period, all comnrnnications were directed to the Student via her ROSI
residential address, email address and telephone numbers. In addition, the University used
two personal email addresses that the Student had previously used to communicate with the
University. During this period, correspondence sent by courier was returned to the
University. As a result, the University resent the information via email to the known email
addresses. Further, Ms. Campbell provided information as to her attempts to find another
home address for the Student, which involved a motor vehicle search and contact with
current residents at a rental unit.

7. On August 6, 2010, Ms. Campbell spoke with the Student about the hearing scheduled for
August I 8, 20 l 0 when the Student answered a phone call from Ms. Campbell. The Student
confn'med the accuracy of the contact information used by the University. When informed
by Ms. Campbell of the upcoming August 18, 2010 hearing date, the St11dent indicated that
she would prefer a hearing scheduled for September. She also indicated to Ms. Campbell that
she wanted to anange a meeting with the Dean's Designate. This was the last known verbal
communication between the University and the Student. Ms. Campbell followed up with an
email confinning the details of the telephone conversation.

3

8. On or about August 12, 20 I 0, the University began receiving "bounce backs" of emails sent
to the Student at her official email address. Emails sent to the Student's two other email
acco1mts did not bounce back.

9. As requested by the Student, the August 18, 2010 hearing was adjourned. The Co-Chair
signed an order making the September 24, 20 IO hearing peremptory. On August 26, 20 I 0,
the Notice of Hearing was sent to the Student.

10. Counsel for the University submitted that the notice given to the Student was reasonable, and
in accordance with the requirements of the Sta/11/0,y Powers Procedure Act. Counsel
submitted that the evidence shows that that the Student had no interest in taking part in the
proceedings, and had made a conscious choice not to participate. Counsel relied on a
University policy, which became effective September I, 2006, indicating that students are
responsible for maintaining and advising the University on ROSI of a current and valid
mailing address, as well as for the use of the University issued email address.

11. Based on the information before us, the Panel concluded that the University had provided
reasonable notice to the Student. The Panel concluded that other than one contact in January

2010 with the Division, and then Ms. Campbell's phone call to the Student on August 6,
2010, the Student has not responded to any communications from the University. Further, it
is apparent from the information before us that the Student, when contacted briefly on
August 6, 2010, used that conversation to adjourn the scheduled hearing on the August 18,

20l0 yet made no sincere attempt to participate again in the process. This was similar to her
behaviour when the Division arranged a February 23, 2010 meeting, at which the Student did
not attend.

12. The Panel was satisfied that the University had taken many steps to try to contact the
Student, and that the Student had failed to make herself available to the University or to
acknowledge communications from the University repeatedly. The information before us
persuades us that the Student received the information sent by the University. The evidence
is clear that by August 6, 2010, the Student was aware that she was facing academic

4

discipline charges, that a hearing was scheduled, and that the University was prepared to
adjourn the hearing to accommodate the Student. However, the Student never commtmicated
again with the University. Further, the evidence demonstrated the Student's unwillingness to
attend the Dean's meeting, also scheduled to accommodate the Student.

13. Accordingly, the Panel concluded that reasonable notice had been provided, and that it would
be improper to permit a Student to avoid facing charges by a complete failnre to respond to
the University's many attempts to reach her and to accommodate her. Similarly, the Panel
concluded that any further adjournments would not be reasonable, given that the Student has
demonstrated a pattern of behaviour consistent with someone who appeared unwilling to
participate in any patt of the process.
14. Therefore, the Panel concluded that reasonable notice had been provided and was prepared
to proceed in the Student's absence, in accordance with the provisions of the Statl//01J'
Powers Procedure Act.

Hearing on the :Facts

15. The charges are as follows:

i.

On or about April 14, 2009, you knowingly used or possessed an
unauthorized aid during and in connection with the final examination in
POLB92H3 ("Course"), contrary to section B.l.l(b) of the Code.

ii.

In the alternative to charge #1, on or about April 14, 2009, you knowingly
engaged in a fo1m of cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud
or misrepresentation not otherwise described in the Code in order to obtain
academic credit, or other academic advantage of any kind, with respect to
the final examination in the Course, contrary to section B.I.3(b) of the
Code.

16. The Particulars of the charges are as follows:

i.

At all material times, you were registered as a Student at the University of
Toronto.

5

11.

In the Fall term of 2008, you enrolled in the Course, Revolution, Democracy
and Authoritarianism in Modern Europe, which was taught by Lucan Way at
University of Toronto Scarborough.

m.

You wrote a deferred final examination in the Course which was held on April
14, 2009 (the "Examination"). The Examination was worth 45% of the final
grade in the Course.

iv.

You were not permitted to bring any aids into the Examination.

v.

You brought an exam answer booklet marked "TERM" into the Examination
which contained 11 pages of notes relevant to the Course ("Course Notes").
You were not permitted to possess or use those Course Notes during the
Examination.

vi.

You brought the Course Notes into the Examination in order to obtain an
academic advantage.

F:vide11ce

17. In support of the charges, the University called three witnesses and provided a Book of
Documents.

18. The first witness was Ms. Rita Pearsall, the Associate Registrar of the University of Toronto
at Scarborough ("UTSC"). She testified that following the creation of a new defened
examination policy, UTSC was inundated with requests for defened examinations.
Accordingly, the UTSC created a deferred examination sitting date to accommodate all the
Students sitting deferred examinations from the fall 2008 session. This sitting was set for
April 14, 2009. Ms. Pearsall was responsible for implementing a system to administer the
deferred examination sitting. Specifically, she created a process whereby every student
sitting for an examination was provided with a specially marked envelope, whose cover page
set out the details of the examination including the length, the number of booklets provided,
and whether aids were provided, The envelope contained each student's specific examination
questions and the appropriate number of booklets. She explained that when students entered
the room, their ID was checked, and they were provided with their specific envelope. They
were asked to leave their bags and coats at the front of the room, and sat in an assigned area.

6

At the conclusion of the examination, students were required to place all their material back
into the envelope,

19. Ms. Pearsall explained that the examination booklets used for April 14, 2009 were from the

"J" series, but she acknowledged that one of the Student's three booklets was from the "K"
series, They were not using the "Term" series booklets, as these were the booklets used by
Divisions when the students wrote term tests, These booklets were not in use for final
examinations,

20, Ms, Pearsall testified that she witnessed the Student "flustered" and unwilling to place
everything back into the envelope, Ms, Pearsall observed the Student "delaying" the return of
the materials into the envelope. However, the Student (at Ms. Pearsall's request) finally put
all the material into the envelope. Ms, Pearsall collected the Student's envelope but she
testified that the Student then returned and asked for the envelope, Ms, Pearsall did not give
her the envelope. Ms. Pearsall then observed the Student leave the examination room and
return again. She identified the Student to the Registrar, Don MacMillan, and indicated that
there might be a problem with the Student's examination. Ms. Pearsall recalled noticing that
something was not right with the Student's materials because she thought she observed a
booklet marked "Term" as these were not in use during that examination period. She did not
know the Student prior to the events of April 14, 2009.

21. The University then called the Registrar, Don MacMillan, He reviewed for the Panel the
careful process created by the University to oversee the integrity of this defened examination
sitting date. He explained that Ms. Pearsall was responsible for creating a process that
ensured that each Student was provided with a specially designated envelope containing the
Student's examination and the appropriate examination booklets, Further, the envelopes
contained specific information for each course about whether aids were allowed. He
described for the Panel that on the date in question, Students entered the room, were given
the appropriate envelope by invigilation staff and were seated at specially marked tables.

7

22. Mr. MacMillan testified that he left the examination after it started but returned for the
collection of the "two hour" examinations. He recalled that Ms. Pearsall identified the
Student to him, and indicated that she was reluctant to return all her 111aterials in the
envelope. Mr. MacMillan opened the envelope and saw that there were fom booklets inside,
including one marked "Term." He reviewed its contents and believed it to be "crib notes."
lv!r. MacMillan recalled that the Student returned to the examination and indicated that she
wanted the envelope back because she had forgotten something. Mr. MacMillan testified that
at that point he stated that he believed that an atte111pt had been 111ade to cheat and indicated
that the Student could not have the envelope and he would be reporting the matter.

23. Mr. MacMillan explained to the Panel that the "Ter111" booklets were only used for tenn tests
and not final examinations. This examination sitting used the "J" series, but if they had nm
out while packing envelopes, they would have used the next alphanumeric in the series,
hence the Student having a "K" booklet in her envelope. Students who required additional
booklets during the examination would have been given booklets from the same series. In his
opinion, it was unlikely that they would be given a "Tenn" booklet. The examination
booklets came out of boxes stored in a secure location under the control of the Registrar's
Office, and were labeled sequentially. The boxes brought to the examination room as
"extras" would have been sequentially labeled and part of the same series.

24. Then the Panel heard from Ms. Elena Maltscva. Ms. Maltseva has been the tutorial assistant
in the Course for the past five years, and has always been responsible for marking the final
examination. She explained that she knew the Sll1dent very well, as she often pa11icipated in
the Course. She explained that no aids were ever allowed for this Course's final examination.
Ms. Maltseva reviewed the Course syllabus and the contents of the final examination. She
reviewed the contents of the "Tenn" booklet in some detail for the Panel, and compared the
contents of the booklets labeled "J" and "K," which contained the Student's answers to the
examination questions. Ms. Maltseva's review of the material led her to several conclusions.
First, she noted that some of the material in the "Tenn" booklet was not covered by any
question on the examination; accordingly it would have been extremely unlikely that a
sll1dent making "rough notes" would have spent time preparing answers to questions that

8

were not asked. Similarly, some of the contents of the "Term" booklet contained extensive,
detailed answers to questions that required only a "short" answer. Further, many of the
questions would not have required the Student quote the statistical and chronological detail
included in the "Term" booklet. As well, the "Term" booklet contained a list of Course
readings, with relevant page numbers. Further, the contents of the "Term" booklet were
repeated nearly verbatim in support of some of the Student's answers in the examination
booklets.
25. The Panel reviewed the documentary evidence provided by the University. The Panel
reviewed the actual envelope provided for the Student's deferred examination in the Course,
noting that the examination was listed as two hours in length, three booklets were provided,
and no aids were allowed. The Student's work included writing in 2 "J" series booklets, and
1 "K" series booklet. These three booklets were labeled as part of the Student's examination
materials (i.e. 1/3, 2/3 etc. with the Student's student number and name). The Student also
returned a fourth booklet marked "Tenn". The cover of this booklet was blank. The Panel
reviewed the contents of all four booklets.

The University's Submissions

26. The University, in its closing submission, argued that there was more than enough
infonnation evidence before us to conclude that the Student more than likely brought the
"Tenn" booklet into the examination with her, that this booklet contained notes, and that the
Student used these notes to answer the examination questions. There was no reasonable
explanation for the contents of the notes, given that it was a two-hom examination and the
booklet contained nearly 11 pages of densely written notes. Further, some of these notes bore
a high degree of similarity to the Student's answers; other information was not relevant at all
to the questions on the examination. Further, the evidence indicated that the Student appeared
reluctant to return all her materials to the invigilators and made a number of attempts to
retrieve something before finally exiting the examination room. In the absence of an
explanation from the Student as to her actions that day, or with respect to the contents of the
"Term" booklet, a reasonable inference was that the Student brought an unauthorized aid into

9

the examination room with her to gain an advantage. While there was no specific information
before the Panel as to how the Student brought the "Term" booklet into the room, the Panel
need not determine exactly how this occurred. Rather, the Panel had to be satisfied that the
Student, on a balance of probabilities, possessed and used an unauthorized aid in the
examination on April 14, 2009 in the Course.

Decision of the Tribunal

27. The Panel, having reviewed and considered the oral and documentary evidence finds the
following.

28. It is apparent to the Panel that the University went to great lengths to organize and implement
a new deferred examination process to accommodate the large number of students sitting
defened examinations in April 2009. It is apparent that the University instituted a careful and
deliberate process to ensure that students were provided with the correct envelope, and that
the contents of the envelope contained only the information required to write that student's
particular examination.

29. It is apparent to the Panel that the Student was provided with an envelope that contained
three examination booklets in the appropriate alphanumeric series for a two-hour
examination in the Course on April 14, 2009. However, the evidence before us indicates that
when the Student was asked to put all her material into the envelope at the end of the
examination, the Student was reluctant to do so, and in fact, inquired about and returned to
the invigilation staff, in an effort to retrieve a document from the envelope. It is apparent to
the Panel that the Student's envelope included a fourth booklet which was not provided to the
Student at the start of the examination and which appeared to be some sort of unauthorized
aid.

30. Fmther, the Panel has concluded that this fourth booklet had the appearance of a "cheat
sheet." The booklet contained eleven pages of densely written notes. These notes were
written within an examination booklet that was labeled "Term" which was out of sequence

10

with that day's exam booklets' series and not labeled as an examination answer booklet. In
some respects, the information contained in the booklet bore a high degree of relevance to the
final examination. In other respects, the notes bore no relation to the questions on the
examination. Further, some of the information was repeated directly in the Sh1dent's exam
answer booklets, while other information was either elaborated upon or condensed,
depending on the nature of the question.

31. In our view, the University has proven on balance of probabilities that the Student both
possessed and used the unauthorized aid in the examination.

32. As stated, the evidence before us demonstrated that it was more likely than not that the
Student brought the "Tenn" booklet into the examination with her to use as an unauthorized
aid during the examination. We note that there was no information before us to answer the
question of "how" the Student brought the unauthorized aid into the examination. However,
the Panel considered the reasoning in the matter of Tribunal Decision "Ms. B.," in which the
Panel concluded that it was not necessary to determine how the cheating occuned. Rather,
the test is whether the University has provided clear and convincing evidence that the student
violated the Code in the maimer described. In this case, the University has satisfied that test.

In our opinion, there was no other reasonable explanation to explain the information before
us, other than that the Student brollght an unauthorized aid into the examination with her and
used it to gain an academic advantage.

33. Accordingly, the Panel concluded that the University had discharged its on\ls and proven the
offence on the balance of probabilities. Thus, the Panel found that the St\ldent is guilty of one
(I) count of use or possession of an unauthorized aid during and in com1ection with the fmal
examination in POLB92I-I3, contrary to section B.I. l(b) of the Code of Behaviour on

Academic Matters ("Code''). The University withdrew the alternate charge, given our
finding of guilt on this charge.

11

Penalty Phase of the Hearing
Evidence

34. The University did not tender any evidence at the penalty phase of the hearing.

The UniversiZl' 's Submissions

35. The University advised that it was seeking the following sanction to be imposed by the
Panel:
a) Final grade of zero in POLB92H3;
b) That the Panel suspend the Student for a period of not less than two years;
c) That the Panel impose a notation on the Student's transcript for a period of not less
than three years; and
d) That the Panel recommends that the Provost rep01t the matter with the Student's
name withheld.
36. The University took the Panel through the case of"Mr. C." in which the University Tribunal
provided an outline of the principles to be followed in dealing with the penalty phase of an
academic discipline mailer. In that case, the Tribunal noted that punishment is not intended to
be retribution to get even with the student, but rather must serve a useful function. The
classical components of punishment are reformation, detell'ence, and protection of the public.
In applying these criteria, a tribunal should consider all of the following:

1.
11.

iii.
1v.
v.
vi.

The character of the person charged;
The likelihood of a repetition of the offence;
The nature of the offence committed;
Any extenuating circumstances smTounding the commission of the offence;
The detriment to the university occasioned by the offence; and
The need to deter others from committing a similar offence.

37. University counsel took the Panel through a number of relevant Tribunal decisions. She
observed that no two cases were alike, and that the Panel was not bound by these decisions
but that consistency was an important principle in sentencing. She highlighted for the Panel
that the Tribunal typically dealt with students who were convicted of a first offence by
imposing a suspension of no less than two years. She further submitted that the Tribunal must

12

consider the relevant aggravating and mitigating factors of each case before assigning a
penalty.

38. Counsel acknowledged that there was no information before us to indicate that the Student
had committed other academic offences. She submitted that the evidence demonstrated a
deliberate and carefully planned attempt to gain an academic advantage. In the University's
submission, the onus was on the Student to show evidence supporting a reduced penalty or
mitigating factors. The Student did not plead guilty, which would be the best evidence or
insight of remorse, and indeed, by her failure to attend, presented no evidence of any other
mitigating factors. The likelihood of repetition was not clear given the lack of information
before us. The only character evidence before the Panel was that of the information related to
the offences.

Decision on Penalty

39. The Panel considered the University's submission and the information presented to the Panel
by the University. The Panel also considered the cases presented by the University in
support of its submissions on penalty. As submitted by the University, the Panel is not bound
by these cases, but these cases offered the Panel an instructive overview as to how previous
panels of the Tribunal dealt with similar offences.

40. The Panel recognized that the University sought what it referred to as "threshold" penalty for
a first offence, and for a case such as this. However, the Panel chose to impose a longer
suspension and notation period than that requested by the University for the reasons that
follow.

41. First, the info1mation before us led the Panel to conclude that the Student both possessed and
used the unauthorized aid. The Student's actions were, in the Panel's view, characterized by
deceit and pre-meditation, in an effort to gain an unfair academic advantage.

13

42. Second, while the information indicated that this was the Student's first offence, the Panel
observed that the offence was committed after the Student had been enrolled at the
University for several semesters already. At that time in her University career, the Student
would have been expected to clearly know and understand the expectations of the University
with respect to academic integrity.

43. Third, given the Student's failure to participate in any stage of the process, the Panel had no
evidence of any mitigating factors. There was no acknowledgement, no explanation, no
remorse, no extenuating circumstances, and no evidence of any prospect of rehabilitation
brought to the Panel's attention. The Panel was concerned about what appeared to be several
attempts to mislead the University as to her willingness to participate at different stages of
the process. The Panel was also concerned at the lengths to which the University had to go to
ensure that the Student was notified of the hearing, despite her unwillingness to engage, and
the resources involved in such an undertaking.

44. Finally, the Panel was concerned about the nature of the offence and the importance of
deterrence. The Panel notes that the first paragraph of the Code states the following:
The concern of the Code ofBehaviour 011 Academic Mallers is with the responsibilities of
all parties to the integrity of the teaching and learning relationship. Honesty and fairness
must inform this relationship, whose basis remains one of mutual respect for the aims of
education and for those ethical principles which nrnst characterize the plll'sllit and
transmission of knowledge in the University.
45. Fmther, the Code states as follows with respect to "Offences":
The University and its members have a responsibility to ensure that a climate which
might encourage, or conditions which might enable, cheating, misrepresentation or
unfairness not be tolerated. To this end, all must acknowledge that seeking credit or other
advantages by fraud or misrepresentation, or seeking to disadvantage others by disrnptive
behaviour is unacceptable, as is any dishonesty or unfairness in dealing with the work or
record of a student.
46. The Panel observed that st\ldents who do not act with honesty undermine the reputation of
the University and the hard work of other students who do act with honesty in their sh1dies.
The Student's actions in this case strike at the heart of academic integrity and make light of
the attempts by other students to approach their sh1dies with integrity and honesty.

14

47. Therefore, in consideration of the sentencing principles outlined above, the evidence before
us, and past Tribunal decisions, the Panel imposed the following sanctions:

1. The Student receive a final grade of zero in the Course POLB92H3;
2. The Student be suspended from the University for a period of three years,
commencing September 24, 2010, to September 23, 2013;
3. That the Student's academic record and transcript be annotated to reflect that she
has been found to have committed academic misconduct for a period of four
years, commencing September 24, 2010, to September 23, 2014;
4. That this case shall be reported to the Prnvost for publication of a notice of the
decision of the Tribunal and the sanction or sanctions imposed, with the name of
the Student withheld.

,;/Dated this / lf--rlay of October 2010

15

