Case 854

DATE:

   November 30, 2016

PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v. M.B. (âthe Studentâ)

Hearing Date(s):

   August 23, 2016

Panel Members:

   Mr. Andrew Pinto, Barrister and Solicitor, Chair
   Professor Ato Quayson, Faculty Panel Member
   Mr. Sean McGowan, Student Panel Member

Appearances:

   Mr. Robert Centa, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland
   Barristers
   Ms. Emily Home, Student-at-Law, Paliare Roland Barristers
   Mr. Daniel Walker, Counsel for the Student, Bobila Walker Law LLP

In Attendance:

   M.B., the Student
   A.B., the Studentâs Son
   Ms. Lucy Gaspini, Manager, Academic Integrity & Affairs, Office of the
   Dean, University of Toronto Mississauga
   Mr. Christopher Lang, Appeals, Discipline, and Faculty Grievances
   Mr. Sean Lourim, Technology Assistant, Office of the Governing Council

   The Student was charged with one offence of plagiarism under s.
   B.i.1(d) of the Code, and alternatively, academic dishonesty under s.
   B.i.3(b) of the Code. The charges related to a presentation worth 15%
   of her course marks in which, the Student admitted to knowingly
   including verbatim statements from unattributed sources and
   representing the ideas or words of others as her own. Â The Student
   pled guilty to the plagiarism charge. The University then withdrew the
   academic dishonesty charge.

   An Agreed Statement of Fact and Joint Submission of Penalty was
   submitted by the Student and the University agreeing to a final grade
   of zero in the course, a two-year suspension, a three-year notation on
   her transcript and a report to the Provost regarding this case. Â The
   Student had committed two prior plagiarism offences. Five years prior
   to the current charge, the Student pled guilty to plagiarism in an
   assignment that she had submitted for course credit. She received a
   grade of zero on the assignment, a further reduction of ten marks from
   her final grade, and a six-month annotation on her academic record and
   transcript. Â The second prior incident of plagiarism was two years
   after the first. After pleading guilty to plagiarism, the Student
   received a penalty of a final grade of zero in the course, a one year
   suspension, and an 18-month annotation on her transcript and record for
   that offence. Â In accepting the Joint Submission of Penalty, the Panel
   took into account earlier decisions where a two-year suspension was
   awarded for students who had committed prior academic offences
   (University of Toronto v. Z.B., Case No. 487, January 22, 2008 and
   University of Toronto v. Y.L., Case No. 04-05-02, April 11, 2005), the
   fact that the assignment was only worth 15% of the final grade in the
   course, the Studentâs guilty plea saved the University from having to
   prove the Studentâs involvement and contribution to the offence, as
   well as the Studentâs cooperation with the discipline process. The
   Panel found no principled reason to reject the partiesâ Joint
   Submission of Penalty.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/13034
