Case No.: 901

THE UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO

IN THE MATTER OF charges of academic dishonesty made on November 29, 2016
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic
Matters, 1995,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Act, 1971, S.O. 1971 , c. 56 as am. S.O.

BETWEEN:
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
- and -

REASONS FOR DECISION
Hearing Dates: June 20, 2017 and July 18, 2017
Members of the Panel:
Mr. R.S.M. Woods, Barrister and Solicitor, Chair
Professor Faye Mishna, Faculty Panel Member
Ms. Alexis Giannelia, Student Panel Member
Appearances:
Ms. Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel , Paliare Roland, Barristers
Mr. Olando Vinton, Elita Chambers, Counsel for the Student
In Attendance:
Ms. r:11111111 ~
' the Student (June 20, 2017 and July 18, 2017)
Ms. Chelsea Laidlaw, Assistant to Mr. Olando Vinton, Elita Chambers (June 20, 2017 and July
18, 2017)
Professor Roberta Fulthorpe, University of Toronto Scarborough (June 20, 2017)
Professor Luc De Nil, Vice-Dean, Students, School of Graduate Studies (June 20, 2017 and July
18, 2017)
Mr. Christopher Lang, Director, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances (June 20 and July
18,20 17)

-21.

r::tlllllll ~ ("the Student") is a graduate student enrolled in the Doctor of

Philosophy program in the School of Graduate Studies, Department of Physical and
Environmental Sciences at the Scarborough Campus of the University of Toronto (the
"University").

2.

In the spring of 2016, the Student applied for a graduate research scholarship.

The

project the Student proposed involved a topic outside of her area of expertise, but within the area
of others working in the same lab in which she worked.

This led her supervisor, Professor

Roberta Fulthorpe, to take a closer look at the application. Based on her review of it, Professor
Fulthorpe concluded that the application was made up of extracts from the work of others. This
led her to examine the papers the Student had submitted in the courses she had taken. They
seemed to display the same problem.
3.

Based on what appeared to be a senes of incidents of plagiarism, the Vice-Provost

charged the Student with the following offences under the University of Toronto Code of
Behaviour on Academic Matters, 1995 (the "Code"):
(a)

In or about Fall 2014, you knowingly represented as your own an idea or
expression of an idea or work of another in an essay that you submitted in
EES 1128 entitled "Demystifying belowground multispecies interplay in
legume plant-mutualistic plant-microbial systems" ("EES1128 Essay"),
contrary to section B.I.l(d) of the Code.

(b)

In or about Winter 2015, you knowingly represented as your own an idea
or expression of an idea or work of another in an essay that you submitted
in EES2200 entitled "Nitric oxide in plant signaling" (EES2200 Essay"),
contrary to section B.I.1 (d) of the Code.

(c)

In or about March, 2016, you knowingly represented as your own an idea
or expression of an idea or work of another in a research statement on the
subject of "Microbial ecology of green roofs in Toronto" ("Research
Statement") that you submitted to the University in support of a

scholarship request, contrary to section B.I. l (d) of the Code.

-3(d)

In the alternative to charges 1, 2 and 3, you knowingly engaged in a form
of

cheating,

academic

dishonesty

or

misconduct,

fraud

or

misrepresentation not otherwise described in the Code in order to obtain
academic credit or other academic advantage of any kind, contrary to
section B.I.3(b) of the Code, in connection with:
(i)

The EES 1128 Essay in or about Fall 2014;

(ii)

The EES2200 Essay in or about 2015; and

(iii)

The Research Statement in or about March 2016.

The Hearing
4.

We heard this matter over the course of two days.

On June 20, 2017 we heard oral

evidence from Professor Roberta Fulthorpe and the Vice-Dean, Students, Professor Luc De Nil.
The Vice Provost 's counsel also introduced into evidence, with the Student's consent, an
affidavit from Professor Marney Isaac, a lecturer with the School of Graduate Studies.

The

Student gave evidence on her own behalf.
5.

Following the evidence, we heard submissions from counsel for both parties. After

considering the evidence and submissions we issued our decision on the charges, finding the
Student guilty of charges 1, 2 and 3. We then adjourned the hearing to July 18, 2017, to allow
the parties time to consider their evidence and submissions on the appropriate penalty. When we
reconvened on July 18, 2017 we heard further evidence from the Student and submissions on
penalty. After considering the evidence and the submissions of both paiiies, we issued our
decision on penalty.

Decision
6.

Based on the evidence before us, and the submissions of counsel for the parties, we

conclude that the University has established that the Student is guilty of each of Charges 1, 2,
and 3. Based on that decision, the University has withdrawn Charge 4.
7.

Given the number and seriousness of the offences, as well as the Student's status as a

doctoral student on a scholarship, notwithstanding the Student's submissions about her personal

-4-

background and the consequences the penalty would have on her, we have decided to impose the
significant penalty outlined below, including recommending to the President of the Uni versity
that he recommend the Student' s expulsion to the Governing Council.

Merits of the Charges

Evidence
8.

The Student is currently 38 years old.

She grew up in Croatia and attended the J. J.

Strossmayer University of Osijek in Croatia, receiving a Master of Food Engineering in 2005 .
Based on her curriculum vitae, after receiving that degree, she continued to work at the Croatian
university, while spending some time on research assignments in China, as well as one year at
Wageningen University in the Netherlands. Although English is not her first language, over the
course of her academic career, she wrote, or participated in writing, numerous English-language
academic papers and chapters in academic publications.
9.

In 2014, the University admitted the Student as a doctoral student in the School of

Graduate Studies, studying in the Department of Physical and Environmental Sciences under
Professor Fulthorpe.

Professor Fulthorpe is an environmental biologist.

The Student was

planning to focus her studies on microbial biology. She eventually decided to concentrate upon
the interaction between microbes and coffee plants.
10.

Professor Fulthorpe testified that the Student's record was so good that Professor

Fulthorpe's department decided to put her up for a Connaught Scholarship.

This made it

affordable for the department to take the Student on as a student because, as a Connaught
Scholar, the Student would only have to pay the same student fees as domestic students. The
Student's evidence was that the scholarship was worth about $35 ,000 annually.
11 .

Having been admitted to the University, and been awarded the Connaught Scholarship,

the Student was given a student visa to enter Canada. At the University, she worked alongside
other students in a lab under Professor Fulthorpe's supervision.

-512.

Professor Fulthorpe testified that the Student's progress was slower than her other

students. She described the Student's progress as "painstakingly slow". The Student took much
more time to complete routine lab work as compared to her colleagues in the lab.
13 .

Nevertheless, the Student did attend the required courses and submit the papers needed to

complete those courses. In particular, in the fall of 2014, she attended EES 1128 and submitted
the EES 1128 Essay in fulfillment of the requirements of that course. That paper was worth 40%
of her final mark. She received a mark of 87% for that paper. In the winter of 2015 she attended
EES2200. She submitted the EES2200 Essay in fulfillment of the requirements of that course.
At the time, no one raised any questions with either of those papers.
14.

In February 2016, the University and The Toronto-Dominion Bank created the TD

Graduate Research Scholarships in Environmental Science (the "TD Scholarships"). According
to the email sent to doctoral students in Environmental Science, the goal of the TD Scholarships
was "to promote research projects that are related to the sustenance of the natural environment,
particularly in a near-urban setting." The total value of the available scholarships was $10,000.
The email invited interested students to submit a one page statement of how their research plans
addressed the above criteria, along with an updated curriculum vitae.
15.

The Student applied for one of the TD Scholarships. In the Research Statement, which

she submitted as part of her application, she proposed a project investigating "the ecological
processes that shape green roof microbial composition, population dynamics and function, and
how plant-microbial feedbacks facilitate the ecosystem services".
16.

Professor Fulthorpe testified that she first saw the Research Statement at a meeting

convened to review applications for the TD Scholarships. She described the Research Statement
as coming "out of the blue" because it was not within the Student's area of study. There was a
component of the proposed project, looking at the microbial ecology of roofs, that was within the
Student's area, but she was studying a very different habitat. Green roofs were something that
were being studied by an undergraduate student in the lab in which the Student was working, but
she was not part of that project.

-617.

Professor Fulthorpe sent the Research Statement to Scott Mclvor, who together with

Professor Marc Cadotte, was supervising the undergraduate student ' s work. He told Professor
Fulthorpe that portions of the Research Statement had been plagiarized from the work of others.
Professor Fulthorpe testified that she then reviewed the Research Statement and was able to
confirm that parts of it had been taken verbatim from the work of others.
18.

Counsel for the Student did not challenge on cross-examination Professor Fulthorpe's

evidence that the Research Statement outlined a project that was outside of the Student's area of
study and being undertaken by another student in the lab in which the Student was working.
19.

Given what she had discovered in the Research Statement, Professor Fulthorpe decided to

look at the papers the Student had submitted in the courses she had taken at the University. In
particular, Professor Fulthorpe looked at the EESl 128 Essay, the essay the Student had
submitted in EESl 128, an essay entitled "Demystifying belowground multispecies interplay in
legume plant-mutualiztic plant-microbial systems", and the EES2200 Essay, the essay the
Student had submitted in EES2200entitled "Nitric oxide in plant signalling".

Professor

Fulthorpe also asked Professor Marney Isaac, who had taught EES 1128, to review the EES 1128
Essay.
20.

Both Professor Fulthorpe and Professor Isaac concluded that large portions of the

EES 1128 Essay had been taken verbatim, or nearly verbatim, from the work of others. In the
affidavit she submitted, Professor Isaac identified multiple passages that were taken verbatim or
nearly verbatim from articles authored by others.

For her part, in her testimony, Professor

Fulthorpe went over for us a highlighted copy of the essay which identified sentences, and in
some cases paragraphs, that were taken verbatim from scholarly articles written by others. The
Student's counsel did not challenge any of this evidence.
21.

Professor Isaac's affidavit evidence was admitted without any cross-examination, and the

Student's counsel did not cross-examine Professor Fulthorpe on her evidence that the paper was
plagiarized.
22.

Professor Fulthorpe testified that most of the EES2200 Essay was composed of extracts

taken verbatim from articles written by others. A large part of the essay was taken verbatim

-7from one article, an article (the "Freschi Article") by Luciano Freschi of the University of Sao
Paolo entitled "Nitric oxide and phytohormone interactions: current status and perspectives" .
Again, counsel for the Student did not challenge this evidence when cross-examining Professor
Fulthorpe.
23.

Vice-Dean De Nil gave evidence about his meetings with the Student after Professor

Fulthorpe identified the issues with the Research Statement and the two essays. He testified that
he met with her in October 2016.

He went over the process with her to ensure that she

understood her rights. He reviewed the evidence he had. He highlighted the main sections the
University considered to have been plagiarized and invited her to comment. Vice-Dean De Nil
indicated that the Student admitted to plagiarizing all three documents.

In the case of the

Research Statement, she told him that it was outside of her field of expertise so , in order to
appear more knowledgeable, she decided to take information from other sources. In the case of
the essays, she said the information was all common knowledge so references were not required.
24.

Vice-Dean De Nil stated that he decided to refer the case to the Tribunal because of its

seriousness, involving three papers and two courses.

The fact that one incident involved a

scholarship was significant to him because had the issue not been discovered it might have led to
someone else not obtaining something they should have obtained.
25.

On cross-examination, Vice-Dean De Nil agreed that the Student had told him that she

had not intentionally plagiarized anything. He could not recall any language issue, but said that
he believed the Student told him that English was not her first language. At no point did he
believe that she had trouble understanding him. On re-examination, he indicated that someone in
the Doctor of Philosophy programme would be expected to have a significantly strong level of
English language ability to be able to handle the academic requirements.
26.

For her part, in her evidence, the Student did not give evidence about how the Research

Statement, the EES 1128 Essay and the EES2200 Essay came to include the work of other
people. Instead, she gave evidence about marital problems that she had had with her husband
before coming to Canada and her eventual divorce. She also testified about her proficiency in
English. She testified that she thought that she had complied with the applicable guidelines, and
that no one had ever complained before about her writing. She stated that she had not received

-8any formal training in writing in English at a scientific level. On cross-examination she admitted
that many of the papers on her curriculum vitae had been written in English and that the level of
English she gave on her curriculum vitae, C2, was a high level.

Submissions
27.

Counsel for the University submitted that the Student was clearly guilty of the charges

against her. She reviewed the three documents, pointing out those portions that were taken from
the works of others. For his part, in his submissions counsel for the Student suggested issues
with the English language may have contributed to her actions, but failed to offer a reasonable
explanation of how an academic could have conceived that she could include material written by
others in her papers without making clear that it was the work of someone else.

Findings
28.

Based on the evidence before us, the Student is guilty of the charges that she represented

as her own the works of others in each of the Research Statement, the EES 1128 Essay and the
EES2200 Essay.
29.

About one third of the Research Statement was taken verbatim from the works of others.

The primary source was an article entitled "Green Roofs as Urban Ecosystems: Ecological
Structures, Functions, and Services" published in BioScience magazine in November 2007, but
the Student also took statements from four other sources. In the Research Statement, the Student
did not identify any of these verbatim statements as the work of others.
30.

Almost half of the EESl 128 Essay was taken verbatim from the work of others. For

example, the following five paragraphs in the paper were each taken verbatim from articles or
books written by others:
In the early steps of symbiosis, a diverse array of compounds is excluded in the
rhizosphere, including favonoids, isoflavonoids, and non-flavonoid inducers.
These compounds ae chemoattractants for rhizobia (Caetano-Anolle's et al. 1988;
Dharmatiklake & Bauer, 1992), influence bacterial growth, and induce the
expression of nodulation genes (nod genes) (Peters et al., Hungria & Stacey,

-91997). As a result of nod genes expression, biosynthesis of specific lipochitin
oligosaccharides called nodulation factors (Nod factors or LCOs) occurs (Lerouge
et al., 1990).
The 450-million-yr-old arbuscular mycorrhizal (AM) symbiosis is among the
world's most widespread mutualisms and is formed by c. 65% of all known land
species (Wang & Qui, 2006). The extraradical mycelium (ERM) of the fungus
forms an extensive network in the soil and provides the host plant with access to
nutrient resources beyond the root depletion zone. The ERM of the AM fungus
takes up phosphorus (P), nitrogen (N), sulfur and various trace elements from the
soil, and transfers these nutrients to the intraradical mycelium (IRM), where the
nutrients are exchanged for carbon (C) from the host (Marschner &Dell, 1994;
Smith et al., 2009).
Studies have recognized the improvement inplant biomass and nodulation by coinoculation of rhizobia with PGPR. However, the ability of co-inculant PGPR
depends on the inoculant strain's inherent potential and effectiveness/specificity
to certain plant species, cultivar and genotype, composition of root exudates of
host plant, cell density of applied inocula/optimal inoculation dose, temperature
variation, and interaction of applied inocula with rhizosphere microflora
predominant in the particular crop (Medina et al., 2003; El-Sawy et al., 2006;
Remans et al., 2008; Mishra et al., 2009; Fox et al., 2011 ).

Azopirillum, a free living N 2 fixer and a PGPR, has been recognized for its ability
to improve nodulation and biomass of legumes as a co-inoculant of rhizobia
(Roseline et al., 2008). Improved rhizobial infection, nodule formation and N 2
fixation activity as a result of the combined inoculation with Azopirillum and

Rhizobium via the enhanced production of plant hormones and siderophores and
enhancement of total mineral uptake have been claimed as a mechanism for
growth and biomass enhancement of various legumes (Wani et al., 2007;
Dardenelli et al., 2008; Cassan et al., 2009).

- 10 Another prom1smg avenue to optimize plant growth is through managing
interactions between plant growth-promoting bacteria (PGPB), AM fungi and the

Rhizobium-legume symbiosis Mycorrhizal fungi that are known to form
associations with more than 80 % of plant species often enhance nutrient and
water uptake. PGPB are able to increase AM fungal development by affecting
root colonization as well as by enhancing plant N and P uptake (Richardson et al.,
2009).

Production of EPS by PGPB significantly enhances the attachment of

bacteria to mycorrhizal roots and AM fungal structures that influence the
movement of bacteria in the rhizosphere (Bianciotto et al., 2001 ). Soil microbes
(PGR and Rhizobia) are able to enhance the amounts of root exudates resulting in
the activation of AM hyphae and hence higher rate of root colonization (Barea et
al., 2005).
31.

The first paragraph comes from Microbes for Legume Improvement edited by

Mohammad Sahir Khan and others. The second is the opening paragraph of an article by Carl R.
Felbaum and others entitled "Fungal nutrient allocation in common mycorrhizal networks is
regulated by the carbon source strength of individual host plants" published in the journal New

Phytologist in 2014. The third, fourth and fifth paragraphs are from pages 215 to 216 of Plant
Microbes Symbiosis: Applied Facets edited by Nauveen Kumar Arora.
32.

Almost all of the EES2200 Essay was taken from the works of others. From the bulk of

the essay's second paragraph:
It [Niticoxide] was found to play a crucial role in plant growth and development,
staring from germination to flowering, ripening of fruit and senescence of organs.
Also, in case of environmental stress hazard caused by both abiotic and biotic
factors, enhanced NO generation is observed in different plant species and organs.
This review is focused mainly on the essential role of NO-plant hormones
signalling network ....

which is taken verbatim from the abstract to an article by Magdalena Arasimowicz and others in
the journal Plant Science entitled "Nitric oxide as a bioactive signalling molecule in plant stress
responses", to the essay's concluding paragraph:
Finally, we must remain open-minded to conceive increasingly complex NOphytohormone interconnection nodes since new targets of NO-dependent PTMs

- 11 and other upstream and downstream elements of NO signaling cascades will
likely be identified in the future. At the same time, more complete pictures
mechanistically explaining how multiple plant hormones may simultaneously
interact with NO to control specific plant responses might also emerge, very
likely leading to exciting new models ofNO-phyto hormone interaction networks .
which is taken verbatim from the concluding paragraph of the Freschi Article, the essay is little
more than a collection of unattributed statements from papers written by others. Most of the
essay comes from the Freschi Article.
33.

As noted, the Student provided us with little explanation of how what was supposed to be

her work came to include so much material from others. She admitted to Vice-Dean De Nil that
the Research Statement and the two essays contained the work of others. She told him that she
did not think she had to provide references because the material she had included was common
knowledge. At points in her evidence, she appeared to suggest that it resulted from the fact that
English was not her first language, or from the fact that no one had ever complained about her
writing before.
34.

None of this explains or justifies the Student's attempt to pass off as her own the work of

others. Based on our review of it, the plagiarized material goes far beyond statements of general
knowledge; it is in large part the result of the author or authors own research and analysis. We
reject the argument that this was a language issue. Using the work of others has nothing to do
with the fact that the Student's first language is not English.
35.

We do not accept the suggestion that merely because no one had ever complained about

her writing means that the Student was unaware that she could not legitimately present the
thoughts and words of others as her own. The Student had written, or been part of a group
writing, published academic works long before she came to the University.

We reject any

suggestion that she was not aware that she could not pass on the work of others as her own.
36.

Based on the evidence before us, we therefore conclude that the Student did represent as

her own idea or expression of an idea or work of another in each of the EES 1128 Essay, the
EES2200 Essay and the Research Statement, and is therefore guilty of the first three charges
against her. As noted earlier, given that conclusion, the University withdrew the fourth charge.

- 12 Penalty

Evidence
37.

We heard evidence from the Student relating to penalty when the hearing reconvened on

July 18, 2017. The Student testified that she had never been systematically educated in scientific
writing. She said that her mistake was that she had not read the instructions governing papers
when she came to the University. That mistake built up when no one checked her first paper.
According to the Student, if someone had properly checked the paper, then she would not have
been before us.
38.

The Student acknowledged that what she had done was wrong, but asked us to consider

her circumstances. At the time she wrote the essays and the Research Statement, she was in the
midst of the break-up of her marriage. She was an only child and had had to admit to her famil y
that she had failed on every level.

She pointed out that our decision would affect her

professional life, her finances and access to medical care in Canada, as well as her ability to
remain in the country. She asked us to consider the whole picture and the person behind it,
noting that she had dedicated her life to progress and been a straight A student. She knew five
languages. She had worked in six different laboratories in Europe and China. She had joined a
writing group at the University and thought that given the chance would be able to provide
services to others to help them avoid doing what she had done.
39.

During the Student's evidence there was some mention of an accident and her having

taken a leave from her program. On cross examination, the Student agreed that the accident
came after she had written the two essays and the Research Statement. She also admitted that
apm1 from the period of time during which she was on leave, she had continued to receive the
Connaught Scholarship monies.

Submissions
40.

Counsel for the University submitted that we should make an order:
(a)

recording a final grade of O in each of EES1128 (Fall 2014) and EES2200 (Fall
2014);

- 13 -

41.

(b)

immediately suspending the Student for a period of up to five years;

(c)

recommending that the Student be expelled from the University;

(d)

permanently recording the sanction on Ms . ~

(e)

that this case shall be reported to the Provost for publication.

' s academic record; and

Counsel described the Student' s plagiarism as egregious.

The EES 1128 Essay was

plagiarized and an even more significant portion of the EES2200 Essay was taken from other
source documents. The Research Statement involved taking someone else's work and presenting
it as her own. This was fundamentally problematic.
42.

Counsel noted that the Student was a doctoral student and an experienced scientist. She

had a very lengthy list of publications. She noted the Student' s evidence about no one checking
her paper for plagiarism, submitting that the comment demonstrated that the Student was not
taking responsibility for her actions, not something one would expect in someone asking for a
second chance. Counsel acknowledged that the Student had suffered some setbacks in her life,
but submitted that this was not uncommon.
43.

Counsel for the University submitted that the penalty she was requesting was in line with

the penalty imposed in other cases in which the Tribunal found very serious misconduct,
providing us with a series of cases in support of that submission.
44.

Counsel for the Student submitted that instead of recommending expulsion we should

suspend his client. He argued that suspension was the appropriate penalty bearing in mind that:
the Student had no previous record of academic dishonesty; there was an issue with respect to the
Student's proficiency with the English language which constituted a barrier to her ability to write
in English; the Student's appreciation of the seriousness of the findings against her, and
willingness to improve; and, the Student's personal circumstances, including the breakdown of
her marriage and the consequences of any sanction on her immigration status.

- 14 -

Findings
45.

This Tribunal has set out the factors to be considered in imposing sanctions on students in

a number of cases. One such case is The University of Toronto v N. A (Case No.: 661, February
29, 2012) where the Tribunal described the factors this way:
31 The Factors to be considered when determining penalty are well established:
(i)

the character of the person charged;

(ii)

the likelihood of a repetition of the offence;

(iii)

the nature of the offence committed;

(iv)

any extenuating circumstances surrounding commission of the
offence;

(v)

the detriment to the University occasioned by the offence;

(vi)

the need to deter others from committing a similar offence.

32 The Tribunal, in determining the appropriate penalty, should consider various
factors in order to find a fit sentence for this offender, for this offence in this
community. In doing so, fairness, balance and proportion must be balanced.
33 There should be some measure of uniformity or proportionality so that there
should be similar sentences imposed for offences committed in similar
circumstances.

The sentencing should preserve and ensure fairness by

avoiding disproportionate sentences among similar sentencing processes so
that there are not wide swings or inconsistencies between like offences and
like offenders, recognizing that there is never a like offence or like offender.
34 There should be a range of sentences for offences such as plagiarism with
sentences within that range moving up or down within that range depending
on aggravating or mitigating circumstances.
46.

Reviewing the above factors, while the Student has no prior record of committing any

academic offences, and we do not believe there is much likelihood that she would offend again,

- 15 the plagiarism here is simply too significant and too pervasive in the Student's work to merit
anything other than the most serious sanction available to us.
4 7.

The Student is not an undergraduate student who used the work of another in one paper,

she 1s an experienced doctoral student who has written or contributed to many academic
publications. All of the written work before us contained significant elements taken from the
work of others and presented as the Student's own work. The fact that the Student presented the
work of others as her own not once, not twice, but three times is especially troubling, as is the
extent of the plagiarism in the EES2200 Essay and the fact that in submitting the Research
Statement the Student was putting forward as her own a project being undertaken by another
student in the same lab as her.
48.

The Student's personal circumstances, in particular, her marital problems and medical

issues, do not excuse her conduct.

While we might have had some sympathy were those

problems linked directly to a particular incident, in her evidence the Student did not even attempt
to link the incidents of plagiarism to them. Instead, she merely mentioned them as part of her
personal situation. Similarly, we do not accept the submissions of the Student's counsel that the
Student's use of the work of others was somehow linked to her proficiency in the English
language. Scholars know they cannot present the work of others as their own regardless of their
language.
49.

We are also very troubled by the Student's comment that she would not be in this

situation had someone properly checked her first paper. While it is certainly unfortunate that
none of the Student's supervisors and instructors noticed the plagiarism in the EES 1128 Essay,
the Student was the one who did not abide by the code of conduct governing her. She cannot
avoid responsibility for her actions by simply saying she should have been caught earlier. Her
statement leads us to question her acknowledgment that her actions were wrong.
50.

Dealing with the last two factors, the Student's actions reflect very poorly on the

University, all the more so when one of the written works containing the work of others was part
of an application for a scholarship funded by a third party. Other students need to be deterred
from such behaviour, a goal that only a very significant penalty will achieve.

- 16 51.

Based

on

this

Tribunal ' s

previous

decisions,

immediate

suspens10n

and

a

recommendation to the President of the University that he recommend that the student be
expelled is the appropriate penalty where there are multiple incidents of plagiarism by a graduate
student, when the improper conduct relates to obtaining some financial benefit, potentially
deprives another student of some benefit, or reflects poorly on the University as a whole. See for
example: The University of Toronto v. O.G. (Case No.: 587, April 14, 2010) in which expulsion
was recommended when the student's doctoral thesis contained lengthy, unattributed, verbatim
excerpts from secondary sources: The University of Toronto v. D.D. (Case No. : 593, September
3, 201 OJ in which expulsion was recommended where the student's application for an

undergraduate research program contained false information and The University of Toronto v.
K.K.

(Case No.: November 3, 2009) in which expulsion was recommended where the student

had completely fabricated her involvement in an entire course. This case is similar in the extent
of the plagiarism, the fact that one of the documents in issue was an application for a financial
award and involved third parties.
52.

Taking into account all of the factors listed above, the appropriate is to award the Student

final grades of zero in the two courses in which she submitted plagiarized papers, suspend her
immediately, and recommend her expulsion from the University.

Finding
53.

We therefore made the following order on July 18, 2017;
a. The Student shall receive a final grade of zero in each of EESl 128 (Fall 2014)
and EES2200 (Fall 2014);
b. The Student shall be immediately suspended from the University for a period
of up to five years;
c. the Tribunal recommends to the President of the University that he
recommend to the Governing Council that the Student be expelled from the
University;

- 17 d. this sanction shall be recorded permanently on the Student's academic record
and transcript to the effect that she was sanctioned for academic misconduct;
e. this case shall be reported to the Provost for publication of a notice of the
decision of the Tribunal and the sanctions imposed, with the Student's name
withheld.

Dated at Toronto this 6 L~ay of September, 201 7

R. Seumas M. Woods, Co-Chair

