Case 901

DATE:

   September 6, 2017

PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v. D.K. (âthe Studentâ)

Hearing Date(s):

   June 20, 2017 and July 18, 2017

Panel Members:

   Mr. R.S.M. Woods, Barrister and Solicitor, Chair
   Professor Faye Mishna, Faculty Panel Member
   Ms. Alexis Giannelia, Student Panel Member

Appearances:

   Ms. Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland,
   Barristers
   Mr. Olando Vinton, Elita Chambers, Counsel for the Student

In Attendance:

   The Student (June 20, 2017 and July 18, 2017)
   Ms. Chelsea Laidlaw, Assistant to Mr. Olando Vinton, Elita Chambers
   (June 20, 2017 and July 18, 2017)
   Professor Roberta Fulthorpe, University of Toronto Scarborough (June
   20, 2017)
   Professor Luc De Nil, Vice-Dean, Students, School of Graduate Studies
   (June 20, 2017 and July 18, 2017)
   Mr. Christopher Lang, Director, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty
   Grievances (June 20 and July 18, 2017)

   NOTE: Under Appeal

   The Student was charged with three counts of plagiarism contrary to s.
   B.i.1(d) of the Code , or in the alternative, one count of academic
   misconduct not otherwise described contrary to s. B.i.3(b) of the Code
   . The charges related to two essays and a research statement in an
   application for a scholarship that contained significant portions of
   text that were the ideas or work of another person that the Student had
   represented as her own ideas. The Panel found the Student guilty of the
   three charges of plagiarism contrary to s. B.i.1(d) of the Code . Upon
   the Panelâs finding of guilty on the plagiarism charges, the University
   withdrew the alternative charge of academic dishonesty.

   In determining the appropriate penalty, the Panel applied the factors
   described in University of Toronto v N. A (Case No.: 661, February 29,
   2012): (i) the character of the person charged; (ii) the likelihood of
   a repetition of the offence; (iii) the nature of the offence committed;
   (iv) any extenuating circumstances surrounding commission of the
   offence; (v) the detriment to the University occasioned by the offence;
   and (vi) the need to deter others from committing a similar offence.Â
   The Student had no prior record, but the Panel found that the
   plagiarism was too significant and too pervasive in the Student's work
   to merit anything other than the most serious sanction available.Â  The
   Panel emphasized it was particularly egregious that the Student was a
   graduate student who had used the work of others three times.Â  The
   plagiarism in the application for the scholarship was a particularly
   aggravating circumstance as the Student was putting forward as her own
   a project being undertaken by another student in the same lab as she
   had been working.Â  The Panel did not find any extenuating
   circumstances in the Studentâs personal circumstances, specifically,
   her marital problems, lack of proficiency in the English language, or
   medical issues.Â  The Panel was troubled by the Studentâs comment that
   she would not be in this situation if someone had noticed her
   plagiarism earlier. On the last two factors, the Studentâs actions
   reflected poorly on the University, as the plagiarism was on an
   application for funding for a scholarship from a third party.

   The Panel referred to several decisions that held that an immediate
   suspension and a recommendation to the President of the University that
   the student be expelled is the appropriate penalty where there are
   multiple incidents of plagiarism by a graduate student, when the
   improper conduct relates to obtaining some financial benefit,
   potentially deprives another student of some benefit, or reflects
   poorly on the University as a whole ( The University of Toronto v. O.G
   . (Case No.: 587, April 14, 2010); The University of Toronto v. D.D.
   (Case No.: 593, September 3, 2010) and The University ofÂ  Toronto v.
   K. K. (Case No.: NovemberÂ  3, 2009)).Â  The Panel ordered a final
   grade of zero in the affected courses; immediate suspension from the
   University for five years pending expulsion; a recommendation of that
   the Student be expelled; a permanent notation of the sanction on the
   Studentâs academic record and transcript; and that the matter be
   reported to the Provost for publication.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/13040
