Case #777

   DATE: September 4, 2015
   PARTIES: University of Toronto v F.Y.H.
   Hearing Date(s): February 5, 2015
   Panel Members:
   William C. McDowell, Chair
   Richard B. Day, Faculty Member
   Lu Zhao, Student Member
   Appearances:
   Robert Centa, Assistant Discipline Counsel
   Julia Wilkes, Counsel for the Student
   In Attendance:
   Christopher Lang, Director, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances
   Ms. F.Y.H, the Student (via Skype)
   Trial Division â s. B.i.1(d) and s. B.i.1(a) of the Code â plagiarism
   and forged documents â Student appropriated verbatim text from academic
   sources â Student altered Verification of Illness form to extend the
   projected illness end date â Agreed Statement of Facts â guilty plea â
   finding on Agreed Statement of Facts â finding on guilty plea â Joint
   Submission on Penalty â prior academic offence of plagiarism â Joint
   Submission on Penalty accepted â grade assignment of zero; 3-year
   suspension; notation on the Studentâs academic record and transcript
   until her graduation; case reported to Provost for publication
   Student charged under s. B.i.1(d) and s. B.i.1(a) of the Code . The
   charges related to allegations that the Student had knowingly
   represented the ideas of another as her own in a Course paper, and that
   the Student knowingly forged or altered a University of Toronto
   Verification of Illness or Injury form.
   The Student pleaded guilty to both charges. There was an Agreed
   Statement of Facts. The Student appropriated text verbatim or nearly
   verbatim from two academic sources without any appropriate citations,
   and she altered a genuine Verification of Illness form that had been
   signed by a doctor to extend the projected end date for an illness with
   the intention of obtaining an accommodation to be excused from a missed
   midterm. The Panel noted that the Student had a prior offence of
   plagiarism and that at the time of the hearing she was serving a
   one-year academic suspension for poor academic performance. The Panel
   also noted that the Student had suffered from severe anxiety and
   depression, and stated that there was no question that at the time the
   offences were committed the Studentâs medical condition significantly
   affected her ability to succeed in academic study. There was a Joint
   Submission on Penalty. The Panel accepted the Joint Submission on
   Penalty and it imposed a grade assignment of zero in the Course; a
   3-year suspension; a notation on the Studentâs academic record and
   transcript until her graduation from the University; and that the case
   be reported to the Provost for publication.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12884
