THE UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
TRIAL DIVISION
IN THE MATTER OF charges of academic dishonesty made on October 21, 2014
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic
Matters, 1995,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Act, 1971, S.O. 1971, c. 56 am.

BETWEEN:
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
- and -

Fllll ■ -H■
REASONS FOR DECISION

Hearing Date: February 5, 2015
Members of the Panel:
Mr. William C. McDowell, Lawyer, Chair
Professor Richard B. Day, Faculty Panel Member
Ms. Lu Zhao, Student Panel Member
Appearances:
Robert Centa, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Barristers
Ms. Julia Wilkes, Counsel for the Student, Wardle Daley Bernstein Bieber LLP

In Attendance:
Mr. Christopher Lang, Director, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances
■
the Student via Skype

FIii

-

rllll,

-2-

1.

FIii ■

-

~ has entered plea of guilty to one charge of plagiarism and a

second charge of forgery. The specific charges to which a plea was entered are the
following:

2.

1.

On or about, December 2, 2013, you knowingly
represented the ideas of another, or the expressions of the
ideas of another as your own work in an essay titled "A
Discourse Analysis of Turks-Germans in Germany from
1970 -present" (the "Essay") that you submitted in partial
completion of the course requirements in DTS201 H5F (the
"Course"), contrary to section B.1.1 (d) of the Code.

3.

On or about October 10, 2013, you knowingly forged or in
any other way altered or falsified a document or evidence
required by the University of Toronto, or uttered, circulated
or made use of any such forged, altered or falsified
document, namely, a University of Toronto Verification of
Student Illness or Injury, dated October 10, 2013
("Certificate"), which you submitted in support of your
request for academic accommodations in the Course,
contrary to Section B.1.1 (a) of the Code.

In the fall of 2013, Ms. ~ enrolled in DTS201 H5F - Introduction to Diaspora

and Transnational Studies ("the Course"). The instructor was Professor Hui Kian Kwee.
3.

On October 9, 2013, Professor Kwee assigned a surprise in-class quiz which

was worth 10% of the final grade. The syllabus provided that there would be no makeup quiz unless a student provided a proper medical document in accordance with the
Rules of the University. Ms. ~ had not attended the class on October 91\ but on
October 10th , she was examined by Dr. Joe Tran of the South Common Medical Centre
in Mississauga. Dr. Tran signed a verification of Student Illness or Injury form which
indicated that Ms. ~ was significantly impaired in her ability to fulfill academic
obligations between October 9th and 1ih, 2013.

-3-

4.

Another midterm test in the course was scheduled for October 23, 2013. Again,

!-II was absent and failed to write the midterm test, which was worth 25% of the
final grade in the course. Ms. !-II then attended on October 22, 2013 the Bay College
Ms.

Medical and Lockwood Diagnostics in Toronto where she was examined by Dr. C. Lei.
Dr. Lei signed the requisite medical form which indicated that Ms.

rill was impaired in

her ability to perform academic obligations between October 21 st and 25th .

rill subsequently approached Professor Kwee and asked him for
permission to be excused from the midterm test. Ms. rill provided Professor Kwee

5.

Ms.

with the Verification of Student Illness or Injury form which was dated October 10, 2013.
The altered form purported to explain that the student had an anticipated end date for
her illness of October 25, 2013. (It will be recalled that the genuine form executed by Dr.
Tran projected an end date for the illness of October 12, 2013.) As well, she added text
under the heading "Additional Comments" on the certificate which was not written by the
doctor who signed the form.
6.

Ms.

rll conceded before us that she knew the altered form was falsified, that

she intended that the University rely on it in considering whether or not to provide her
with academic accommodations, and that she did so in an attempt to obtain an
academic advantage. As well, Ms.

rll accepted that she knew at all material times that

the University required evidence to be presented in order to obtain the academic
accommodation she sought.

-4Plagiarism

7.

The plagiarism charge also relates to the Course. The Course included a

research essay due on December 2, 2013 which was worth 30% of the final grade.
8.

The syllabus contained an express warning against plagiarism beginning,

"Plagiarism - DO NOT DO IT! - if you do not know what plagiarism is, read the
following

and

consult

the

website:

http://www.writing.utoronto.ca/advice/using-

sou rces/how-not-to-plagiarize".
9.

On December 2, 2013, Ms.

f-111 submitted a paper entitled "A Discourse Analysis

of Turks and Germans in Germany from 1970-present" ("the Essay"). It was a
requirement of the course that research essays would be submitted to turnitin.com. We
reviewed the analysis of the essay generated by website.
10.

The turnitin.com analysis disclosed a 58% similarity between Ms. H■'s paper

and two essays ("the Sources"):
(a)

Claus Mueller, "Integrating Turkish communities: a German dilemma",
Popul Res Policy Rev (2006) 25:419 - 441; and

(b)

Gazme Avci, "Comparing Integration Policies and Outcomes: Turks in the
Netherlands and Germany", Turkish Studies, Volume 7, No. 1, 67-84
(March 2006).

11.

While Ms.

f-111 sometimes used quotation marks to delineate passages taken

verbatim or nearly verbatim from the sources she accurately identified in the essay, she

-5-

also appropriated other verbatim or nearly verbatim text, which she used without
quotation marks or any other appropriate citation.
12.

Ms. rill admitted the mechanical aspects of the plagiarism. She accepted that

she had represented the ideas and work found in the sources as her own, and had
committed plagiarism contrary to section B.1.1 (d) of the Code. It follows that she
admitted having engaged in a form of cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct,
fraud or misrepresentation in order to obtain academic credit, contrary to section
B.1.1 (d) of the Code.
Penalty

13.

Ms. rill had a prior offence of plagiarism in the summer of 2013 in the course

CCT11 0H5S - The Rhetoric of Digital and Interactive Media Environments (CCT110)
which was taught by Professor Michael Dick. She submitted an essay in that course
which was worth 30% of the final grade. On November 20, 2013, Ms.

rll admitted

having committed plagiarism in the essay. This matter was dealt with by the Dean, who
imposed a mark of zero, a grade reduction and an annotation on her academic record
and transcripts from November 20, 2013 until August 20, 2014.
14.

At the time of the hearing before us, Ms.

rll was serving a one-year academic

suspension for poor academic performance.
15.

We heard evidence that the student had suffered from depression for some time.

She had received medical counselling with respect to a precipitous loss of weight. Ms.

HIii had cooperated with the investigation into these matters.

-6-

16.

Ms. H■ is an only child. Her parents are separated. In the spring of 2013, Ms.

H■ learned that her parents were getting divorced. Regrettably, she was drawn into

their conflict. She sought psychiatric counselling for severe anxiety and depression in
April 2013. There is no question that for much of 2013 Ms. H■'s medical condition
significantly affected her ability to succeed in academic study, although she may not
have recognized this at the time.
17.

Before us, it was agreed that Ms. H■ should receive the following sanctions:
(a)

a final grade of zero in the course DTS201 H5F;

(b)

a suspension from the University from the day the Tribunal makes its
order until August 30, 2018; and

(c)

a notation of the sanction on her academic record and transcript until the
date she graduates from the University.

18.

These proposed sentences are within the range of those handed down by the

Tribunal in recent cases, and we accepted the joint submission.
19.

The parties additionally agreed that the case should be reported to the Provost

for publication of the notice of decision of the Tribunal and the sanction imposed in the
University newspapers, with the name of the student withheld.
DATED at Toronto, this

4 ~ a y of September, 2015.

William C. McDowell, Co-Chair

