UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
GOVERNING COUNCIL
Report # 417 of the Academic Appeals Committee
December 13, 2021
To the Academic Board
University of Toronto
Your Committee reports that it held a hybrid hearing (mix of both in-person and electronic via
Zoom) on Monday, December 13, 2021, at which the following members were present:
Academic Appeals Committee Members:
Professor Stephen Waddams, Chair
Professor Ron Levi, Faculty Governor
Ms. Mozynah Nofal, Student Governor
Hearing Secretary:
Mr. Christopher Lang, Director, Office of Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances
For the Student Appellant:
Mr. O.R. (the “Student”)
For the Faculty of Applied Science and Engineering:
Professor Thomas Coyle, Faculty of Applied Science and Engineering

1

Background
The Appellant was prevented by illness from completing work in three courses in the Faculty of
Applied Sciences and Engineering in 2020: HMB 200, MIE 304 and FOR 424. The Appellant
had obtained a mark of 48 per cent in FOR 424. He petitioned the Examination Committee of
the Faculty for permission to complete the work for the three courses at later dates. The medical
evidence was undisputed, and the Examination Committee agreed that accommodation was
appropriate. The accommodation allowed was retroactive withdrawal, explanations being given
in identical words in respect of each course, without reference to the mark in FOR 424.
The result was that the Appellant did not incur any academic penalty, but neither did he receive
any academic credit, nor was he given the opportunity of completing the remaining requirements
of FOR 424. The Appellant appealed to the Faculty’s Academic Appeals Board, which
dismissed the appeal on the ground that ‘there is no evidence that the student completed
sufficient course work for the courses in question’; no reference was made in the Board’s reasons
to the mark of 48 per cent in FOR 424. The Appellant now appeals to your committee, stressing
the distinction between FOR 424 and the other two courses.
An expedited hearing was scheduled in view of the need for a decision before the Winter term of
2022.
Decision
Your committee’s decision is that the appeal should be allowed in respect of FOR 424, and the
Appellant afforded an opportunity to complete the remaining requirements of that course during
the Winter term of 2022. The accuracy of the mark of 48 per cent was not disputed by the
Faculty, and consequently the reason given by the Academic Appeals Board (that ‘there is no
2

evidence that the student completed sufficient course work’) does not apply to this course: the 48
per cent mark is, to say the least, some evidence.
In respect of the other two courses (HMB 200 and MIE 304) no evidence was presented of the
extent of work completed, and, consequently, the appeal in respect of those two courses is
dismissed.

3

