Report 417

   DATE : December 13, 2021
   PARTIES : Mr. O.R. (the ‚Student‚) v. Faculty of Applied Science and
   Engineering

   HEARING DATE(S) : December 13, 2021, hybrid hearing (mix of both
   in-person and electronic via Zoom)

   Committee Members:
   Professor Stephen Waddams, Chair
   Professor‚ØRon Levi, Faculty Governor
   Ms. Mozynah Nofal, Student Governor

   Hearing Secretary:
   Mr. Christopher Lang, Director, Office of Appeals, Discipline and
   Faculty Grievances

   Appearances:
   For the Student Appellant:
   The Student

   For the Faculty of Applied Science and Engineering:
   Professor Thomas Coyle, Vice-Dean, Undergraduate Studies, Faculty of
   Applied Science and Engineering

   The Student was unable to complete course work for three separate
   courses due to illness. The Student petitioned the Examination
   Committee of the Faculty of Applied Science and Engineering (‚Faculty‚)
   for permission to complete the work for the three courses at later
   dates. The medical evidence was undisputed, and the Examination
   Committee agreed that accommodation was appropriate. The accommodation
   that was allowed was a retroactive withdrawal, explanations being given
   in identical words in respect of each course, without reference to the
   mark in one of the courses. Based on the accommodation, the Student did
   not incur any academic penalty, nor did he receive any academic credit,
   nor was he afforded the opportunity to complete the remaining
   requirements for the one course in which he received a grade. The
   Student appealed to the Faculty‚s Academic Appeals Board, which
   dismissed the appeal on the ground that there was no evidence that the
   Student completed sufficient course work for the courses in question.
   The Student appealed to the Academic Appeals Committee (the
   ‚Committee‚), stressing the distinction between the courses.

   The Committee found that the grade received in the one course was
   indicative of some evidence that the Student completed sufficient
   course work for that course only. With respect to the other two
   courses, there was no evidence presented of the extent of the work
   completed. Consequently, the Committee found that the appeal should be
   allowed in part. The Student should be afforded an opportunity to
   complete the remaining requirements of the one course in which he
   received a grade during the Winter term of 2022, however, the appeal
   with respect to the other two courses is dismissed.
   [1]View Report

References

   1. file:///media/30148
