UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
GOVERNING COUNCIL

Report #351 of the Academic Appeals Committee
November 25, 2010
To the Academic Board
University of Toronto
The Academic Appeals Conrn1ittee reports that it held a hearing on Friday, November 19, 2010,
at which the following were present:
Assistant Dean Kate Hilton, Chair
Professor Robert Baker
Professor Ellen Hodnett
Professor Henry Mann
Mr. Olivier Sorin
Secretary: Mr. Christopher Lang, Director, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances
In Attendance:
For the Student Appellant:

Mr. S

M

(the "Student")

For the University of Toronto, Faculty of Applied Science and Engineering:

Professor Thomas Coyle, Associate Professor & Interim Associate Chair, Undergraduate Studies
Mr. Khuong Doan, Associate Registrar, Student Services

I.

The Appeal

The Student is appealing the decision of the Academic Appeals Board of the Faculty of Applied
Science and Engineering ("AAB"), dated August 17, 2009, which denied the Student's request
for late withdrawal without academic penalty.

II.

Facts

The Student enrolled in Faculty of Applied Science and Engineering ("Engineering") in Fall
2006. He experienced academic difficulty due to family circumstances, and ultimately withdrew
from the program.

1

The Student took a year off, and in the summer of 2008, he was preparing to return to school.
That summer, his fiancee became unexpectedly pregnant, and they decided to terminate the
pregnancy. This event had a number of negative repercussions for the Student. The Student's
parents disapproved of his and his fiancee's decision, causing a rift in the family relationship. He
moved out of the family home, which increased his living expenses; although he got a weekend
job as a window cleaner, he still struggled to support himself financially. In addition, the
Student experienced mental distress as a result of his estrangement from his parents and his guilt
over the termination of the pregnancy.
While all of these events were unfolding, the Student returned to school. In Fall 2008, the
Student enrolled in the first year program in Engineering. Because he had withdrawn from the
program in 2006, the Student was determined to succeed. However, his personal circumstances
affected his ability to focus on his studies. The Student experienced academic difficulty
throughout the term, but he persisted and wrote his final examinations in December 2008. The
results of the examinations, however, were very disappointing. The Student failed the term, and
was expelled from the program.
The Student petitioned the Examinations Committee, requesting late withdrawal without
academic penalty due to his personal circumstances. In its decision of January 28, 2009, the
Examinations Committee denied the petition.
The Student then appealed to the AAB, which upheld the decision of the Examinations
Committee on August 17, 2009.
On November 16, 2009, the Student appealed to the Academic Appeals Committee of Governing
Council, requesting once again that he be granted late withdrawal without academic penalty, so
that he could enroll once again in the Engineering program.

III.

Decision

This Conm1ittee accepts that the Student was distressed by his difficult family circumstances and
financial situation in the Fall of 2008, and that the Student's academic perfo1mance was likely
affected by these factors. However, such a finding is insufficient to merit the extraordinary
remedy of late withdrawal without academic penalty.
The Academic Appeals Committee has repeatedly affomed that late withdrawal without
academic penalty will only be awarded in cases where there is a change in circumstances after
the drop date for courses. Once the drop date is past, the University holds the student to his or
her decision to continue with the course, and will not make exceptions for circumstances that
existed at the time of the drop date, however difficult those circumstances may be for the student.
The drop date policy requires students to make a reasonable assessment as to their probability of
success; it does not permit them to gamble that they will be able to overcome their circumstances
and succeed in their courses while retaining the option of late withdrawal if their gamble fails.

2

In this case, the Student argued that his circumstances became more difficult following the drop
date, as he had less income towards the end of the term from window washing and he began
arguing more frequently with his fiancee. For these reasons, he suggested that his mental
distress became more acute and affected his studies more dramatically following the drop date.
It is difficult for this Committee to assess the extent of the Student's mental distress and the
degree to which it affected his studies, since the Student did not present any medical evidence at
the hearing, and he testified that he had never sought medical or counseling support of any kind.
As stated above, late withdrawal without academic penalty is not available as a remedy for
circumstances which existed at the time of the drop date. For the Student's argument to be
successful, he would have had to demonstrate that his situation deteriorated so dramatically
following the drop date that it amounted to an unforeseen change in circumstances, rather than an
extension of existing circumstances. This is a high standard, and in light of the fact that the
Student did not present any medical or other compelling evidence to support his argument, this
Committee could not conclude that the test was met.
In short, the Student had been distressed about his family circumstances and financial situation
well before the drop date, and he continued to be distressed about them following the drop date.
He hoped that he would be able to turn the situation around and improve his academic
performance. Unfortunately, his hopes were not realized, and the Student must accept the
consequences of his choice.
The appeal is denied.

3

