Report #351

   DATE: November 25, 2010
   PARTIES: S.M.Â  (the Student) v. University of Toronto, Faculty of
   Applied Sciences and Engineering
   Hearing Date(s): November 19, 2010
   Committee Members:
   Assistant Dean Kate Hilton, Chair
   Professor Robert Baker
   Professor Ellen Hodnett
   Professor Henry Mann
   Olivier Sorin
   Appearances:
   For the Student Appellant:
   S.M. (the Student)
   For the University of Toronto, Faculty of Applied Sciences and
   Engineering:
   Professor Thomas Coyle, Assistant Professor & Interim Associate Chair,
   Undergraduate Studies
   Khuong Doan, Associate Registrar

   University of Toronto, Faculty of Applied Sciences and Engineering â
   late withdrawal without academic penalty â medical illness â family
   circumstances â financial circumstancesâ extraordinary remedy â
   demonstrable unforeseen change in circumstances âÂ  no medical evidence
   â no compelling evidence â test for late withdrawal without academic
   penalty not met â appeal dismissed
   Appeal of a decision to deny the Student his petition for a late
   withdrawal without academic penalty. The Student had previously
   enrolled in the Faculty of Applied Science and Engineering but had to
   withdraw due to family circumstances. The Student took a year off and
   returned to the University. Personal circumstances persisted and
   affected the Studentâs ability to focus on his studies. The Student
   experienced academic difficulty throughout the term, but persisted and
   wrote his final examinations. The Student failed the term and was
   expelled from the program. The Committee rejected the Studentâs appeal.
   The Committee accepted that the Student was distressed by difficult
   family and financial circumstances and that the Studentâs performance
   was affected. The Committee held, however, that such a finding was
   insufficient to merit the extraordinary remedy of late withdrawal
   without academic penalty. The Committee held that the Student would
   have had to demonstrate that his situation had deteriorated so
   dramatically following the drop date that it amounted to an unforeseen
   change in circumstances rather than an extension of existing
   circumstances. The Committee held that the Student did not present any
   medical or other compelling evidence to support his argument. The
   Committee concluded that the test was not met. Appeal dismissed.
   [1]View Report

References

   1. file:///media/12596
