Case #858 - Appeal 2

   [1]Case 858 - Appeal 1
   [2]Case 858 - Tribunal 1
   [3]Case 858 - Tribunal 2
   DATE: April 18, 2019
   PARTIES: A.S. (Appellant) v. The University of Toronto (Respondent)
   Hearing Date:Â  February 1, 2019
   Panel Members:
   Ms. Patricia D.S. Jackson, Chair
   Dr. Ramona Alaggia, Faculty Panel Member
   Ms. Alena Zelinka, Student Panel Member
   Professor Aarthi Ashok, Faculty Panel Member
   Appearances:
   Mr. Hatim Kheir, Downtown Legal Services, for the Appellant, also in
   attendance
   Mr. Robert Centa, for the Respondent
   DAB Decision
   Note: SeeÂ Tribunal case summaryÂ for detailed facts
   Discipline Appeals Board â Student appeal from Tribunal decision â
   request for new Tribunal hearing - concoction of academic sources and
   falsification of academic record â s. B.i.1(f) and s. B.i.1(a) of Code
   - - the standard of proof to be applied in proceedings under the Code
   is the civil standard of proof on a balance of probabilities â appeal
   dismissed
   Appeal by the Student from a Tribunal decision finding the Student
   guilty of two offences under the Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters
   (the Code ) and recommending expulsion.Â  The Student knowingly
   submitted a report for course credit containing references to concocted
   sources contrary to section B.i.1(f) of the Code . The Student also
   submitted to the Provost a falsified version of a disciplinary letter
   from his Vice-Dean contrary to section B.i.1(a) of the Code .
   The Student asked the Discipline Appeals Board (DAB) to remit the
   matter to a new panel of the Tribunal for a new hearing on the basis
   that the Tribunal had applied the wrong standard of proof in finding
   him guilty on a balance of probabilities. The Student submitted that
   the Code required the offence to be proved âon clear and convincing
   evidence,â which he asserted was a higher standard than on a balance of
   probabilities. The Student relied upon the Supreme Court of Canadaâs
   decision in Penner v. Niagara Regional Services, 2013 SCC 19 , which
   found that the âclear and convincingâ standard of proof in the Police
   Services Act was a higher standard of proof than the balance of
   probabilities.
   The Provost submitted in response that there was no statutory regime
   similar to the Police Services Act establishing a standard of proof in
   Tribunal proceedings. The Provost further submitted that the Code is an
   internal University policy to be interpreted and administered within
   the mainstream of civil and administrative law, including the Supreme
   Court of Canadaâs decision in C. (R.) v. McDougall, 2008 SCC 53 , which
   concluded that there is only one civil standard of proof at common law
   and that is proof on a balance of probabilities.
   The DAB declined to accept this characterization of the Code as simply
   a statement of policy, and found instead that the Code , although not
   itself a statute, was enacted pursuant to an express delegation of
   statutory power granted to the Governing Council of the University
   pursuant to the U niversity of Toronto Act, 1947 and the University of
   Toronto Act, 1971 .Â  The DAB found that the creation of the relevant
   standard or proof under the Code was a valid exercise of this statutory
   authority by the Governing Council and that it intended to create a
   standard of proof under the Code that is the ordinary civil standard of
   proof on a balance of probabilities.
   In so doing, the DAB referred to a consistent and substantial body of
   Tribunal and DAB authority interpreting the standard of proof under the
   Code as the ordinary civil standard of proof on a balance of
   probabilities.Â  The DAB found that the Penner decision did not
   overturn this line of authority because the wording employed in the
   Police Services Act is different than the wording employed in the Code
   .Â  The DAB found that the words âclear and convincing evidenceâ as
   employed in the Code describe the kind of evidence required to prove,
   on a balance of probabilities, that the Student committed the offence.
   Finally, the DAB found that the absence of a reenactment of the Code in
   the face of Tribunal and DAB authority applying the civil standard of
   proof, indicates that the intention of the Governing Council was to
   adopt the civil standard of proof under the Code .
   Upon dismissing the appeal, the DAB concluded that the result would not
   be any different if the Student was correct and the Tribunal should
   have applied a higher standard of proof because the Student failed to
   address the allegations raised by the first offence, and effectively
   admitted that he had received the disciplinary letter in its original
   form.
   [4]View Case

References

   1. https://live-the-office-of-the-governing-council.pantheonsite.io/media/13076
   2. https://live-the-office-of-the-governing-council.pantheonsite.io/media/28402
   3. https://live-the-office-of-the-governing-council.pantheonsite.io/media/12947
   4. file:///media/28403
