Case #691

   DATE: September 26, 2013
   PARTIES: University of Toronto v. S.E.
   Hearing Date(s): August 7, 2013
   Panel Members:
   Andrew Pinto, Chair
   Pascal Van Lieshout,Â Faculty Member
   Maria Wei, Student Member
   Appearances:
   Robert Centa, Assistant Discipline Counsel for the University
   Danielle Muise, Student Representative, DLS
   In Attendance:
   Wayne Dowler, Manager, Office of Academic Integrity
   Natalie Ramtahal, Coordinator, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty
   Grievances

   Trial Division â s. B.i.1(d) and s. B.i.1(f) of the Code â plagiarism
   and concocted sources â submitted four assignments in two different
   courses containing wholesale plagiarism â Agreed Statement of Facts â
   guilty plea accepted for charges under s. B.i.1(d) â remaining charges
   withdrawn by University â Joint Submission on Penalty â second offence
   â Student admitted guilt early for three of four offences â Joint
   Submission on Penalty accepted -- grade assignment of zero in two
   courses; four-year suspension beginning on date of hearing; five-year
   notation; report to Provost for publication

   Student charged with four offences under s. B.i.1(d) , four offences
   under s. B.i.1(f) and in the alternative, four offences under s.
   B.i.3(b) . The charges related to allegations that the Student had
   submitted a total of four written assignments in two different courses
   which contained verbatim or nearly verbatim passages from other sources
   without proper attribution and references to concocted sources. The
   Student pleaded guilty to the four offences under s. B.i.1(d) and the
   matter proceeded by way of an Agreed Statement of Facts. Three of the
   four assignments were nearly identical to text found in uncited
   sources, except for minor wording changes and two or three original
   paragraphs. The fourth assignment was identical to text found in a
   single uncited source, except for minor wording changes and a few
   original sentences. The Panel accepted the Studentâs guilty plea and
   the University withdrew the remaining charges. The parties presented a
   Joint Submission on Penalty. This was the Studentâs second plagiarism
   offence. The Student admitted guilt with regards to three of the four
   assignments at the Deanâs Meeting. The Student subsequently cooperated
   with the University and admitted guilt with regards to all four
   assignments by agreeing to the Agreed Statement of Facts and Joint
   Submission on Penalty. The Panel noted that the Studentâs misconduct
   involved wholesale plagiarism and non-attribution of work. The Panel
   found it concerning that the Student did not admit guilt with regards
   to the fourth assignment and the Deanâs Meeting, but concluded that the
   penalty proposed in the joint submission was consistent with the
   serious nature of the Studentâs misconduct and that there was no
   principled reason to reject it. The Panel imposed a final grade of zero
   in two courses, a four-year suspension beginning on the date of the
   hearing, a five-year notation on the Studentâs transcript, and ordered
   that the case be reported to the Provost for publication.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/13022
