Report 310

DATE:

   September 29, 2006

PARTIES:

   The Student Appellant v UTSC

Hearing Date(s):

   September 1, 2006

Committee Members:

   Assistant Dean Kate Hilton, Chair
   Professor Brian Corman
   Professor Glen Jones
   Professor Ellen Hodnett
   Ms. Johanna Weststar

Judicial Affairs Officer:

   Dr. Anthony Gray

In Attendance:

   The ‚Student‚
   Mr. Roland Luo (Counsel for the Student)
   Associate Dean Nick Cheng, UTSC

   Request to re-write the final examination in one course. The Student
   claimed that she had received poor instruction and that at the time of
   her final examination she was suffering from nausea and dizziness. The
   Student‚s physical illness was raised for the first time in the Notice
   of Appeal to the Committee. With the Committee‚s permission, the
   Student filed additional materials in support of her appeal following
   the original Notice of Appeal. The Student brought a motion to exclude
   the Faculty‚s response to the Student‚s additional materials on the
   grounds that the Faculty had failed to deliver the response within the
   agreed-upon timelines. The Committee denied the motion on the grounds
   that all applicable timelines had been complied with and that there was
   no prejudice to the Student. The Committee considered the Student‚s
   medical certificate and oral evidence with respect to her physical and
   mental state, and the Faculty‚s policy on rewriting a final exam based
   on medical grounds and found that the evidence submitted did not meet
   the standard required to merit relief. The Committee noted that neither
   it, nor the Divisional Appeals Committee, has the jurisdiction to
   assess the quality of a particular instructor and that allegations
   concerning the classroom performance of a particular instructor (even
   if substantiated) would constitute grounds for an academic appeal only
   in rare situations where a student could demonstrate that he or she was
   differentially disadvantaged, relative to the other students in the
   class. The Committee found that that there was no conclusive evidence
   submitted that the instruction was inadequate and no reason to conclude
   that the instruction had had a differential impact on the Student
   relative to her fellow classmates. Appeal dismissed.
   [1]View Report

References

   1. file:///media/12565
