Case No.: 1375
THE UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
IN THE MATTER OF charges of academic dishonesty filed on May 26, 2022,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters,
1995,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Act, 1971, S.O. 1971, c. 56 as amended
S.O. 1978, c. 88

BETWEEN:

UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO

- and -

A

P

REASONS FOR DECISION

Hearing Date: October 18, 2023, via Zoom
Members of the Panel:
Johanna Braden, Chair
Dr. Susanna Chow, Faculty Panel Member
Zoë Reichert, Student Panel Member
Appearances:
Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg Rothstein LLP
Joseph Berger, Co-Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg Rothstein LLP
Adam Goodman, Counsel for the Student, Barrister & Solicitor
Hearing Secretary:
Christopher Lang, Director, Office of Appeals, Discipline & Faculty Grievances
In Attendance:
A
P

1.

The Trial Division of the University Tribunal was convened on October 18, 2023,

to consider charges brought by the University of Toronto (the “University”) against Ms.
A

P

(the “Student”) under the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on

Academic Matters, 1995 (the “Code”).

The Charges and Particulars
2.

Five charges involving three different courses were laid against the Student, as

follows.
1. On or about March 23, 2022, you knowingly altered or falsified a document or evidence
required by the University of Toronto, or uttered, circulated or made use of any such
altered or falsified document, namely, a screenshot that purportedly showed Quercus
gradebook entries in POL338H1, which you submitted in support of your assertion that
your final grade in that course had been recorded inaccurately and should be raised,
contrary to section B.I.1(a) of the Code.
2. On or about March 23, 2022, you knowingly altered or falsified a document or evidence
required by the University of Toronto, or uttered, circulated or made use of any such
altered or falsified document, namely, a screenshot that purportedly showed Quercus
gradebook entries in POL101H1, which you submitted in support of your assertion that
your final grade in that course had been recorded inaccurately and should be raised,
contrary to section B.I.1(a) of the Code.
3. On or about March 23, 2022, you knowingly altered or falsified a document or evidence
required by the University of Toronto, or uttered, circulated or made use of any such
altered or falsified document, namely, a screenshot that purportedly showed Quercus
gradebook entries in PHY100H1, which you submitted in support of your assertion that
your final grade in that course had been recorded inaccurately and should be raised,
contrary to section B.I.1(a) of the Code.
4. On March 24, 2022, you knowingly altered or falsified a document or evidence required
by the University of Toronto, or uttered, circulated or made use of any such altered or
falsified document, namely, documents that purported to be your answers to

2

assignments #5 and #6 in PHY100H1, which you submitted in support of your assertion
that you had submitted this academic work in a timely fashion and that your final grade
in that course had been recorded inaccurately and should be raised, contrary to section
B.I.1(a) of the Code.
5. In the alternative to each of the charges listed above, on or about March 23 or 24,
2022, you knowingly engaged in a form of cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct,
fraud, or misrepresentation in order to obtain academic credit or other academic
advantage of any kind in each of the three courses listed above, which violated section
B.I.3(b) of the Code.

3.

The particulars provided to the Student in support of these charges were as

follows.
(a) You were a student at the Faculty of Music, University of Toronto at all material times.
(b) In Fall 2021, you received a final grade of:
(i) F in POL338H1, which was taught by Professor Mark Winwar;
(ii) F in POL101H1, which was taught by Professor Courtney Jung; and
(iii) C in PHY100H1, which was taught by Professor Sidhartha Goyal.
(c) On March 8, 2022, you advised the registrar in the Faculty of Music that your final
grade in each of the three courses was incorrect because the instructors had not
recorded assessments that you had submitted to them by email. You knew that this claim
was false.
(d) On March 23, 2022, you emailed the three instructors and the registrar in the Faculty
of Music and attached screenshots that appeared to show Quercus gradebook entries
that indicated that you should have received a higher final grade in each of the courses.
You knew that the claims in these emails were false, and the screenshots were altered,
falsified, and did not accurately reflect your academic record.
(e) On March 24, 2022, you sent an email to Prof. Goyal that attached what you
represented to be your answers to Assignments 5 and 6, which you claimed to have
submitted in a timely way. You knew this statement was false and that you created the
answers in March 2022 in furtherance of your attempt to raise your final grade in the
course.

3

(f) You took these steps to obtain a higher final grade in each of the courses or to obtain
some other academic benefit or advantage that you did not earn.
(g) You knew that the screenshots and assignments that you submitted were forged,
altered or contained false information when you submitted them. You knowingly
submitted these documents:
(i) understanding that the University of Toronto required evidence to be presented
in order to obtain the adjustment you sought in your final grades;
(ii) with the intention that the University of Toronto rely on these documents in
considering your request; and
(iii) in an attempt to obtain an academic advantage.

The Evidence
4.

The Student admitted the charges. She attended the hearing with counsel.

5.

The evidence was presented by way of an Agreed Statement of Facts,

supplemented with the documents referred to in those facts. The crux of the evidence is
set out below.
6.

The Student has been enrolled at the University’s Faculty of Music (the “Faculty”)

since the Fall 2019 term. By the time of the hearing, she had completed 21.66 credits and
had a cumulative grade point average (“CGPA”) of 3.32. In the Fall 2021 academic term,
the Student was enrolled in, among other courses:
a) PHY100H1: Magic of Physics, which was taught by Professor Sidhartha Goyal
(“PHY100”);
b) POL101H1: The Real World of Politics, which was taught by Professor
Courtney Jung (“POL101”); and
4

c) POL338H1: Politics and Government of Southeast Asia, which was taught by
Professor Mark Winward (“POL338”), (together the “Three Courses”).
7.

Grades for the Fall 2021 term were released in January, 2022. The Student

received final grades of C in PHY100, F in POL101, and F in POL338.
A.

The Student’s initial communications with the Registrar’s office

8.

On March 8, 2022, the Student met with the Registrar of the Faculty, N.B., to advise

the Registrar that the final marks she had received in each of the Three Courses were
inaccurate.
9. The Student explained to N.B. that:
a. she encountered difficulty uploading assessments on the University’s online
teaching and learning platform “Quercus“, and therefore emailed a number of her
assessments to the respective instructors and/or Teaching Assistants in the Three
Courses towards the end of the Fall 2021 term;
b. she sent emails to the instructors of all Three Courses when final grades were
released in January 2022, but had not received responses to any of her emails;
c. in late February 2022, she became aware that her laptop had been infected, her
email accounts were compromised and her emails had not been sent;
d. she sent a number of emails to the Registrar’s Office about the issue;
e. she was working on getting her emails restored on her laptop; and

5

f.

she was concerned about getting her marks corrected as quickly as possible to
permit her to meet a deadline of March 25 for applications she wished to make to
law schools.

10.

N.B. asked the Student to re-send the emails to each of the instructors in the three

courses, with a copy to the Registrar’s office.
11.

N.B. was unable to find any emails sent by the Student to the Registrar’s office

addressing any concerns about her marks in the Three Courses.
12.

The Student did not send any emails to the instructors of the Three Courses or to

the Registrar’s office following her meeting with N.B. on March 8.
13.

At the Student’s request, she met with the Faculty’s Assistant Registrar, Dawn

Pascoe, on March 22, 2022. She again expressed concerns about the accuracy of her
marks in the Three Courses. Ms. Pascoe asked the Student to reach out to the instructors,
with a copy of the emails sent to them to N.B.
14.

The Student sent emails to the instructors for the Three Courses on March 23,

2022, in which she claimed that she had submitted various assignments for which she
was entitled to academic credit as described more fully below.
B.

PHY100 – Fall 2021

15.

Students in PHY100 in Fall 2021 were required to submit six problem set

assignments, together worth 48% of the overall mark in the course. No submissions were
permitted after the deadline for each problem set other than for exceptional medical and

6

personal issues. Assignment 5 was due November 19 and assignment 6 on December
3.
16.

The Student submitted some of her required course work. She did not submit

assignments 5 or 6 at all. She was assigned a grade of zero for each of assignments 5
and 6.
17.

On March 23, 2022, the Student emailed the PHY100 instructor, Professor Goyal.

She asked him to change her grade in PHY100 on the basis of a screenshot she attached
to her email, purportedly taken from Quercus (“March 23 PHY100 Email”). The
screenshot showed that the Student had received grades of 90/100 and 95/100 on
Homework Assignment 5 and Homework Assignment 6 in PHY100, respectively.
18.

The March 23 PHY100 Email included the following statements:
a. The grade of C awarded to her for PHY100 “was impossible since I handed in all
my assignments”.
b. “I have tried to reach out to you multiple times thereafter”.
c. She only became aware in February 2022 that her computer was infected with “a
terrible malware that compromised all of my accounts”, resulting in the corruption
of a lot of her files, and the loss of a majority of her computer files.
d. She found a screenshot she had taken of her Quercus grades at the end of the
semester, a precaution she took because a similar problem had occurred the
previous summer.

7

e. That screenshot erroneously showed that her assignments were missing with no
grades or comments allocated.
f.

The issue was urgent, and stressful, because she needed her grades to meet the
application deadline for law school, and she therefore needed her grades changed
by Friday of that week.

g. She continued to search for screenshots of the emails she had sent previously.

19.

Professor Goyal had no record of the Student having submitted either Homework

Assignment 5 or Homework Assignment 6 in PHY 100. Professor Goyal reviewed the
Student’s grades on Quercus, which showed that the Student had received grades of
zero on both Homework Assignment 5 and Homework Assignment 6.
C.

POL101 – Fall 2021

20.

Students in POL101 were required to submit seven assignments, with each of the

six best being worth 15% of the course mark. Assignments were due on specific dates
throughout the term. Extensions could be requested for valid reasons for up to seven
days after the due date, following which the answer key for an assignment would be
posted and late work would no longer be accepted.
21.

The Student submitted her first assignment on time, and assignments 3 and 4 late.

She did not submit assignments 2, 5 or 6 at all. She was assigned a grade of zero for
each of assignments 2, 5 and 6.
22.

On March 23, 2022, the Student sent an email to Professor Jung, the instructor in

POL101, asking her to change the Student’s grade in POL101 on the basis of a
8

screenshot attached to her email, purportedly taken from Quercus (“March 23 POL101
Email”). The screenshot showed that the Student had received grades of 9/10, 8/10, and
8.5/10 on Assignments 2, 5 and 6 in POL101, respectively.
23.

Neither Professor Jung nor the Student’s Teaching Assistant in POL101 had any

record of the Student having submitted any of Assignments 2, 5 or 6 in POL101.
24.

Professor Jung reviewed the Student’s grades on Quercus, which showed that the

Student had received grades of zero on Assignments 2, 5 and 6.
D.

POL338 – Fall 2021

25.

Students in POL338 were required to submit, among other things, a media portfolio

due November 1 worth 20% and a research essay worth 35% due December 6. The
Student did not submit either the required media portfolio or a research essay.
26.

On March 23, 2022, the Student emailed the POL338 instructor, Professor

Winward, asking him to change the Student’s grade in POL338 on the basis of a
screenshot she attached to her email, purportedly taken from Quercus (“March 23
POL338 Email”). The screenshot showed that the Student had received grades of 81/100
on a media portfolio and 75/100 on a research essay in POL338.
27.

Professor Winward did not have any record of the Student having submitted either

a media portfolio or the research paper in POL338. Additionally, Professor Winward had
no recollection of having seen a research paper related to the subject on which the
Student claimed to have written her research paper.

9

28.

Professor Winward reviewed records of Excel worksheets where he had recorded

grades for the two assessments in question. These records showed the Student had
received grades of zero on both the media portfolio and research essay in POL338.
29.

The March 23 PHY100 Email sent by the Student to Professor Goyal, the March

23 POL101 Email sent by the Student to Professor Jung, and the March 23 POL338 Email
sent by the Student to Professor Winward (collectively the “March 23 Emails”), were
virtually identical but for the particulars of the allegedly missing assignments in each
course and the marks the Student claimed she had received for them. The Registrar’s
office was copied on each of the March 23 Emails.
E.

The investigation

30.

The Registrar invited the Student to a meeting on April 14, 2022 to discuss

concerns about the claims she made in each of her emails that some of her coursework
in the Three Courses had not been given grades. The Student attended as requested.
This meeting took the place of three independent meetings with each of the instructors
for the Three Courses.
31.

Several hours after the meeting with the Registrar on April 14, 2022, the Student

sent Professor Goyal an email (“April 14 PHY100 Email”) which attached what were
purported to be:
a. screenshots of emails the Student had sent to her Teaching Assistant in
PHY100 on November 26, 2021;

10

b. the text of another email sent to her Teaching Assistant on December 3,
2021; and
c. copies of her answers to Assignments 5 and 6 in PHY100 as Word
documents (collectively “PHY100 Documents”).
32. The document properties associated with the Assignment 5 and 6 submissions the
Student sent to Professor Goyal as part of the PHY100 Documents on April 14, 2022,
showed that both documents were created on March 24, 2022 (the day after the Student’s
initial March 23 PHY100 Email to Professor Goyal), not during the Fall 2021 semester.
33. On April 18, 2002, the Student emailed N.B. writing that she was “deeply sorry for
what has transpired” and requesting to meet with N.B. on the following day.
34. The Student met with N.B. on April 19, 2022. At this meeting the Student admitted
that she had fraudulently created the screenshots which she had attached to the March
23 Emails, to include grades for assessments which she had not submitted in the Three
Courses. The Student explained that she had been under a lot of pressure in the Fall
2021 semester and didn’t get extensions that she had requested for assignments in
POL101 and POL338. The Student further explained that in Fall 2021 she was struggling
to manage everything she had to do including preparing for the Law School Admissions
Test (LSAT), preparing law school applications and participating in extra-curricular
activities. The Student expressed that she was afraid of failing in the Three Courses, not
graduating, and disappointing her parents. The Student apologized for breaking the
Registrar’s and her parents’ trust.

11

35. On April 19, 2022 the Student, sent identical emails to Professors Goyal, Jung and
Winward (collectively the “April 19 Emails”). The April 19 Emails included the following:
“I am not sure if you are aware of the situation yet, however I wanted to send this
as soon as I could. I would like to profusely apologize and express my profound
regret and shame for what has transpired. I acknowledge and deeply regret the
pain and inconvenience it has caused you and everyone involved. Although you
do not know me well, I also regret breaking this trust between a professor and a
student, and letting you down.

The April 19 Emails concluded with the Student offering her “deep and heartfelt
apologies” and asking to meet with each professor of the Three Courses individually.
36.

N.B. subsequently forwarded the matter to the Faculty’s Associate Dean,

Academic and Student Affairs.
37.

The Student attended a meeting with the Dean’s Designate, on April 26, 2022. She

acknowledges that the Dean’s Designate provided her with the Dean’s warning contained
in the Code. The Student admitted that she submitted forged documents in the Three
Courses in order to improve her grades in all three courses.
38.

The Student explained that she was very busy in the Fall 2021 semester, having

enrolled in some courses with larger workloads than she had anticipated, while trying to
study for the LSAT, complete applications for law schools, and pursue extra-curricular
activities. The Student indicated that she had fallen behind, became overwhelmed and
desperate and did not know what to do. The Student indicated that she had asked for
extensions from some of her instructors for the courses she was enrolled in, but when
12

she did not receive them, this further added to her anxiety. The Student apologized
profusely and expressed remorse for her actions.
E.

Admissions

39.

The Student admits that she did not submit any of the following assignments in the

Three Courses, and that she was not entitled to academic credit for any of them, despite
the claims she made to the contrary to the Registrar, Deputy Registrar, Professor Goyal,
Professor Jung, and Professor Winward:
a. Assignments 5 and 6 in PHY100, each worth 8%;
b. Assignments 2, 5 and 6 in POL101, each worth 15%; and
c. A media portfolio worth 20% and a research essay worth 35% in POL338
(collectively the “Assignments”).

40.

The Student admits that she knowingly provided the following false information and

documents for the purpose of misleading the Registrar and her course instructors in
PHY100, POL101, and POL338, to convince them that she had completed and submitted
the Assignments to raise her grades in the Three Courses:
a. false information to the Registrar in her meetings of March 8 and 23, 2022, and to
each of her instructors in the Three Courses in the March 23 Emails, when she
claimed to have submitted the Assignments in the Three Courses that should have
been assigned grades but were not;
b. altered, falsified documents in the form of screenshots of grade sheets in each of
the Three Courses which did not accurately reflect her grades in those courses;

13

c. documents created in March 2022 that she falsely represented to be emails sent
to her teaching assistants together with timely answers to Assignments 5 and 6 in
PHY100 submitted in the Fall 2021 term, when they had in fact been created in
March 2022 to further her attempts to increase her grade in PHY100; and
d. false explanations to the Registrar and to the instructors in the Three Courses,
including technical computer difficulties and her efforts to communicate with them
in February 2022.

41. The Student admits that she therefore knowingly:
a. altered or falsified screenshots purportedly showing Quercus gradebook entries
for the Three Courses, which she submitted to her course instructors on March 23,
2022, in support of her assertions that her final grades had been recorded
inaccurately and should be raised, contrary to section B.I.1(a) of the Code; and
b. falsified and circulated or made use of documents that purported to be her answers
to Assignments 5 and 6 in PHY100H1, which she submitted in support of her
assertion that she had submitted these assignments in a timely fashion and that
her final grade in PHY100H1 had been recorded inaccurately and should be
raised, contrary to section B.I.3(b) of the Code.
c. in doing so, she engaged in a form of cheating, academic dishonesty or
misconduct, fraud or misrepresentation not otherwise described in the Code in
order to obtain academic credit or other academic advantage of any kind, contrary
to section B.I.3(b) of the Code.

14

Decision of the Tribunal on the Charges
42.

The onus is on the University to establish on the balance of probabilities, using

clear and convincing evidence, that the academic offences charged have been committed
by the Student.
43.

In this case, the Student admitted 4 charges of violating section B.I.3(a) of the

Code, which states that is an offence for a student to knowingly forge or in any other way
alter or falsify any document or evidence required by the University, or to utter, circulate
or make use of any such forged, altered or falsified document, whether the record be in
print or electronic form.
44.

The Student admitted these charges in writing and at the hearing, which she

attended with counsel. The Tribunal was satisfied that the Student’s admissions were
voluntary, informed and unequivocal.
45.

The Agreed Statement of Facts provided ample evidence to support the charges.

It is clear from those facts that the Student deliberately and repeatedly fabricated
documents in an attempt to obtain better grades than the ones she had earned. She
falsified screenshots in an effort to trick three of her professors into falsely believing the
Student had completed assignments. The Tribunal was satisfied that these documents
were “required” in the sense that they were specifically requested by the Registrar as
proof of the Student’s claim that her grades were incorrect, and the Student’s request for
a revision to her grades could not be considered without them.

15

46.

Accordingly, the Tribunal found the Student guilty of Charges 1, 2, 3 and 4. The

fifth alternative charge of violating section B.I.3(b) of the Code was withdrawn by the
University.
Sanction
47.

The University and the Student jointly submitted that the Tribunal should order the

following sanctions:
a. a final grade of zero in the course POL338H1 in Fall 2021;
b. a final grade of zero in the course POL101H1 in Fall 2021;
c. a final grade of zero in the course PHY100H1 in Fall 2021;
d. a term of suspension from the University for a period of four years from May
1, 2023 to April 30, 2027;
e. a notation of the sanction on her academic record and transcript from the
date of the Tribunal’s order to April 30, 2028, or her graduation from the
University, whichever occurs first; and
f. to report to the Provost for publication of a notice of the decision of the
Tribunal and the sanction imposed in the University newspapers, with the
name of the Student withheld.
48.

The Student submitted additional evidence for the sanctions phase of the hearing,

including a letter of apology she had written, and letters of support from various people,
including one of the professors she had tried to deceive.
16

49.

The Tribunal considered the evidence and submissions of the parties in light of the

factors and principles relevant to sanction as set out by this Tribunal in University of
Toronto and Mr. C. (Case No. 1976/77-3, November 5, 1976).
a. The character of the Student: the Student had a good academic record, with
no prior history of academic misconduct. She admitted her misconduct and
agreed to a joint submission on sanction, saving the cost and expense of a
fully contested hearing. She expressed her remorse in writing, and through
her admissions of guilt. The letters of support are positive, although it is not
clear that any of their authors (other than Professor Goyal) knew about the
underlying misconduct. She appears to have been a high-achieving, wellrounded person who floundered when faced with the prospect of failure.
b. The likelihood of repetition of the offence: this was the Student’s first
academic offence. However, the dishonest conduct was repeated. She
persisted in her false claims of having turned in numerous assignments
when she knew she had not. She lied in meetings with the Registrar. She
only came clean when confronted with clear proof that her most recent
forgeries (copies of her answers to certain assignments) could not have
been created months earlier as she had claimed. While the Tribunal
appreciates the Student’s expressions of remorse, there is concern that the
misconduct could be repeated if she finds herself in a similarly stressful
situation. The Student has written that the sanction she has agreed to will
serve as an invaluable life-long lesson, and the Tribunal hopes very much
this is true.
17

c. The nature of the offence committed: these were deliberate falsifications.
They could not have occurred by accident or neglect. They were not
spontaneous, or in the desperate heat of one difficult moment. They show
calculated dishonesty over a period of more than six weeks. The Student
persistently lied to obtain grades she had not earned.
d. Any extenuating circumstances: the Student explained that she had been
under considerable stress, including pressure from her parents and the
many challenges that came with the Covid-19 pandemic. The Student’s
counsel submitted that Covid and its aftermath has led to a mental health
crisis on campus, and that the University could have done more than it did.
The Tribunal accepts that Covid has been hard. The Tribunal accepts the
Student’s evidence that she felt she was (in her words) “between a rock and
a hard place.” The reality is that most students caught cheating did so under
pressure, resorting to lies and fabrications when they felt they had no other
choice. It is possible that if the Covid-19 pandemic had never occurred, the
Student would never have resorted to academic dishonesty. While this
stress may have been a factor that explains why the Student engaged in
such blatant lies, it is not an excuse. As the Student herself acknowledges,
she must be held accountable for her choices.
e. The detriment to the University caused by the misconduct: the University
recognizes that grades may be inputted in error, and has a system of review
to fix any mistakes. The University is harmed any time a student tries to take
advantage of that system. Given the limitations of manipulated screenshots,
18

there was perhaps not much risk the Student’s attempts to cheat would be
successful. However, considerable resources were expended investigating
the Student’s false claims and fabricated evidence.
f. The need for general deterrence: this is always a significant concern. The
Student’s counsel submitted that a preoccupation with general deterrence
has caused some sanctions to become overly harsh. He cited recent cases
referring to a presumptive minimum two-year suspension for an act of
plagiarism or forgery (subject to variation depending on the surrounding
circumstances), and he claimed this was not in place twenty years ago.
While that may be true, and while every sanction must be fair, the Tribunal
finds that general deterrence is a valid feature of penalty orders. Further,
the facts of this case take it beyond any “presumptive minimum” sanction.
The Student’s dishonesty involved three different courses and multiple
forged documents over a period of more than six weeks.
50.

The Tribunal is not bound by previous decisions of the Tribunal, and each case

must be decided on its own facts. Nevertheless, it is important for like cases to be treated
alike so that parties can come to hearings with reasonable expectations of what kind of
sanction they can anticipate based on the findings. The Tribunal considered previous
cases to help determine the range of penalties ordered in other cases. Grades of zero in
the affected courses are a constant feature in all cases. The length of suspension varies
from two years to five years, and even to outright expulsion, with most cases imposing a
suspension of three to four years.

19

51.

Given the joint submission, the Tribunal did not have to consider whether the

proposed sanction was perfect. Some may find the length of suspension too long, and
others may find it too short. It is clear that the proposed sanction is firmly within the range
of what has been ordered in similar cases. The four-year suspension has been backdated to more than five months before the hearing date, and tailored so that it does not
expire mid-way through an academic term. The sanction does not shock the conscience
or bring the administration of justice into disrepute. It represents an appropriate balance
of the mitigating and aggravating factors.
52. Accordingly, on October 18, 2023, the Tribunal made an order:
1.

That the Student is guilty of four counts of knowingly altering or falsifying a

document or evidence required by the University of Toronto, or uttered, circulated
or made use of any such altered or falsified document, contrary to section B.1.1(a)
of the Code.
2.

That the following sanctions shall be imposed on the Student:
a) a final grade of zero in the course POL338H1 in Fall 2021;
b) a final grade of zero in the course POL101H1 in Fall 2021;
c) a final grade of zero in the course PHY100H1 in Fall 2021;
d) a suspension from the University of Toronto for a period of four years
from May 1, 2023 to April 30, 2027; and
e) a notation of the sanction on her academic record and transcript from
the date of the Tribunal’s order to April 30, 2028, or her graduation
from the University, whichever occurs first.
20

3.

That this case shall be reported to the Provost for publication of a notice of

the decision of the Tribunal and the sanction or sanctions imposed in the University
of Toronto newspapers, with the name of the student withheld.

Dated at Toronto this 10th day of April 2024,
Original signed by:
____________________________________
Johanna Braden, Chair
On behalf of the Panel

21

