Case 1375

   DATE:

   April 10, 2024

   PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v. A.P. ("the Student")

   HEARING DATE:

   October 18, 2023, via Zoom

   PANEL MEMBERS:

   Johanna Braden, Chair
   Dr. Susanna Chow, Faculty Panel Member
   Zo√´ Reichert, Student Panel Member

   APPEARANCES:
   Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg
   Rothstein LLP
   Joseph Berger, Co-Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg Rothstein LLP
   Adam Goodman, Counsel for the Student, Barrister & Solicitor

   IN ATTENDANCE:

   The Student

   HEARING SECRETARY:

   Samanthe Huang, Coordinator and Hearing Secretary, Office of Appeals,
   Discipline and Faculty Grievances

   The Student was charged with four counts under s. B.i.1(a) of the Code
   for knowingly altering or falsifying a document or evidence or uttered,
   circulated or made use of any such altered or falsified document in
   connection with three different courses (the ‚Courses‚). In the
   alternative, the Student was charged with knowingly engaging in a form
   of cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or
   misrepresentation in order to obtain academic credit or other academic
   advantage of any kind, contrary to section B.i.3(b) of the Code.

   The Student admitted all the charges. The hearing proceeded on the
   basis of an Agreed Statement of Facts tendered as evidence by the
   Student and the University. The Student was enrolled in, and received
   final grades, in the Courses. The Student subsequently advised the
   Registrar and the Professors in each of the Courses that the final
   grade in of the Courses was incorrect and that instructors had not
   recorded assessments submitted by email. In their email to the
   Professors, the Student attached screenshots purporting to show Quercus
   gradebook entries that indicated that the Student had completed various
   assignments which had not, in fact, been submitted (the ‚Screenshots‚)
   and that, therefore they should have received higher final grades. In
   one of the courses, the Student attached answers to two assignments
   which the Student asserted had been submitted in a timely manner, in an
   attempt to raise their final grade ‚ assignments which the Student had
   failed to complete at all. The Student subsequently admitted to the
   Registrar, and in a later meeting with the Dean‚s Designate, that they
   had fraudulently created the Screenshots and expressed remorse for
   their actions.

   The Panel concluded that the ASF provided ample evidence to support the
   charges and found the Student guilty of all four counts under s.
   B.i.1(a) of the Code. The alternative charge of violating s. B.i.3(b)
   of the Code was withdrawn by the University.

   In determining the appropriate sanction, the Panel heard a joint
   submission from the University and the Student. The Panel also
   considered additional evidence, including a letter of apology,
   submitted by the Student. The Panel considered the evidence and
   submissions in light of the factors and principles relevant to sanction
   as set out in University of Toronto and Mr. C . (Case No. 1976/77-3,
   November 5, 1976). In particular, the Panel noted, with respect to the
   Student‚s character, that the Student had a good academic record with
   no prior history of misconduct and admitted her misconduct. The Panel
   noted, however, that it was concerned that if the Student was faced
   again with similarly stressful circumstances, they might repeat the
   academic offence. With respect to the nature of the offence, the Panel
   considered the offence to be deliberate and the product of calculated
   dishonesty that was designed to take advantage of the University‚s
   grading system and required general deterrence. Lastly, the Panel noted
   that while it was not bound by previous decisions of the Tribunal, it
   considered previous cases to determine the range of penalties ordered
   in other cases. The Panel concluded that the jointly proposed sanction
   was reasonable and represented an appropriate balance of the mitigating
   and aggravating factors in this case.

   The Panel agreed to backdate the suspension as per the joint submission
   as it was tailored so that suspension did not expire mid-way through an
   academic term.

   The Panel imposed the following sanction: a final grade of zero in the
   Courses; a four-year suspension; a notation on the Student‚s transcript
   and academic record for five years, or the Student‚s graduation,
   whichever occurs first; and a report to the Provost for publication.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/31622
