Case #585

   DATE: September 1, 2010
   PARTIES: University of Toronto v. M.F.W.
   Hearing Date(s): June 3, 2010
   Panel Members:
   Michael Hines, Chair
   Professor Markus Bussman, Faculty Panel Member
   Elena Kuzmin, Student Panel Member
   Appearances:
   Robert Centa, Assistant Discipline Counsel, for the University
   Betty-Ann Campbell, Law Clerk for Assistant Discipline Counsel
   Professor Eleanor Irwin, Deanâs Designate UTSC
   Don MacMillan, Registrar, OISE
   In Attendance:
   Professor John Britton, Deanâs Designate
   Professor Denis Smyth, Course Instructor
   Alexandra Lucc, Course Teaching Assistant
   Trial Division â s. B.I.1.(c); s. B.I.3(b) of Code â impersonation on
   an exam â academic dishonesty â male impersonating female student â
   hearing not attended â reasonable notice of hearing providedÂ  â
   peremptory hearing â previous adjournment â Notice of Hearing - finding
   on evidence of guilt â negative inference from failure to attend
   hearing âÂ  nature of the offence â deterrence â University submission
   on penalty accepted - grade assignment of zero for course; five-year
   suspension; seven-year notation on transcript; report to Provost; and
   recommendation that the Student be expelled
   Student charged with an offence under s. B.I.1(c), and alternatively,
   under s. B.I.3(b) of the Code. The charges related to the allegations
   that the Student had someone impersonate them to write an Exam. The
   Student was not present for the hearing. The University argued that the
   Panel should proceed in the Studentâs absence, observing that the
   hearing had been adjourned previously and had been made returnable on a
   peremptory basis. The Student had been issued a Notice of Hearing
   noting that the hearing may take place without her should she not
   attend. The University attempted to contact the Student 34 days before
   the hearing and received no response. A Notice of Hearing was then
   issued seventeen days before the hearing. The Panel was advised the
   Student had accessed their ROSI account indicating she was in contact
   with the University. The Panel unanimously accepted the Universityâs
   submission to proceed in the Studentâs absence, recognizing that if
   some unknown factor was present, the Student could raise it by way of
   appeal. In analyzing the case on the merits, the Panel heard evidence
   that a male student attempted to access the Exam room and impersonate
   the Student, a female. Based on the evidence, the Panel found the
   Student guilty of having someone impersonate her at an Exam contrary to
   s. B.I.1(c) and of academic dishonesty contrary to s. B.1.3(b) of the
   Code. The Panel reviewed the Universityâs submission noting that the
   Guidelines on Sanctions issued by the Provost call for expulsion in a
   case of impersonation at an exam. The University noted that, while not
   binding, these sanctions are appropriate given the severity of the
   offence and are in accordance with the factors laid out in the case of
   Mr. C.. Discipline Counsel put forward the argument that impersonation
   is not an offence that can be engaged in negligently or spontaneously.
   Discipline Counsel further characterized the offence as especially
   egregious, as it is possible for a plagiarized piece of work to contain
   at least some original material, while in the case of impersonation at
   an exam, there is no original work.Â  In terms of general deterrence,
   the University argued the strongest message was necessary given the
   nature of the offence and detriment to the University. The Panel
   further noted the Studentâs failure to appear reflected a lack of
   respect for the University and its governing processes and should be
   considered an exacerbating factor. The Panel noted that the Office of
   the Provost may wish to consider including the fact that the Panel may
   draw a negative inference should the Student fail to attend hearings in
   future Notices of Hearings. The Panel held they were not prepared to
   speculate in a manner that excuses the Studentâs non-attendance,
   concluding they were prepared to treat the unexplained absence as an
   exacerbating factor. The Panel once again recognized that if some
   unknown factor was present the Student could raise it by way of appeal.
   Looking at the case history on the offence of impersonation, the
   University noted that the usual sanctions for the offence of
   impersonation ranged from three-year suspensions to expulsion. The
   Panel noted that the cases where suspensions were imposed as a penalty
   the Student was present and took steps to persuade the Panel it would
   achieve the necessary personal deterrence. The Panel accepted the
   Universityâs submission on penalty and imposed a final grade of zero in
   the course, a five-year suspension, a seven-year notation be put on the
   Studentâs transcript and that a report to the Provost be issued. The
   Panel further imposed a recommendation to the President that the
   Student be expelled from the University.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12756
