Case #645

   DATE: May 20, 2011
   PARTIES: University of Toronto v. A.T.
   Hearing Date(s): March 24, 2011
   Panel Members:
   Mr. John Keefe, Chair
   Dr. Chris Koenig-Woodyard, Faculty Member
   Ms. Emily Holland, Student Member
   Appearances:
   Mr. Robert Centa, Assistant Discipline Counsel for the University
   Ms. Allison Worone, DLS for the Student
   In Attendance:
   Mr. A.T., the Student
   Dr. Martha Harris, Academic Integrity Officer
   Ms. Natalie Ramtahal, Coordinator, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty
   Grievances

   Trial Division â s. B.i.1(d) of Code â plagiarism â coursework
   purchased from a commercial provider of essays â Student first denied;
   he admitted when confronted with metadata â Agreed Statement of Facts
   and Agreed Statement of Facts on Penalty â guilty plea â finding of
   guilt â prior plagiarism offence â Student only acknowledged fault when
   confronted with overwhelming evidence â Student cooperated with the
   University, attended and testified at the hearing, and exhibited
   general remorse â likelihood of repetition â purchasing academic work
   is at the most serious end of spectrum of plagiarism â University
   vulnerable to this type of offence as it is very difficult to detect â
   grade assignment of zero for course; five-year suspension;
   recommendation that the Student be expelled; permanent notation on
   transcript; report to Provost

   Student charged under s. B.i.1(d) of the Code . The charges related to
   allegations that the Student submitted an essay purchased from a
   commercial provider of essays. The Student first denied the allegations
   but admitted to having purchased the essay when confronted with
   metadata fields that showed the original author being listed as someone
   else. The parties submitted an Agreed Statement of Facts and an Agreed
   Statement of Facts on Penalty, and the Student pleaded guilty to the
   charges. The Panel found the Student guilty under s. B.i.1(d) . The
   Panel proceeded to consider whether it should impose a recommendation
   of expulsion or a five-year suspension. Regarding the Studentâs
   character, the Panel noted that the Student had a prior plagiarism
   offence although it was not the most serious in nature (the imposed
   sanction was zero on the assignment and a reduction in the course grade
   by 20 marks). The Panel also noted that the Student only acknowledged
   his fault when he was faced with overwhelming evidence. Although he
   cooperated with the University by entering into an ASF and an ASF on
   Penalty, attended and testified the hearing, and exhibited genuine
   remorse, because of his prior offence, the Panel was not entirely
   convinced that there was no likelihood of a repetition. The Panel found
   that there were no extenuating circumstances, and the fact that the
   Student began the process of purchasing the essay two weeks before the
   due date showed that it was a deliberate act, not a lapse in judgment.
   The Panel stressed the serious nature of the offence by stating that
   purchasing academic work was at the most serious end of the spectrum of
   plagiarism. The Panel also found that because purchased essays were
   very difficult to detect, the University was very vulnerable to this
   kind of commercial activity; thus, there was an overwhelming need to
   impose sanctions to deter others as well as to reflect the seriousness
   of the offence. The Panel concluded that these factors called for a
   recommendation of expulsion rather than a five-year suspension. The
   Panel imposed a grade assignment of zero in the course; a five-year
   suspension; a recommendation that the Student be expelled; a permanent
   notation on the Studentâs transcript; and a report be issued to the
   Provost.

   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/13014
