Case 1203

DATE:

   February 21, 2023

PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v. A.S. ("the Student")

HEARING DATE:

   November 15 2022, via Zoom

PANEL MEMBERS:

   Karen Symes, Chair
   Professor Emily Nacol, Faculty Panel Member
   Jessica Johnson, Student Panel Member

APPEARANCES:

   Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg
   Rothstein LLP
   Daniel Goldbloom, Counsel for the Student, Goldbloom Law

HEARING SECRETARY:

   Ms. Krista Kennedy, Administrative Clerk and Hearing Secretary, Office
   of Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances

   The Student was charged with five counts under section B.i.1(d) of the
   Code for¬ knowingly representing as their own an idea or expression of
   an idea, and/or the work of another in two book reviews and three
   essays they submitted for academic credit in five different courses. In
   the alternative, they were charged with five counts for knowingly
   engaging in a form of cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct,
   fraud or misrepresentation not otherwise described in the Code in order
   to obtain academic credit or other academic advantage of any kind in
   connection with these book reviews and essays, contrary to section
   B.i.3(b) of the Code.

   The hearing proceeded on the basis of an Agreed Statement of Facts
   (‚ASF‚) and Joint Submission on Penalty (‚JSP‚). The Student had
   submitted book reviews and essays that included verbatim and nearly
   verbatim excerpts from several sources without proper attribution. In
   some instances, Turnitin Originality Reports identified similarities
   with other sources in the Turnitin database. In other instances,
   Turnitin had not identified the similarities between the Student's and
   other sources because the Student had re-ordered the words or used a
   thesaurus to find synonyms of the same words. The professor in the
   course uncovered the similarities through their own investigation. The
   Panel accepted the Student‚s guilty plea in relation to four papers and
   found the Student guilty of four counts of plagiarism, contrary to
   section B.i.1(d) of the Code in relation to three courses. The
   University withdrew the remaining charges.

   In determining sanction, the Panel commented that the plagiarism in the
   Student‚s four papers was very deliberately engaged and represented
   virtually the entirety of the work the Student had submitted. The
   Student‚s efforts to change the plagiarized material was of particular
   concern to the University because these efforts had their intended
   effect by going undetected by Turnitin. The Panel highlighted the
   importance that the penalty imposed must send a strong message that
   this type of academic misconduct will be uncovered and will not be
   tolerated. Since multiple offences were committed in three different
   courses, the Panel indicated that this factor demonstrated that there
   was a real risk that the Student would reoffend. It also noted the
   following mitigating factors: the Student had no prior history of
   academic misconduct; they had admitted their guilt and entered into the
   ASF and JSP; they had not attempted to minimize or justify their
   conduct; they had accepted responsibility and expressed regret and
   remorse over their conduct; they had committed to the offences when
   they were experiencing a particularly difficult time; and they sought
   out counselling. The Panel concluded that the JSP was neither contrary
   to the public interest, nor would it bring the administration of
   justice into disrepute. It found that the proposed penalty fell within
   the range of penalties imposed in other similar cases.

   The Panel imposed the following sanctions: a grade of zero in three
   courses; a four-year suspension; a 3.5-year notation on the Student's
   transcript or until their graduation; whichever occurs first; and a
   report to the Provost for publication .
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/30936
