Report 272

DATE:

   November 28, 2002

PARTIES:

   Ms. M.K. (the Student) v. UTSC

Hearing Date(s):

   November 19, 2002

Committee Members:

   Professor Ed Morgan, Chair
   Professor Sherwin Desser
   Professor Cheryl Misak
   Mr. Chris Ramsaroop
   Professor John Wedge

Judicial Affairs Officer:

   Mr. Paul Holmes

In Attendance:

For the Student:

   Ms. M.K. (the Student)
   Ms. Soma Choudhury, Downtown Legal Services
   Ms. Erica Toews (observing), Faculty of Law

For UTSC:

   Professor Ian McDonald, Associate Dean

   Request to write deferred examination. The Student claimed that she was
   unable to write the exam because she had left Canada to visit with her
   dying grandmother. The Faculty advised the Committee that had the
   Studentâs grandmother died prior to the exam the conditions for special
   considerations, as described in the Facultyâs policy on deferred exams,
   would have been met and the Studentâs petition would been granted, but
   that the same conditions were not met for a visit to the grandmother in
   advance of her death. The Committee found that if a visit abroad in the
   event of a grandparentâs death constituted an appropriate âspecial
   circumstanceâ for a deferred exam, then it was reasonable to consider a
   visit to a dying grandparent to be an equally appropriate âspecial
   circumstanceâ. The Student was not in a position to predict the precise
   course of her grandmotherâs fatal illness and her need to travel abroad
   just prior to the exam was a factor beyond her control. The Committee
   observed that if the Divisional Appeals Committee had had the complete
   medical diagnosis of the Studentâs grandmother before it when it heard
   the appeal it may have come to a different conclusion. The Committee
   found that the Divisional Appeals Committee was under the mistaken
   impression that the Student was failing the course at the time of her
   departure from Canada and that the error was sufficient to undermine
   the fair process of the appeal. The Committee observed that the
   exercise of the Divisional Appeals Committeeâs judgment would be
   tainted by misinformation about whether the petitioner is passing or
   failing the course for which special consideration is being requested,
   and found that the Student had a right to a hearing by the Divisional
   Appeals Committee with her accurate academic record before it. Appeal
   allowed. The Committee ordered that the Student be permitted to write a
   deferred examination in the course.
   [1]View Report

References

   1. file:///media/12648
