UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
GOVERNING COUNCIL
REPORT NUMBER 272 OF THE ACADEMIC APPEALS COMMITTEE
Your Committee reports that it held a hearing on Tuesday, November 19, 2002, at which
the following were present:
Professor Ed Morgan, Chair
Professor Sherwin Desser
Professor Cheryl Misak
Mr. Chris Ramsaroop
Professor John Wedge
Mr. Paul Holmes, Judicial Affairs Officer
In Attendance:
For the Student:
Ms. M.K. (the Student)
Ms. Soma Choudhury, Downtown Legal Services
Ms. Erica Toews (observing), Faculty of Law
For the University of Toronto at Scarborough:
Professor Ian McDonald, Associate Dean
This is an appeal to the Academic Appeals Committee of Governing Council (the
“Committee”) by Ms. M.K., a student enrolled in an Honours Bachelor of Arts program,
from the decision of the Subcommittee on Academic Appeals of the University of
Toronto at Scarborough (the “Subcommittee”). The Subcommittee denied Ms. M.K.’s
appeal of a decision of the Scarborough Academic Committee on Standing denying her
petition to write a deferred examination for the SOCB01Y course taught in the summer
session of 2001. Ms. M.K. was unable to write the exam because she had left Canada for
India to visit with her dying grandmother.
The Subcommittee’s reasons for denying the appeal were that Ms. M.K. should have
pursued one of two alternative courses of action: either petition for late withdrawal from
the course or leave and return sooner in order to take the exam as scheduled. In view of
her failure to pursue either of these two options, the Subcommittee felt that Ms. M.K.’s
inability to write the exam did not raise grounds for special consideration under the
governing university rules. It is the policy of the University of Toronto at Scarborough
(“UTSC”) to grant special consideration only to those students “whose academic work is
seriously affected by some factor or factors beyond their control.”

Report Number 272 of the Academic Appeals Committee
The Committee received written submissions and heard from Ms. M.K. as well as from
Professor Ian McDonald, Associate Dean of UTSC. Professor McDonald indicated in his
oral presentation to the Committee that had Ms. M.K.’s grandmother died prior to the
exam the conditions for special considerations would have been met and Ms. M.K.’s
petition for a deferred exam would have been granted, but that the conditions for special
consideration were not met for a visit to the grandmother in advance of her death. Ms.
M.K. testified that she learned several weeks before the exam – but after the July 22 drop
date for the course – that her grandmother’s illness was diagnosed as being fatal, and that
it was her grandmother’s dying wish to see her grandchildren one last time. She traveled
to India with the rest of her family on August 5, 2001, thus missing the exam on August
15, 2001. Ms. M.K.’s grandmother in fact passed away in October 2001.
It is the Committee’s view that if a visit abroad in the event of a grandparent’s death
constitutes an appropriate “special circumstance” for a deferred exam, it is only
reasonable to consider a visit to a dying grandparent to be an equally appropriate “special
circumstance”. The Committee notes that Ms. M.K. was not in a position to predict the
precise course of her grandmother’s fatal illness, and that her need to accompany the rest
of her family to India just prior to the SOCB01Y exam was indeed a factor beyond her
control. The Committee also notes that the Subcommittee did not have a complete
medical diagnosis of Ms. M.K.’s grandmother before it when it heard Ms. M.K.’s appeal,
and that had it fully understood the medical situation it may well have come to a different
conclusion.
Furthermore, it is clear to the Committee that the Subcommittee was under the mistaken
impression that Ms. M.K. was failing the SOCB01Y course at the time of her departure
from Canada. Professor McDonald concedes on behalf of UTSC that the Subcommittee
had been so misinformed by the course instructor. He submits, however, that this error
had no substantial bearing on the decision taken by the Subcommittee in rejecting Ms.
M.K.’s appeal.
It is the Committee’s view that this error was sufficient to undermine the Subcommittee’s
fair process. Professor McDonald was not present at the Subcommittee hearing, but Ms.
M.K. testified that her failing grade prior to the exam was the subject of much discussion
at the Subcommittee hearing. The Committee is of the view that the Subcommittee
members could not help but to have been influenced by the mistaken information they
were given. A petition for special consideration calls for the exercise of some judgment
about the petitioner’s special situation, and it stands to reason that this exercise of
judgment would be tainted by misinformation about whether the petitioner is passing or
failing the very course for which special consideration is being requested. Ms. M.K. had a
right to a hearing by the Subcommittee with her accurate academic record before it.

Page 2 of 3

Report Number 272 of the Academic Appeals Committee

For these reasons, the Committee is unanimous in its decision to grant the appeal. Ms.
M.K. is entitled to a deferred examination in the SOCB01Y course for the 2001 summer
session.

November 28, 2002

Paul J. Holmes
Judicial Affairs Officer

Professor Ed Morgan
Chair

Page 3 of 3

