UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL - TRIAL DIVISION
IN THE MATTER of charges of academic dishonesty made on July 25, 2008;
AND IN THE MATTER of the University of Toronto Act, 1971, S.O. 1971, c. 56 as amended
S.Q. 1978, C. 88;
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic
Matters, 1995,·

BETWEEN:
UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO

-and-

Members of the panel:
•
•
•

--

Mr. Ronald Slaght, Chair
Professor James Rini, Faculty Member
Ms. Melany Bleue, Student Panel Member

Appearances:
•
Mr. Robert Centa, Assistant Discipline Counsel for the University of Toronto
•
Professor Eleanor Irwin, Dean's Designate, University of Toronto at Scarborough
•
•

Ms. Sarah Crowder, Student Legal Representative, Downtown Legal Services
Ms _ _ _ Student

REASONS FOR DECISION

1.

The Trial Division of the University Tribunal was convened on September 8, 2008 to

consider charges brought under the Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters, 1995 ("Code") and
laid against the Student by letter dated July 25, 2008 from the Vice-Provost, Academic,
Professor Edith Hillan.

-2Hearing on the Facts

The charges are as follows:

2.

(i)

On or about May 28, 2008, you knowingly used or possessed an
unauthorized aid or aids or obtained unauthorized assistance in an
academic examination or term test, namely the mid term examination in
FREA96H3, contrary to Section B.I. l(b) of the Code.

(ii)

In the alternative, on or about May 28, 2008, you knowingly engaged in a
form of cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or
misrepresentation not otherwise described in the Code in order to obtain
academic credit or other academic advantage of any kind during the mid
term examination in FREA96H3, contrary to Section B.1.3.(b) of the
Code.

At the outset of the hearing, the Tribunal was informed that matter would proceed as a

plea of guilty based upon an Agreed Statement of Facts, dated September 9, 2008, and a Joint
Submission on Penalty, dated September 8, 2008. The details of the Agreed Statement of Facts
are summarized here:

•

In the 2005 Fall, the Student was admitted to the University of Toronto at
Scarborough.

•

In 2008 Summer, the Student enrolled in FREA96H3, Introduct01y French I, taught
by Rostyslav (Ross) Bilous. As part of the course requirements, students were
required to write a mid-term test worth 25% of the final grade. Students were not
permitted to use any aids during the writing of the mid-term.

•

On May 28, 2008, during the writing of the mid-term, Mr. Bilous and the presiding
invigilator discovered the Student in possession of, and copying from, pieces of paper
that contained both typed and handwritten text relevant to the subject matter of the
mid-term. The papers were confiscated from the Student, but she was permitted to
continue writing the mid-term.

•

The Student admits that she knowingly used and possessed unauthorized aids and
obtained unauthorized assistance in the mid-term, contrary to Section B.i. l.(b) of the
Code. The Student admits that she is guilty of charge #1 of the charges filed by the
University.

-3-

3.

The Student pleaded guilty to count 1 of the charges. On the basis of the ASF, the

Tribunal accepted the plea and made a finding that the Student was guilty of Count 1. The
remaining charge was withdrawn.
Decision

4.

The panel accepts the Student's plea and enters a verdict of guilty on charge 1. The

University withdraws the remaining charge.

Penalty

5.

In an Agreed Statement of Facts pertaining to sanction, the panel was informed of prior

academic offences committed by the Student as well as mitigating factors that were taken into
consideration when preparing the Joint Submission on Penalty. Briefly, the Student had been
sanctioned at the divisional level on two prior occasions, April 27, 2006 and November 16, 2006,
for acts contrary to the Code. However, in the weeks prior to the instant offence, the Student's
family, and the home where she lived, were threatened and harassed by individuals seeking to
collect on gambling debts owed by a member of the Student's family. To her credit, the Student
immediately admitted to committing the current offence; within days of committing the offence,
the Student withdrew from all other courses in which she was enrolled, effectively placing
herself on a voluntary suspension; and, finally, the Student

enrolled in a counselling program

focussed on exploring and correcting the underlying causes and motivations that led her to
commit these academic offences.
6.

The Joint Submission on Penalty recommended the following sanctions:
(i)

the University Tribunal impose a grade of zero in the course FREA96H3;

-4(ii)

that the Student be suspended from the University of Toronto until April
30,2011;

(iii)

that the Student's academic record and transcript bear a notation until
April 30, 2011, indicating that she has been found guilty of an academic
offence;

7.

The parties submit that the University Tribunal should report this case to the Provost who

may publish a notice of the decision of the University Tribunal and the sanctions imposed with
the Student's name withheld.
8.

In support of the recommended sanction, counsel for the University reviewed for the

panel previous decisions of the Ontario Comi of Appeal (on the effect of a Joint Submission on
discretion in sentencing) and the University Tribunal. While acknowledging the right of the
Tribunal to impose a sanction different than that proposed by the parties, counsel for the
University reminded the panel of the deference that is owed to joint submissions. Although the
Tribunal is not bound by previous decisions, discipline counsel argued that the proposed sanction
is within the range of penalties imposed by other Tribunal panels in similar cases.
9.

The panel sought clarification as to the Student's academic status relative to graduation,

to which the University replied that the Student had completed 13.5 credits and was, therefore,
past the half way point to completion. The Student would have to complete 6.5 credits following
her return to the University. Therefore, 2012 is the earliest that the Student would be eligible for
graduation.
10.

The Panel accepted the Joint Submission on Penalty.

In reviewing the facts, the Panel

acknowledged that the Student admitted the offence and cooperated with the University.

-5However, the Student should be aware that this was a very "close call". But for the University's
acquiescence in a suspension of less than tlu·ee years, we would not have imposed this sanction.
We would likely have imposed a sanction of tlU'ee years or more. The panel is concerned that
there is no evidence to suggest that the Student has learned anything from the two previous
offences for which she was sanctioned. Although we will accept this Joint Submission, we are
not without our doubts about its propriety. We recognize that two years and eight months is a
long time to be away from the University. We expect that by the time the Student returns to the
University, she will have learned that there had better not be a fourth offence. We hope that the
Student will benefit from the counselling she has unde11aken. Although it is difficult for us to
infer very much at this early stage, given the absence of any reports or evaluations from the
counsellor, we are pleased to see that the Student has taken this initiative. The fact that the
Student voluntarily withdrew from her courses (leaving these to be added to her course work
upon her return) was an act that allowed the panel to ultimately accept this Joint Submission.
That was a factor we put some emphasis on when accepting the Submission. Therefore, the
penalty in this case will be:

I.

suspension from the University until April 30, 2011;

II.

a grade of zero in the course FREA96H3;

iii.

a notation on the Student's transcript until April 30, 2011, indicating that she
has been found guilty of an academic offence;

IV.

a report to the Provost who may publish a notice of the decision of the
University Tribunal and the sanctions imposed with the Student's name
withheld.

bate

Ronald G. Slaght, Chair

