Case #527

   DATE: November 3, 2008
   PARTIES: University of Toronto v. Student
   Hearing Date(s): September 8, 2008
   Panel Members:
   Mr. Ronald Slaght, Chair
   Professor James Rini, Faculty Member
   Ms. Melany Bleue, Student Panel Member
   Appearances:
   Mr. Robert Centa, Assistant Discipline Counsel for the University
   Professor Eleanor Irwin, Dean's Designate, UTSC
   Ms. Sarah Crowder, Student Legal Representative, DLS
   Ms. Student
   Trial Division â s. B.i.1(b) of Code â unauthorized aid â mid term
   examination â Agreed Statement of Facts â guilty plea â two prior
   academic offences â mitigating factors that the Studentâs family
   experienced harassment prior to offence, that the Student admitted
   guilt, cooperated with discipline process, withdrew from all courses
   and sought counseling â academic status relative to graduation â Joint
   Submission on Penalty accepted â grade of zero assigned for course;
   two-year eight-month suspension; two-year eight-month notation on
   transcript; and report to Provost
   Student charged under s. B.i.1(b), and alternatively, s. B.i.3(b) of
   the Code. The charges related to a mid term exam during which the
   Student was alleged to have been in possession of, and copying from,
   text relevant to the subject matter of the exam. The matter proceeded
   as a plea of guilty based upon an Agreed Statement of Facts and a Joint
   Submission on Penalty. On the basis of the Agreed Statement of Facts,
   the Tribunal accepted the plea. The Panel considered an Agreed
   Statement of Facts pertaining to sanction. Aggravating factors included
   the Studentâs two prior academic offences. Mitigating factors included
   the harassment the Student's family experienced in the weeks prior to
   the offence, and the fact that the Student immediately admitted to
   committing the offence and subsequently voluntarily withdrew from all
   her courses and sought counseling. The Panel considered the Studentâs
   academic status relative to graduation and found that she was past the
   half way point to completion. In accepting the Joint Submission on
   Penalty, the Panel acknowledged that the Student admitted the offence
   and cooperated with the proceedings. The Panel stated that but for the
   Universityâs acquiescence, it would have imposed a suspension of three
   or more years. The Panel accepted the Joint Submission based on the
   fact that the Student voluntarily withdrew from her courses, and
   despite there being no evidence that the Student had learned from her
   pervious academic sanctions. The Panel imposed a two-year, eight-month
   suspension; a grade of zero in the course; a two-year, eight-month
   notation on the Studentâs academic record and transcript; and that a
   report be issued to the Provost.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12708
