Case 546

DATE:

   May 31, 2010

PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v. K.X.

Hearing Date(s):

   May 4, 2010; May 10, 2010; May 20, 2010

Panel Members:

   Michael Hines, Chair
   Annette Sanger, Faculty Member
   Mir Sadek Ali, Student Member

Appearances:

   Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel for the University
   Camille Labchuk, DLS for the Student (May 20, 2010)
   Kristi Gourlay, manager, Office of Academic Integrity (May 10, 2010;
   May 20, 2010)
   Tamara Jones, Academic Integrity Office
   Justin Fisher, Academic Integrity Office (May 4, 2010)
   John Britton, Dean's Designate (May 4, 2010; May 20, 2010)
   Joshua Hjartarson, Instructor (May 4, 2010)

In Attendance:

   K.X., the Student
   Christopher Lang, Director, Appeals, Discipline and FacultyÂ Grievances

   Student charged with two offences under s. B.i.1(d) and, in the
   alternative, one offence under s. B.i.3(b)1 of the Code . The charges
   related to allegations that the Student submitted two essays, extensive
   portions of which were copied from other works without attribution. The
   Student pleaded not guilty. The professors became concerned about
   plagiarism when a report generated by turnitin.com indicated there was
   extensive verbatim and nearly verbatim copying from uncited sources.
   The professors emailed the Student to arrange a meeting. The Student
   stated that he believed that he was contacted by his professors because
   his essay was substandard. The Student responded to the email two days
   later indicating that he had just submitted a second version of the
   same essay, along with a medical certificate explaining he had been
   ill. The second essay was substantially different from the first, but
   still contained extensive material copied from other sources without
   attribution. The Student testified that this was the first time he had
   been required to submit a social science essay requiring proper
   citation. The Student suggested that the University did not take
   adequate time to teach students what was expected in this regard. The
   Student noted that the syllabus stated that a failure to use proper
   citation would result in a substantial penalty in calculating the
   assigned grade. The Student claimed that he inferred this meant that,
   at worst, failure to properly cite sources would result in a reduced
   score for his essay, rather than prosecution under the Code . The Panel
   found that the submission of the second essay containing as much
   plagiarism as the first supported the Studentâs contention that he did
   not understand the rules. The Panel did not accept the Universityâs
   primary submission that the student knowingly engaged in deliberate
   wrongdoing. The Panel did accept, however, that the student ought to
   have known he was in violation of the Code . The Panel found the
   Student guilty of the charges under s. B.i.1(d). The University
   introduced in evidence a Letter of Reprimand dated April 29, 2008 that
   had been issued to the Student for taking a cell phone into a computer
   sciences exam. The Student testified that he was a single parent
   without a job; that he was working towards a degree so he could support
   himself and his son; and that he was only one course shy of completing
   his degree. The Student was willing to take a workshop on essay
   writing. The Student did not demonstrate an appreciation that he had
   committed plagiarism, nor did he indicate any remorse. The Panel noted
   that the presumptive two-year penalty for a first conviction on
   plagiarism should be modified in a case where deliberate plagiarism has
   neither been admitted to, nor established. The Panel stated that the
   potential mitigating force of the Studentâs personal circumstances was
   offset by his cavalier attitude toward the rules of the University. The
   Panel imposed an a grade of zero in the course, an 18-month suspension,
   a notation on the Studentâs transcript lasting three years or until
   graduation, and that the case be reported to the Provost for
   publication in the University newspaper.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/13012
