UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
TRIAL DIVISION
IN THE MATTER of charges of academic dishonesty made on December 9, 2009;
AND IN THE MATTER of the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic
Matters, 1995;
AND IN THE MATTER of the University of Toronto Act, 1971 , S.O. 1971 , c. 56, as
amended S.O. 1978, c. 88;
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
-ANDMR.~-,..
Hearing Dates: May 4, 2010, May 10, 2010 & May 20, 2010
Members of the Panel:
Mr. Michael Hines, Barrister and Solicitor, Chair
Dr. Annette Sanger, Faculty of Music, Faculty Panel Member
Mr. Mir Sadek Ali, Student Panel Member

Appearances:
Ms. Lily Harmer, Assistance Discipline Counsel for the University, Paliare Roland
Barristers
Ms. Camille Labchuk, Legal Case Worker for Mr.
Downtown
Legal Services (May 20, 2010- for Sanctioning Phase)
Ms. Kristi Gourlay, Manager, Office of Academic Integrity, Faculty of Arts and
Science (May 10, 2010 & May 20, 2010)
Dr. Tamara Jones, Academic Integrity Officer, Faculty of Arts and Science
Mr. Justin Fisher, Academic Integrity Office, Faculty of Arts and Science (May 4,
2010)
Professor John Britton, Dean's Designate, Faculty of Arts and Science (May 4,
2010 & May 10, 2010)
Professor Joshua Hjartarson, Instructor, Department of Political Science (May 4,
2010)

'111- ~.

In Attendance:

(11111 ~.

Mr. ~
the Student
Mr. Christopher Lang, Director Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances,
Office of Governing Council

1.

By letter dated December 9, 2009, the Respondent, ~ ~ ("~") was
advised that he had been charged with three offences concerning two essays
that he had submitted in fulfillment of the course requirements of POL 103Y1Y.
Specifically, he was charged twice with plagiarism under section B.1.1(d) and
once with academic dishonesty contrary to section B.1.3(d) of the Code of
Behaviour on Academic Matters, 1995 ("Code").

2.

The matter proceeded initially before the Tribunal on May 4, 2010. ~
represented himself.

3.

It quickly became apparent that this case was unusual in at least one respect,
namely that the student in question, despite ample evidence that he had copied
extensive portions of other works without attribution, nevertheless denied that he
had committed plagiarism. Accordingly, it was necessary for the University's
Prosecutor to call evidence.

4.

The Tribunal then heard from Professor J. Hjartarson, one of the professors
responsible for the delivery and evaluation of POL 103. Prof. Hjartarson testified
as to the requirements for successful completion of the course as well as to the
efforts he took to explain to his students the risks associated with plagiarism.
These concerns were particularly associated with the requirement to provide a 1O
to 12 page essay, worth 30% of the final mark in the course. He introduced in
evidence a copy of the Syllabus used in the course. On page 6 of this document,
the following appears:
Plaglarlsm
Plagiarism is a serious academic offence and will be dealt with accordingly. For further
clarification and Information, please see the University of Toronto's policy on plagiarism
at http:/www.utoronto.ca/writing/pagset.html
Formatting Bibliographies, References (and/or Footnotes)

In completing the written assignments, students must cite all facts and figures that are not
common knowledge and must cite all ideas that are borrowed from other authors.
Students must use a recognized standard format correctly when formattlng their
bibliographies, references and footnotes. Failure to do so will result in substantial penalty
in calculating your assignment grade. Consult your TA if you have any questions.
·
(italics in the original]

Prof. Hjartarson also testified briefly as to the instructions given to the class at
the commencement of the course. Unfortunately, although understandably, this
evidence was somewhat vague, in large part due to the passage of almost two
years since the summer course began in 2008. Prof. Hjartarson te stified that he
told the students that the course evaluators would use turnitin.com in an effort to
detect plagiarism. He stated that in addition to bringing page 6 of the Syllabus
specifically to the attention of the students, he also followed his standard practice
in connection with plagiarism:

2

"I tell a student sob story. I outline the consequences. I tell them to cite all ideas, facts
and figures not your own. Don't quote without quotations . I take about five minutes.
Basically I tell them 'don't do it or I'll fry you'."

5.

Prof. Hjartarson emphasized that he typically told his students that they must be
attentive to possibilities of plagiarism "even if it's two sentences".

6.

Unfortunately in this case, these cautions appear either to have been not heeded
or not understood. In any event, ~ submitted his essay on or about the due
date. The report generated by turnitin .com indicated that there was extensive
verbatim and nearly verbatim copying from a large number of sources. The
"Turnitin Originality Report" indicated an "Overall Similarity Index" of 86%. A
visual review of the essay in question makes it very clear that more than half of
the material contained therein was taken directly from other sources without
attribution. The essay also discloses a number of quotes which were identified
as coming from external sources and were footnoted more or less correctly.

7.

Prof. Hjartarson testified that upon receiving this report, he and his fellow
instructor, Prof. L. Turgeon, sent ~ an email dated July 22, 2008, advising

~

:
"Dear Mr.~.
Luc Turgeon and \, your POL 103 instructors, would like you to meet us in the Department
of Political Science one week today (Tuesday, July 29) at 5:20 p.m. to discuss your
paper. The Department is located on the third fl oor Sid Smith. Are you able to attend at
this time?"

~ replied by email dated July 24, 2008 as follows:
"Dear all,
Today I submitted my essay of the last version to the Department of Political Science
reception. In addition to this essay, I also submitted a medical certificate which attached
on the top. Please check it and mark my essay on this version. I also submitted a copy
of the essay to the www.turnitin.com. Please tell me if-I still need to attend the next
Tuesday's meeting. Thanks."

8.

As suggested in this email,~ had, by that point, handed in a second version
of his essay which was, in fact, quite different from the first. Although different in
content, it was very similar in the sense that it still contained extensive material
copied directly from other sources without attribution. Some of the copied
material was the same as in the first essay, w~ile much of it was different.

9.

Also as suggested, ~
had submitted a medical note which indicated that he
had been ill the previous week and had had "difficulty with concentration".

10.

In response to ~ s question, Prof. Hjartarson confirmed that a meeting was
. still necessary. Indeed, Prof. Hjartarson's concerns regarding plagiarism were, if
anything, elevated by the submission of the second paper.

3

11 .

A meeting took place between the two instructors and · While it appears
that the professors attempted to bring home to their concerns regarding
plagiarism, it appears that ~ was quite adamant that the real issue between
them should be whether or not the second essay should be marked instead of
the first. The professors were, understandably, not prepared to do this and
attempted repeatedly to bring the discussion back to the issue of plagiarism.
~ continued to see the issue as a refusal on the part of his instructors to
accept an essay which should be used to replace one which, in his view, was
substandard due to medical reasons . He appeared to demonstrate no clear
appreciation regarding the issue of plagiarism.

12.

~ also testified at the hearing. He emphasized his background first of all as
a student coming from another country and second as a student whose studies
had always focused on mathematics and computer sciences. He testified that
although he had taken a couple of first year social sciences courses earlier in his
academic career, this was the first time he had been required to submit a proper
"academic" essay (his expression), complete with the proper citation of sources.
He took the position that, because this was the first time in his academic history
that he had been asked to write.such an essay, he "should be allowed to make
mistakes", much as a student driver is allowed to make a mistake while acquiring
his or her driver's license. He indicated that documenting sources was a new
skill and that he needed practice and correction, rather than punishment. It was
clear that he felt that any failings in his ability to properly document his sources
was the fault of the University, specifically its failure to take the time to teach
students what was expected and required in this regard.

13.

With respect to the Syllabus, ~ made the point that the expressed obligation
to "cite all ideas that are borrowed from other authors" appeared in the
subsection dealing with formatting bibliographies, rather than plagiarism. He
noted that although plagiarism was expressly stated to be a "serious academic
offence", the failure to "cite all ideas that are borrowed from other authors" was
expressly associated with the following:
"Failure to do so will result in substantial penalty in calculating your assignment grade."

14.

From 'this, ~ stated that he drew the conclusion that at worst, failure to cite all
ideas correctly would result in a reduced score for his essay, rather than
prosecution under the Code. For this reason, he stated that although he was
more or less aware of the admonitions concerning the proper citation of sources,
he "did not take them very seriously since I thought I would just lose marks".

15.

Regarding the second essay, ~ stated that he believed that he was being
contacted by his professors because the first essay was substandard ( due, in his
view, to his illness), and therefore decided to submit a second paper. He stated
without contradiction that it was not uncommon in courses for mathematics and
computer sciences for students to be permitted to submit successive versions of

4

pieces of work for evaluation to demonstrate that they were, in fact, learning the
material in question.
16.

The foregoing is a very general outline of the positions of the University and the
student, respectively. Ms. Harmer, on behalf of the University, submitted that the
evidence showed that ~ knew that what he was doing was wrong. She
characterized the second essay as an unsuccessful attempt to cover up or
correct the plagiarism that~ had knowingly committed in submitting the first
paper. Alternatively, Ms. Harmer submitted that~ was certainly in
possession of all of the information he needed in order to ensure that the
University's Code was followed. She emphasized the introductory paragraph
under Part B of the Code which states:
"Wherever in this Code an offence is described as depending on "knowing", the offence
shall likewise be deemed to have been committed if the person ought reasonably to have
known."

17.

~ . for his part, maintained his position that he did not know enough about the
process of citing sources for an "academic" paper. He also stressed, with
respect to the University's alternative argument, that more should have been
done to bring home to him what was expected.

18.

We would note, parenthetically, that although~ spoke with a heavy accent
and frequently had to be asked to repeat himself, it was evident that his
understanding of the English language was, without doubt, sufficiently
sophisticated to understand all of the instructions that were provided to him both
verbally and in writing.

19.

Following the receipt of evidence, the Panel adjourned the hearing to assess the
issue of liability. With respect to the critical evidentiary points noted above, the
Panel was not comfortable accepting Ms. Harmer's characterization of the
second essay as an attempt to cover up the plagiarism inherent in the first essay.
As stated, the second essay contained essentially as much plagiarism as the
first, although in respect of different sources. This supports, rather than refutes,
contention that he did not know the rules. If, as the University contends,
the second essay was written out of concern that earlier plagiarism had been
detected, surely ~ would have taken efforts to avoid such plagiarism in this
second attempt. The submission of the second essay, in the opinion of the
Panel, supports rather than refutes ~ · s position that he did not know the
rules.

>tllls

20.

The Panel also took note of the evidence of Prof. Hjartarson. It was, as stated
above, understandably vague in some respects. This was a first year Social
Sciences course. It is delivered to students who come to the University from all
over the world. While professors and certainly virtually all students involved in
such a course are highly sensitized to issues of plagiarism, this will (as we
believe the present case demonstrates) not necessarily be a universal condition.
It would have been helpful, we suggest, if Prof. Hjartarson had been able to

5

describe with more detail, perhaps from a handout distributed to students at the
start of the class, precisely what information in addition to the Syllabus was
provided to them regarding plagiarism. Moreover, the unfortunate placement of
the expressed obligation to "cite all ideas that are borrowed from other authors"
in the Syllabus section on formatting rather than its section on plagiarism, may
have given a mistaken understanding as to the importance attached to that
process.
21 .

Following brief deliberations, the Panel issued the following oral decision:
[1) The panel is unanimously of the view that the Student ought to have
known that his actions were in violation of section 8 .1.1 (d) of the Code.
While the evidence was not at all times consistent on this point, overall
we are satisfied that the Student was aware of the significance of the
issues concerning the proper attribution of quotes and ideas lo their
proper sources.

[2) He is a student at the university level. Whether or not he actually
understood the rules, he ought to have had a reasonable familiarity in
respect of his responsibilities in this regard. The University has a policy
on plagiarism that was accessible to him and more concretely, he had
access to his professors and teaching assistants. Whether he actually
realized it or not, he ought to have recognized, at very least, that
inserting verbatim word-for-word quotes extending over many lines of
text, was problematic. He, at a minimum, ought to have clarified his
responsibilities. Had he done so, his mistakes would have been
explained to him as he was drafting his essay, rather than after it was
submitted. The information that he needed was available to him and so
he ought to have known that his actions constituted plagiarism.
(3] The panel is also unanimously of the view that it cannot reliably
conclude on a balance of probabilities that the student knowingly
engaged in plagiarism. Once again, the evidence on this Issue points in
different directions. To the extent that it may make a difference to
sanction, ii cannot be said that the evidence clearly and convincingly
supports the conclusion that the student was guilty of deliberate
plagiarism.

[4) To summarize we accept the University's alternative submission that
the student ought to have known that he was in violation of the Code, but
we do not accept its primary submission that he engaged in deliberate
wrongdoing.

22.

Upon issuing its oral decision set out above, the Panel then adjourned the
proceedings. It recommended to that he obtain legal representation of
some kind .

23.

The hearing resumed on May 20, 2010. By this point in time, Ms. Camille
Labchuk of Downtown Legal Services had been engaged by as his
representative. The Panel was advised that the parties had not reached any
agreement on sanction.

6

24.

Ms. Kristi Gourlay, Manager, Office of Student Academic Integrity, testified on
behalf of the University. She introduced in evidence a Letter of Reprimand dated
April 29, 2008 that had been issued to for taking a cell phone into a
computer sciences exam. This letter of reprimand was issued pursuant to an
acknowledgement by ~ that by having brought the cell phone into the
examination room, he had committed an academic offence.

25.

~ testified briefly as to his personal circumstances. He told the Panel that he
was a single parent and did not have any job presently, that he was continuing to
work towards obtaining his degree so that he could support himself and his son.
He stated that he was only one full course shy of obtaining his degree. He
advised the Panel that he was willing to take a workshop on essay writing and
wished that he could have learned more in terms of how to correctly document
his sources. He did not, however, demonstrate an appreciation that, even
unknowingly, he had committed plagiarism, nor did he indicate any remorse or
even take any responsibility for the manner in which events had unfolded.

26.

With respect to the Letter of Reprimand, he advised the Panel that he was
unaware that he could not bring a cell phone into the exam room, so long as he
did not make any use of it. He signed the acknowledgement since that was the
only way he had of regaining possession of his cell phone. During a brief crossexamination concerning the Letter of Reprimand,~ confirmed that he had
probably received an email outlining the rules associated with the taking of
exams. However, he indicated that he did not pay very close attention to those
rules since he believed that he needed only to avoid cheating in order to comply.
As with his testimony regarding plagiarism, ~ did not demonstrate any clear
appreciation for the fact that the University has its own rules that have to be
followed under such circumstances.

27.

The Panel acknowledges the obvious importance of plagiarism in the academic
community. It also acknowledges what appears to be an increasing incidence of
plagiarism despite the well-publicized use of such detective mechanisms as
turnitin.com. The following paragraphs from the Tribunal's Decision in Jllllll(April 15, 2010, Case #573) speak to these issues:
[7] The offence of plagiarism has been commented upon by other
panels hearing discipline matters. We note the comments of Chair Lax
in the University of Toronto vs. M.H.H. {January 12, 2009, Case No.
521) I am quoting from paragraph 29:
"Other panels have noted that the seriousness of the offence of
plagiarism is lhal ii undermines the relationship of trust which must exist
between the University and its students."
[8} Thal Panel referred to the University of Toronto vs. S.B.
(November 24, 2007, Case No. 488) and quotes:

7

"It hardly needs to be said that the credibility and academic mission of
the University and the degrees it awards students can be greatly harmed
by the commission of offences such as plagiarism and concoction."
(9) Likewise, the Panel referred lo the University of Toronto and AK.
(October 12, 2007, Case No. 481), noting among other things that in
recent years plagiarism has been a particular problem for the University
and Tribunals.

(1 1) We also note the description of plagiarism in the Code of Behaviour
on Academic Matters. The description of plagiarism is at once a
perversion of originality and the denial of the interdependence and
mutuality which are al the heart of scholarship itself and hence of the
academic experience.

28.

The Panel was provided with a number of other decisions of the Tribunal
regarding plagiarism. The University submitted, and it was not seriously
contested by the student, that presumptively a two-year suspension has been
regarded as the appropriate penalty for a first conviction on a charge of
plagiarism.

29.

This case, however, appears to be unusual if not unique, in the sense that it
concerns a conviction of a student who, the Panel has found, did not actually
know but rather ought to have known that his actions were inconsistent with the
Code. The first question before us, then, is the extent to which (if at all) the
presumptive two-year penalty for a first conviction on plagiarism should be
modified in a case involving academic irresponsibility as compared to academic
dishonesty.

30.

As stated, this particular issue does not appear to have been addressed by the
Tribunal previously, certainly not in the cases that were presented to us. We are
of the view that academic irresponsibility is, in itself, an extremely serious matter.
Students attending at the University level must take a high degree of
responsibility for understanding the rules of the institution. Students at this level
cannot be expected to be spoon-fed by their instructors, but rather must
demonstrate a high degree of academic integrity and responsibility of their own.

31 .

In this case,
certainly was aware of the existence of some rules regarding
plagiarism and the citation of sources. However clear or unclear the Syllabus
warnings were, they were followed by the clear direction "consult your TA if you
have any questions''. If
actually believed that his understanding of
plagiarism was potentially compromised by the fact that this was his first
"academic" essay, he should have recognized the seriousness of the issue and
spoken with one of his teaching assistants or with one of his professors. Ex post
facto protestations of ignorance are all too easily made and can be very difficult
to disprove. To the extent that this Decision can be used to convey a message
to other students, it is that students are held to an extremely high standard when

XIII

>11111

8

it comes to understanding the rules of the institution within which they are
enrolled.

32.

At the same time, the Panel, evidently speaking on behalf of the Tribunal for the
first time on this issue, does not regard the offence of academic irresponsibility
as at the same level of culpability as the offence of a student who knows the
rules and knowingly disregards them. Both matters are serious, but we believe
that a case of deliberate academic dishonesty strikes even more centrally at the
core values of the University. For this reason, although - • s named offence
remains "plagiarism", we are of the view that the presumptive "two-year
suspension rule" should be modified where deliberate plagiarism has neither
been admitted to, or established.

33.

In our view, in a case such as this, where the student should have known but did
not know that what he was doing was wrong, the appropriate penalty is an 18month suspension. To the extent that any o t - • s personal circumstances
might have been relied upon in mitigation of this penalty, we are of the view that
any such considerations are totally offset by the cumulative evidence of ~
's
attitude towards the charge of which he has been convicted as well as his
attitude to the events that led to his Letter of Reprimand. While the offences are
different in nature, in both cases, ~ demonstrated a cavalier attitude towards
the rules of the University. In both cases, the rules of the University were readily
accessible to him, yet he chose to rely upon his own assessment of what was
right and wrong. ~ cannot expect to be a member of the University
community while remaining oblivious to the rules by which its students must
conduct themselves .

34.

In terms of personal deterrence, the Panel remains concerned that~. even
at this stage of the proceedings, has no higher appreciation of the importance of
the rules of the University than he had before the hearing began. We doubt very
much that he will engage in plagiarism again, particularly given the short period
of time he needs in order to complete his degree. At the same time, the Panel is
concerned that there will be other rules of the University which have not been
"internalized" by ~ - He needs to understand the grave importance of these
rules.

35.

Additionally, and as stated above, to the extent that this decision may have some
general deterrent value, it will be useful in emphasizing to students their
responsibility in familiarizing themselves with and obeying such rules.

36.

In conclusion, the Panel imposes the following sanctions:

of zero in POL103Y1Y;

(a)

That the student receive a grade

(b)

A suspension from the University for a period of 18 months, commencing
May 4, 2010;

9

37.

(c)

A notation on his transcript for a period of 3 years or until he graduates,
whichever is shorter; and

(d)

This matter shall be reported to the Provost for publication in the
University newspapers with the name of the student withheld.

With respect to this last point, during its deliberations the Panel was concerned
that the deterrent value of this decision ( and indeed others like it) may not be
most effectively achieved solely through such publication. It seems to us that the
most effective moment in time for the delivery of such information occurs at the
start of each course. Obviously, it serves the purposes of both the University and
its students for those students to understand clearly the University's rules
concerning plagiarism. In this case, Prof. Hjartarson obviously attempted to
achieve this. If students were aware that they could receive a substantial (e.g.
18 month) suspension simply for failing to follow rules of which they were
ignorant, we believe this might incline students such as ~ to take more
seriously their responsibilities in terms of becoming familiar with the details and
application of such rules.

I certify that this Is the decision of the Panel.
May 31, 2010

MichaelA. Hines, Co-Chair

10

