Case #944

   DATE: March 5, 2018
   PARTIES: University of Toronto v. A.A. (âthe Studentâ)
   Hearing Date(s):Â  Â December 8, 2017
   Panel Members:
   Ms. Breese Davies, Barrister and Solicitor, Chair
   Professor Louis Florence, Faculty Panel Member
   Mr. Daniel Lazzam, Student Panel Member
   Appearances:
   Ms. Tina Lie, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg
   Rothstein LLP
   The Student (via Skype)
   In Attendance:
   Ms. Tracey Gameiro, Associate Director, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty
   Grievances
   Professor Wanda Restivo, Dean's Designate, University of Toronto
   Scarborough
   Mr. Sean Lourim, IT Support, Office of the Governing Council
   Trial Division - s. B.i.1 (d) â plagiarism â ideas in an essay copied
   from online sources âÂ  agreed statement of facts â joint book of
   documents â joint submission on penalty â guilty plea â two prior
   offences â low end of reasonable penalty âÂ  Panel acknowledged that a
   joint submission should not be rejected unless its acceptance would
   bring the administration of justice into disrepute â final grade of
   zero in the course; suspension of 3 years and 4 months; notation on
   transcript for 5 years and 4 months or until graduation, whichever is
   earlier; and that the decision be reported to the Provost for
   publication with the Student's name withheld
   The Student was charged with one charge plagiarism contrary to s.
   B.i.1(d) of the Code , or in the alternative, one charge of
   unauthorized assistance contrary to s. B.i.1(b) of the Code ; or in the
   further alternative, one charge of academic misconduct not otherwise
   described contrary to s.B.i.3(b) of the Code . The charges related to
   an essay that the Student had submitted for course credit that
   contained passages that were verbatim or nearly verbatim to those
   contained in online sources. The matter proceeded by way of agreed
   statement of facts and a joint book of documents. The Student pled
   guilty to the first charge of plagiarism contrary to s. B.i.1(d) of the
   Code . Upon the Panel accepting the Studentâs guilty plea to the first
   charge, the University withdrew the alternative charges.
   The parties submitted a Joint Submission on Penalty (JSP) requesting:
   (a) final grade of zero in the course; (b) a suspension of three years
   and four months; (c) the sanction be recorded on academic record and
   transcript for five years and four months or until graduation,
   whichever is earlier; and (d) that the decision be reported to the
   Provost for publication with the Student's name withheld. In deciding
   whether to accept the JSP, the Panel was referred to cases where the
   student received a suspension in the range of three to five years and a
   notation was placed on the student's academic record for a lengthy
   period of time - ranging from four to seven years ( The University of
   Toronto v. N.A. (Case No. 661, February 29, 2012), The University of
   Toronto v. S.P. (Case No. 654, August 9, 2012), The University of
   Toronto v. L.W (Case No. 625, February 13, 2013) and The University of
   Toronto v. A.S . (Case No. 835, October 12, 2016), The University of
   Toronto v. S.M . (Case No. 819, June 8, 2016), The University of
   Toronto v. O.E . (Case No. 923, August 30, 2017). The Panel found that
   these cases suggested that the JSP was on the low end, but not outside
   the range of what has been imposed in comparable cases.Â  Together with
   the aggravating factors of the seriousness of the offence and the
   Studentâs two prior plagiarism charges, as well as the mitigating
   factors of the Studentâs participation in the discipline process, the
   Panel for the JSP to be reasonable and ordered: (a) final grade of zero
   in the course; (b) a suspension of three years and four months; (c) the
   sanction be recorded on the Studentâs academic record for five years
   and four months or until the Student graduated, whichever is earlier;
   and (d) that the decision be reported to the Provost for publication
   with the Student's name withheld.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/13047
