Case 1052

   DATE: October 20, 2020
   PARTIES: University of Toronto v. S.G.

   HEARING DATE: July 20, 2020, via Zoom

   Panel Members:
   Ms. Omo Akintan, Chair
   Professor Michael Evans, Faculty Panel Member
   Ms. Alena Zelinka, Student Panel Member

   Appearances:
   Ms. Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg
   Rothstein LLP

   In Attendance:
   Ms. Krista Kennedy, Administrative Clerk & Hearing Secretary, Appeals,
   Discipline and Faculty Grievances

   Not in Attendance:
   The Student

   The Student was charged under s. B.i.3(a) of theâ¯Code of Behaviour on
   Academic Matters, 1995â¯(theÂ âCodeâ) on the basis that the Student
   knowingly forged, or in any other way altered, or falsified a document
   or evidence required by the University of Toronto, or uttered,
   circulated or made use of such forged, altered or falsified document,
   namely a University of Toronto transcript. In the alternative, the
   Student was chargedÂ with knowinglyÂ engaging in a form of cheating,
   academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or misrepresentation in order
   to obtain academic credit or other academic advantage contrary to s.
   B.i.3(b) of the Code.

   Neither the Student nor a legal representative of
   theâ¯Studentâ¯appeared at the hearing.Â Based on the facts and service
   of the documents, the Panel was satisfied that valid and proper service
   wasÂ effectedÂ on the Student pursuant to the University
   TribunalâsÂ Rules of Practice and Procedure.Â The Panel proceeded to
   hear the matter in the absence of the Student.Â â¯The hearing took
   place based on an Agreed Statement of Facts (âASFâ)Â accompanied by a
   Joint Book of Document (âJBDâ)â¯signed by the Student and
   AssistantÂ Discipline Counsel. In the ASF, the Student acknowledged
   that he received a copy of the chargesâ¯andÂ admitted to theÂ charges.

   Regarding the charge laid under s.â¯B.i.3(a)â¯of theâ¯Code,
   theâ¯Panelâ¯reviewed theâ¯facts outlined in theâ¯ASF. The ASF outlined
   that the University received a request for verification of the
   Studentâs transcript for admission to another Ontario University.Â The
   Universityâs transcript services department reviewed the Studentâs ROSI
   record to compare the Studentâs academic record to the purported
   transcript submitted to theÂ other Ontario University. The Panel noted
   that the ASF further outlined that a comparison of the transcripts
   revealed that all but one of the grades on the purported transcript
   were inflated.Â In review of the ASF and based on the evidence,
   including the Studentâs admission, the PanelÂ found
   theâ¯Studentâ¯guilty ofÂ circulating and making use of a falsified
   document contrary to s. B.i.3(a) of the Code.Â â¯The University
   withdrew the alternative charge.

   The Panel noted that forgery is widely recognized asÂ one of the most
   serious academic offenceÂ and require the most serious sanctions as
   outlined inÂ University of Toronto v. S.W.Â (Case No. 947, April 16,
   2020).Â The Panel found that theÂ extentÂ of forgery in this case is
   particularlyÂ egregious since twenty-four of the twenty-fiveÂ grades on
   the StudentâsÂ forgedÂ transcript were inflated andÂ as such did not
   accurately represent the Studentâs actual record.Â The PanelÂ found
   that the evidence of forgery in this case is so apparentÂ that the
   Studentâs admission of guiltÂ holds little weight as a mitigating
   factor.Â The Panel noted that the Student offered no explanation for
   his behaviour and no evidenceÂ that he is capable of being
   rehabilitated.Â Therefore, theÂ PanelÂ further notedÂ that admitting
   dishonestyÂ when confronted with unequivocal evidenceÂ does not excuse
   the underlyingÂ dishonestyÂ norÂ is it evidence that this behaviour
   will not be repeated.Â The Panel found that this type of
   misconductÂ deserves a strongÂ denunciationÂ in order to protect the
   credibility, integrity and reputation of
   academicÂ institutionsÂ andÂ the interest of those who rely on them
   including theÂ University'sÂ students, alumni,Â faculty as well
   asÂ employers andÂ society as a whole. Taking all of these factors into
   consideration and after reviewing the relevant case law, the
   PanelÂ imposed the following sanctions: a five-year suspension, a
   recommendation that the Student be expelled, further to s.Â C.ii.(b)(i)
   ofÂ theÂ Code;Â a report to theÂ Provost for publication.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/29484
