Case #940

   DATE : October 17, 2019

   PARTIES :Â University of Toronto v. C.A.J.

   HEARING DATE : July 4, 2019

   Panel Members :
   Ms. Dena Varah, Co-Chair
   Professor Pascal Riendeau, Faculty Panel Member
   Ms. Julie Farmer, Student Panel Member

   Appearances :
   Mr. Robert Centa, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland
   Rosenberg Rothstein LLP
   Mr. Gerald Chan, Counsel for the Student, Stockwoods LLP

   In Attendance :
   C.A.J. (the âStudentâ)
   Ms. Jennifer Dent, Associate Director, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty
   Grievances

   The Student was chargedÂ on the basis that he knowingly committed
   plagiarismÂ byÂ representing as hisÂ own idea or expression of an idea
   the work of anotherÂ without appropriate attributionÂ in partial
   completion of requirements forÂ fiveÂ coursesÂ at the University. The
   charges relatedÂ toÂ four papersÂ submitted by the Student for academic
   credit,Â andÂ oneÂ take-home examination.Â Specifically, the Student
   was charged withÂ five counts ofÂ plagiarism under s.Â B.i.1(d)Â of
   theÂ Code, and in the alternative,Â two counts ofÂ academic dishonesty
   under s.Â B.i.3(b)Â of theÂ Code.

   The Student attended the hearing withÂ Counsel.Â The parties submitted
   an Agreed Statement of Facts (âASFâ) wherein the Student pledÂ guilty
   toÂ the seven charges. The Panel was satisfied based on a review of the
   ASF, theÂ supportingÂ documents and the submissions ofÂ Counsel,Â that
   theÂ evidence established the plagiarism charges. The Panel therefore
   accepted the Studentâs guilty plea in respect of those charges. The
   UniversityÂ withdrew theÂ twoÂ charges of academic dishonestyÂ and the
   Tribunal made no findings in respect of those charges.

   The parties did not agree on the appropriate penalty.Â The Tribunal did
   not hearÂ viva voceÂ evidence at the hearing andÂ all ofÂ the material
   was filed on consent of both parties. The University submitted that the
   Faculty of Law had been extremely responsive and accommodating of the
   Studentâs requests and that various accommodations were available to
   the Student to address his mental health diagnoses. The Student
   filedÂ medicalÂ evidenceÂ including letters fromÂ his
   treatingÂ psychiatrists. Counsel for the Student submitted that the
   evidence established that the Student was deeply affected by the
   illness and death of his mother.

   The Panel reviewed the principles for determining the appropriate
   sanction set out inÂ University of Toronto v. C.Â While noting that it
   was not bound by precedent, the Panel stated that the cases can serve
   as a guide. The Panel further noted that there is no minimum or
   proscribed penalty that must be applied.

   The Panel took the view that there was little evidence to establish
   good or bad character on the part of the Student. As such, this factor
   was mostly neutral but tilted slightly in favour of a lesser penalty.
   The Panel stated that there was no doubt that the chance of repetition
   was low and noted that there was no evidence that the Student
   hadÂ previouslyÂ committed academic misconduct in any of his schooling.
   The Panel decided that this factor therefore favoured a lesser penalty.
   In terms of the nature of the offence, the Panel stated that there is
   no doubt that plagiarism is a serious offence. The plagiarism in this
   case was on the more serious end of the spectrum in several respects:
   there were five counts of plagiarism in five different courses; four of
   the five involved no meaningful work; the Student was a senior student;
   and the papers were worth 90% in two courses and 100% in one. This
   factor therefore was held by the PanelÂ to favour a more serious
   penalty. The PanelÂ thenÂ identified the issue of extenuating
   circumstances as central in this case. The mitigating factors included
   that the Student had no previous convictions; he had cooperated and
   pled to an ASF; and he had not been engaged in any criminal
   behaviour.Â The Panel accepted that there were significant mitigating
   factors. The Student had diagnosed ADHD and depression, and the
   evidence amply supported that the illness and death of the Studentâs
   mother significantly affected him and resulted in stress and
   depression. The Panel noted that the Student was not arguing that he
   was incapable as a defence to the charges, rather this was a question
   of penalty. The Panel accepted the professional opinions of the
   physiciansÂ that had assessed and treated the StudentÂ regarding the
   connection between the Studentâs stress, depression and ADHD and the
   Studentâs poor decision-making.Â While it agreed that the Faculty had
   done an admirable job of accommodating students with mental health
   problems, it also noted that sometimes even the best attempts at
   accommodationÂ do not succeedÂ and students make regrettable choices.
   The Panel found that this was one of those cases, and that the
   extenuating circumstances favoured a lesser penalty.Â Finally, the
   Panel found that the detriment to the University occasioned by the
   offence and the need to deter others leaned in favour of a more serious
   penalty.

   The Panel decided that expulsion was not the appropriateÂ penalty. It
   noted that the offences were very serious, but none of the other
   factors justified this most extreme penalty. There were significant
   mitigating factors and no aggravating ones. The Panel took the view
   that the mitigating factorsÂ and low likelihood of repetition militated
   in favour of giving the Student a second chance and an opportunity for
   rehabilitation.Â In light ofÂ the evidence and precedents, the Panel
   took the view that the appropriateÂ suspensionÂ was three years, on the
   basis that it would be unsound to impose the same sentence as cases
   where there were aggravating factors and no mitigating ones.

   TheÂ PanelÂ thereforeÂ imposed the followingÂ penalty:Â grade of
   zeroÂ in each of the
   courses;Â aÂ three-yearÂ suspension;Â aÂ three-yearÂ notationÂ on the
   transcript;Â andÂ a report to the Provost for publication.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/28657
