Case No.: 940
UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
IN THE MATTER OF charges of academic dishonesty made on June 28, 2017 and January 25,
2018,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters,
1995,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Act, 1971, S.O. 1971, c. 56 as amended
S.O. 1978, c. 88
B E T W E E N:
UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO (the "University")
- AND –
C

J

(the "Student")

REASONS FOR DECISION
Hearing Date: July 4, 2019
Panel Members:
Ms. Dena Varah, Co-Chair
Professor Pascal Riendeau, Faculty Panel Member
Ms. Julie Farmer, Student Panel Member
Appearances:
Mr. Robert Centa, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg Rothstein LLP
Mr. Gerald Chan, Legal Counsel for the Student, Stockwoods LLP
In Attendance:
Mr. C
J

, the Student

Hearing Secretary:
Ms. Jennifer Dent, Associate Director, Office of Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances

-2-

1.

The Trial Division of the University of Toronto Tribunal was convened on July 4, 2019

to consider charges advanced by the University of Toronto (the “University”) against C
J

(the “Student”) under the Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters (the “Code”).

PART 1 – THE CHARGES
2.

The Student was initially charged with five offences under the Code:
(a)

On or about May 3, 2017, you knowingly represented as your own an idea or
expression of an idea, and/or the work of another in your paper titled
“Compensation for Loss of a Home” (“Compensation Paper”), which you
submitted in partial completion of the requirements for LAW224H1S – Community
Planning: Problems in Urban Policy (the “Community Planning Course”) contrary
to section B.I.1(d) of the Code.

(b)

On or about April 3, 2017, you knowingly represented as your own an idea or
expression of an idea, and/or the work of another in your paper titled “Government
Legitimacy in Developing Nations” (“Legitimacy Paper”), which you submitted in
partial completion of the requirements for LAW278H1S – Investment and Growth
in Emerging Markets (the “Emerging Markets Course”) contrary to section B.I.1(d)
of the Code.

(c)

On or about April 29, 2017, you knowingly represented as your own an idea or
expression of an idea, and/or the work of another in your paper titled “Freedom and
Resources in the Kantian State” (“Freedom Paper”), which you submitted in partial

-3completion of the requirements for LAW213H1S – Kant’s Philosophy of Law (the
“Kant’s Philosophy Course”) contrary to section B.I.1(d) of the Code.
(d)

On or about April 26, 2017, you knowingly represented as your own an idea or
expression of an idea, and/or the work of another in your paper titled “Contract
Modification and Consideration” (“Contract Paper”), which you submitted in
partial completion of the requirements for LAW226H1S – Topics in Contract Law
and Contract Theory (the “Contract Course”) contrary to section B.I.1(d) of the
Code.

(e)

In the alternative to each of the charges above, you knowingly engaged in a form
of cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or misrepresentation not
otherwise described in the Code in order to obtain academic credit or other
academic advantage of any kind contrary to section B.I.3(b) of the Code.

3.

The Student was then charged with two additional offences under the Code:
(a)

In December 2016, you knowingly represented as your own an idea or expression
of an idea, and/or the work of another in your take home examination, which you
submitted in partial completion of the requirements for LAW445H1–Statutes and
Statutory Interpretation (“Statutes Course”) contrary to section B.I.1(d) of the
Code.

(b)

In the alternative to the charge above, you knowingly engaged in a form of cheating,
academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or misrepresentation not otherwise
described in the Code in order to obtain academic credit or other academic

-4advantage of any kind in the Statutes Course, contrary to section B.I.3(b) of the
Code.
PART 2 – AGREED STATEMENT OF FACTS & PLEA
4.

At the outset of the hearing, Discipline Counsel advised that the University and the

Student had entered into an Agreed Statement of Facts. The Agreed Statement of Facts is attached
hereto as Appendix “A”.
5.

Pursuant to the Agreed Statement of Facts, the Student plead guilty to the seven charges

listed above. Discipline Counsel advised that if the Tribunal accepted the pleas on the first four
charges, then they would withdraw charge five. Similarly, if the Tribunal accepted the plea on
the first charge of the additional charges, the University would withdraw the second charge.
6.

Pursuant to the Agreed Statement of Facts, the Student admitted that he knowingly failed

to attribute the idea and expressions of another person and the work of another person in the
following courses and papers:
(a)

Community Planning, LAW224: The Student submitted a final paper worth 90%
entitled Compensation for Loss of a Home (the “Compensation Paper”), which was
nearly verbatim taken from the work of another;

(b)

Emerging Markets, LAW278: The Student submitted a paper entitled Government
Legitimacy in Developing Nations (the “Legitimacy Paper”), which was taken
nearly verbatim from the work of another;

-5(c)

Kant’s Philosophy, LAW213: The Student submitted a paper entitled Freedom and
Resources in Kantian State (the “Freedom Paper”), which was taken nearly
verbatim from the work of another;

(d)

Contract Law, LAW226: The Student submitted a paper entitled Contract
Modification and Consideration (the “Contract Paper”), which was taken nearly
verbatim from the work of another; and

(e)

Statutory Interpretation, LAW445: The Student included verbatim or near verbatim
text from a book in his take home examination.

7.

The Student was in attendance and had the assistance of counsel. He confirmed that he

accepted the plea as set out in the Agreed Statement of Facts.
PART 3 – THE FACTS UNDERLYING THE CHARGES
8.

The Student was a law student at the Faculty of Law, University of Toronto in the joint

JD/MBA program. In the winter of 2017, the Student was registered in five courses at the Faculty
of Law, four of which are at issue here: Community Planning, Emerging Markets, Kant’s
Philosophy and Topics in Contract Law and Contract Theory.
9.

Community Planning, LAW224 had a course requirement to submit a final paper worth

90% of the grade in the course.
10.

On May 3, 2017 the Student submitted the 7,000 word Compensation Paper.

11.

Following the grading of the paper, staff of the Faculty of Law discovered that the Student

had included nearly verbatim text from an article by Anneck Smit and Marcia Vaiant published
by the University of British Columbia Press (the “Smit Article”).

-612.

Highlighted versions of the Compensation Paper and the Smit Article reflect that the vast

majority of the Compensation Paper is nearly identical to the Smit Article. There were only minor
changes, including the six places where the Student changed the word “chapter” in the Smit
Article to the word “essay” in the Compensation Paper.
13.

Emerging Markets, LAW278 had a course requirement to submit a final paper worth 50%

of the grade in the course.
14.

On April 3, 2017 the Student submitted the 3,320 word Legitimacy Paper.

15.

After the paper was graded, the staff at the Faculty of Law discovered that the text of the

essay was taken nearly verbatim from the paper written by Bruno Marshall Shirle (the “Shirle
Article”).
16.

Highlighted versions of the Legitimacy Paper and the Shirle Article demonstrate that the

text in the Legitimacy Paper is almost entirely taken directly from the Shirle Article.
17.

One of the only changes is the replacement of the word “earnt” in the Shirle Article to the

word “earned” in the Legitimacy Paper.
18.

Kant’s Philosophy, LAW213 had a course requirement to submit a final paper worth

100% of the grade in the course.
19.

On April 29, 2017, the Student submitted the 4,000 word Freedom Paper.

20.

After the paper was graded, staff at the Faculty of Law discovered that the Student had

copied nearly verbatim the text from an article by Deborah Hawkins (the “Hawkins Article”).

-721.

Highlighted versions of the two texts indicated that the Freedom Paper and the Hawkins

Article are nearly indistinguishable. The Student only made slight wording changes.
22.

Topics in Contract Law and Contract Theory had a course requirement to submit a final

paper worth 90% of the final grade.
23.

On April 26, 2017, the Student submitted the 6,990 word Contract Paper.

24.

After the paper was graded, staff at the Faculty of Law discovered that the Student had

taken nearly verbatim text from an article written by Cheng Tan (the “Tan Article”).
25.

Highlighted versions of both texts indicate that the Contract Paper was almost entirely

taken from the Tan Article without any attribution.
26.

Finally, in the previous semester, the Student was registered in Statutes and Statutory

Interpretation, LAW445H1, with a course requirement of an eight hour take home examination
worth 70% of the final grade.
27.

In December 2016, the Student submitted his answers to fulfill the course requirements in

the take home examination (the “Take Home Examination”).
28.

In the fall of 2017 staff at the Faculty of Law discovered that the Student had taken

verbatim or nearly verbatim introductions from a book by Susanna Lindroos-Hovinheimo (the
“Lindroos-Hovinheimo Introduction”).
29.

A highlighted version of the portion of the Take Home Examination and the Lindross-

Hovinheimo Introduction indicates that the Student used that introduction in a portion of the Take
Home Examination without any substantive changes or attribution.

-830.

On May 29 and June 22, 2017, the Student met with Professor Kerry Rittich, the Dean of

the Faculty of Law at the University of Toronto. The Student admitted to Professor Rittich that
he had violated the Code by committing plagiarism in the Compensation Paper, the Legitimacy
Paper, the Freedom Paper and the Contract Paper.
PART 4 – DECISION ON CHARGES
31.

The Tribunal reviewed the Agreed Statement of Facts, the documents in support thereof

and considered the submissions of Assistant Discipline Counsel and counsel for the Student.
32.

After deliberations, the Tribunal determined that the evidence establish charges 1 – 4 and

additional charges 1 and 2. The Tribunal accepted the guilty plea entered by the Student. As a
result, the University withdrew charge 5 and additional chart 2. The Tribunal makes no findings
or determination with respect to those charges.
PART 5 - POSITION OF THE PARTIES ON PENALTY
33.

The parties did not agree on the appropriate penalty.

34.

Assistant Discipline Counsel submitted that the penalty indicated in this case is:

35.

(a)

A recommendation to the Provost that the student be expelled;

(b)

In the alternative, a 5-year suspension from the University;

(c)

Recording a grade of 0 in all of the affected courses; and

(d)

Publishing the decision with the student’s name redacted.

Counsel for the Student submitted that the appropriate penalty is:

-9-

36.

(a)

A 3-year suspension from the University;

(b)

Recording a grade of 0 in all of the affected courses; and

(c)

Publishing the decision with the student’s name redacted.

At the hearing, the Panel advised that it was not recommending expulsion. It took the

length of the suspension under reserve.
The Evidence on Penalty
37.

There was no viva voce evidence at the hearing. All of the material was filed on consent

of both parties. Neither party sought to cross-examine on any of the material.
38.

On behalf of the University, Assistant Discipline Counsel filed an affidavit of Alexis

Archbold, Assistant Dean, JD Program at the Faculty of Law. Ms. Archbold’s affidavit reviewed
the Accommodation Policy at the Faculty of Law. She outlined the various accommodations
pursuant to that Policy the Student had at the Faculty of Law to address his mental health
diagnoses.
39.

Assistant Discipline Counsel drew specific attention to the communications Ms. Archbold

had with the Student in April, 2017 and May, 2017, the time period during which the Student
plagiarized the four essays. During that time:
(a)

The Student sought to reschedule his appeal from his failing grade in Downtown
Legal Services (“DLS”);

- 10 (b)

He sought and received an after-the-fact deferral of his Legal Ethics examination
for “acute stress, lack of sleep and medication” that rendered him weak in his ability
to think clearly and exercise good judgment;

(c)

After prodding from Ms. Archbold, the Student sought and received an extension
to the due dates for the four essays; and

(d)

The Student emailed and requested to replace a “draft” of his Compensation Paper
with the final paper. This request was denied.

40.

Assistant Discipline Counsel submitted that the Faculty of Law had always been

extremely responsive to and accommodating of the Student’s requests, even when they were made
on very short notice. He also pointed to the actions during the time period in question to show
both that (a) the Faculty of Law was being proactive during this time following the death of the
Student’s mother; and (b) that the Student was able to advocate on his own behalf during this
time.
41.

The Student filed a brief entitled “Mitigation and Medical Evidence”, which contained:
(a)

Letter from D. Mayer Hoffer, the Student’s treating psychiatrist, to his counsel;

(b)

Three reports of Dr. Jonathan Rootenberg, a psychiatrist, who conducted a
psychiatric assessment of the Student;

(c)

Letters from each of the Student’s father and cousin; and

(d)

An unaddressed letter from a former employer of the Student.

- 11 42.

Counsel to the Student reviewed in detail the reports of Dr. Rootenberg as well as the

letter of Dr. Hoffer. He submitted that the evidence establishes that the Student was deeply
affected by the illness and ultimate death of his mother.
43.

According to Dr. Hoffer, the Student had diagnoses of Attention Deficit Hyperactivity

Disorder (“ADHD”) and major depressive disorder with strong features of anxiety. Dr. Hoffer
indicated that the Student had had a relatively good response to treatment and had always been
compliant. The Student’s condition deteriorated during his mother’s illness and following her
death and he did not respond well to his ADHD treatment. Dr. Hoffer’s opinion, as expressed in
his letter is that “there is a connection between his acts of plagiarism and the symptoms of
procrastination difficulty, deficiencies in impulse control and inadequate self-regulatory control
mechanisms which manifest themselves in ADHD patients.”
44.

Dr. Rootenberg performed a comprehensive psychiatric examination of the patient and

concluded that the Student does not meet diagnostic criteria of antisocial, narcissistic or other
personality disorder. Dr. Rootenberg’s opinion is that the Student’s plagiarism occurred within a
very specific context and “is not reflective of his overall character and behavior”. He outlined the
positive prognostic factors of good compliance with treatment, a strong support network, absence
of comorbid substance abuse and absence of antisocial attitudes. The negative prognostic factors
were limited to the multiple instances of plagiarism and the stress occasioned by the discipline
process.
The Principles in Determining Penalty

- 12 45.

The principles applied in determining the appropriate sanction in tribunal cases were set

out in University of Toronto v. C (Case No. 1976/77-3, November 5, 1976) (the “C Principles”).
The C Principles are:

46.

(a)

The character of the person charged;

(b)

The likelihood of a repetition of the offence;

(c)

The nature of the offence committed;

(d)

Any extenuating circumstances surrounding the commission of the offence;

(e)

The detriment to the University occasioned by the offence; and

(f)

The need to deter others from committing a similar offence.

The Panel will review each factor below in determining whether they individually and

collectively favour expulsion or a lesser penalty of suspension. We will then review precedents
and consider the appropriate length of penalty.
47.

As Assistant Discipline Counsel fairly noted, the Panel is not bound by precedent in this

case, but the cases can serve as a guide for the Panel. Each case must be reviewed on its own set
of facts. There is no minimum or proscribed penalty that must be applied in this case.
(a) The Character of the Person Charged
48.

Assistant Discipline Counsel noted that we did not hear from the Student so we cannot

determine his state of mind. He noted that we do have evidence from his treating doctor but that
does little to establish character. He did recognize that the letters from the Student’s father and
cousin do go some way towards establishing character, but are mostly focused on the

- 13 circumstances at the time of the offence. Assistant Discipline Counsel urged the Panel to place
little weight on the unaddressed letter from the Student’s previous employer who appears to know
nothing of the charges.
49.

Counsel for the Student submitted that the evidence of those who know the Student

establishes that he is of good character. He is described by his father as “kind and compassionate”.
The Student has sought out opportunities in his community. Dr. Rootenberg established that the
Student does not display antisocial or narcissistic personality traits.
50.

The Panel is of the view that there is little evidence to establish good or bad character on

the part of the Student. The evidence of the Student’s family provides some insight into his home
life, the difficulties he faced with his mother’s illness and death and the relationship he has with
his family members. This evidence displays a devotion to his family, which is only of limited
assistance when trying to assess character. We place limited weight on the evidence of the
Student’s employer, which was an unaddressed letter of recommendation.
51.

That said, other than the charges before it, there is no evidence that the Student is of bad

character. He has had no previous offences or criminal behaviour. He is not antisocial or
narcissistic.
52.

In this case, this factor is mostly neutral but is tilted slightly in favour or a lesser penalty.

(b) The Likelihood of Repetition of the Offence
53.

The parties agreed that the likelihood of repetition of the offence was low. Assistant

Discipline Counsel only pointed to the Student’s attempt in May, 2017 to submit a slightly revised
paper as “some” evidence that there is a risk of repetition of the offence.

- 14 54.

Both Dr. Hoffer and Dr. Rootenberg put the likelihood that the Student would repeat this

behaviour as very low. Dr. Hoffer noted that the Student has always been cooperative and has
generally had a good response to treatment, only decompensating during his mother’s illness and
death.
55.

The chance that a Student will repeat an offence is never zero. However, in this case, there

is no doubt that the chance of repetition is low. Dr. Hoffer has been treating the Student for eight
years and the Student had been stable but for this period of acute stress. There is no evidence from
any of the Student’s schooling that he had committed academic misconduct or had at any point
engaged in criminal behaviour.
56.

We do not accept Assistant Discipline Counsel’s suggestion that the Student’s attempt to

send in a revised essay is evidence of an increased risk of recidivism. This attempt was during the
same period and is an extension of the original offence. The fact that he was attempting to revise
the essay so as not to be caught in the plagiarism shows that he was aware of his wrongdoing and
the chance of serious consequences. This would be relevant if the Student had contested the
charges, but adds little at the penalty stage.
57.

This factor favours a lesser penalty.

(c) The Nature of the Offence Committed
58.

There is no doubt that plagiarism is a serious offence. In this case, the Student partially

plagiarized one take home exam and plagiarized almost 100% of four essays that were worth most
of his mark in four separate courses.

- 15 59.

Assistant Discipline Counsel submitted that the four essays are on the serious end of the

plagiarism spectrum for the following reasons:
(a)

The Student changed certain words such as “article” or “chapter” to “essay” to
make it less obvious that the paper was plagiarized;

(b)

The Student did almost no independent work except for light editing;

(c)

The work was 90% of the final mark in two courses, 100% in the third and 50% in
the fourth;

60.

Assistant Discipline Counsel compared the plagiarism in this case to that in the University

of Toronto v. C.S. (Case No. 709, July 10, 2017) and University of Toronto v. A.B. (Case No. 707,
January 13, 2014) cases.
61.

In C.S., the student plagiarized various secondary sources in his doctoral thesis without

attribution - there were 67 examples. The passages had been carefully reviewed to better fit with
his thesis and to avoid detection.
62.

In A.B., a law student plagiarized three essays for three separate courses in one semester

almost in their entirety. The student pled guilty to the charges and sought an adjournment for the
penalty phase to enable him to retain counsel. The student failed to attend the penalty phase.
63.

Counsel for the Student agreed that the plagiarism was extensive and serious. He did,

however, distinguish it from the C.S. case in two respects:
(a)

the work in C.S was a doctoral thesis, which is especially egregious; and

- 16 (b)

C.S. participated in extensive tailoring from numerous sources, which is intended
to be and is harder to detect.

64.

Counsel for the Student submitted that the Student did very little tailoring and relied on a

single source in each essay. Although that reflects that the student did no meaningful work, it also
reflects less work on his part to deceive while correspondingly being easier for the University to
detect.
65.

The Panel accepts that plagiarism is a serious offence, and that the plagiarism in this case

was on the more serious end of the spectrum in several respects:

66.

(a)

there were five counts of plagiarism in five difference courses;

(b)

four of the five were involved no meaningful work;

(c)

the student was a senior student, three years into a joint JD/MBA; and

(d)

the papers were worth 90% in two courses and 100% in one

The plagiarism in this case was not as serious as C.S., supra which was a doctoral thesis

and reflected a great deal of work on the part of the student in plagiarizing and tailoring from
numerous sources. It is very similar to the plagiarism in A.B., supra, both because it was another
law student and there were three counts of papers being almost the work of others.
67.

This factor favours a more serious penalty.
(d) Extenuating Circumstances

68.

The issue of extenuating circumstances is central in this case.

- 17 69.

Assistant Discipline Counsel agreed that there were minimal aggravating factors. The

Student has no prior convictions. He did submit that the Student’s act of submitting a second
paper a few days after the initial submission that was better tailored to conceal the plagiarism was
itself an aggravating factor.
70.

The Panel concluded that there were no aggravating factors in this case. The second essay

submission was an extension of the offence, but did not independently reflect an aggravating
factor that is a basis for a more severe sentence.
71.

The real question is that of mitigating circumstances and whether they favour a lesser

penalty.
72.

Assistant Discipline Counsel agreed that there were a number of mitigating factors in this

case:

73.

(a)

The Student had no prior convictions;

(b)

He cooperated and plead to an Agreed Statement of Facts; and

(c)

He is not, nor has he been, engaged in any criminal behaviour.

Assistant Discipline Counsel also agreed that the illness and death of the Student’s mother

is a mitigating factor. He accepts – to a certain extent – the report of Dr. Rootenberg outlining
how deeply the Student was affected by his mother’s illness and death. However, he focused on
the work of the Faculty of Law in attempting to accommodate the Student. Even without a request
from the Student, Ms. Archbold initiated contact with the Student herself to ask him if he needed
extensions on his end of term papers. Assistant Discipline Counsel also noted that the Student had

- 18 frequently requested and received accommodations, sometimes last minute or after the fact, for
his ADHD.
74.

Assistant Discipline Counsel noted that the Student was able to engage with Ms. Archbold

and to request accommodations when needed. For example, following his mother’s death, the
Student requested accommodation for a paper and for his Legal Ethics exam. He also worked on
and advanced his appeal from his failing grade in Downtown Legal Services (“DLS”) and
subsequently requested that the appeal be rescheduled. Assistant Discipline Counsel submitted
that the record did not support that the Student did not feel that he could seek relief. Assistant
Discipline Counsel therefore challenged the Student’s statement to Dr. Rootenberg that he did not
believe he would be granted an extension for the papers, especially as he had already been granted
an extension for those same papers.
75.

Predictably, Counsel to the Student emphasized the mitigating circumstances in this case.

First, and importantly, he noted that the Student is not introducing evidence of his mental health
challenges to justify the underlying behaviour. The Student takes responsibility for his actions
and pled to the charges. Although the Student himself did not testify, Counsel for the Student
pointed to the evidence supporting the difficulties the Student faced leading up to and following
his mother’s death:
(a)

The letter from his father and his cousin outlining how his mother’s death affected
the Student;

(b)

The letter from Dr. Mayer recounting the profound effect of his mother’s death on
the Student and the resulting depression and refractory ADHD; and

- 19 (c)

The opinion of Dr. Rootenberg that the Student leads a pro-social life with no
evidence of personality disorder, and that he was experiencing significant stress and
compromised functionality at the time of his misconduct.

76.

Counsel for the Student stated that the Faculty of Law has taken the important step of

recognizing and accommodating mental health issues. However, this is only the first step and
there has to be some recognition that mental health issues can impede a student’s ability to ask
for the assistance he requires or to think through problems rationally. Counsel for the Student
submitted that it was not open to Assistant Discipline Counsel to challenge the conclusions of Dr.
Rootenberg when the reports were filed on consent with no cross-examination.
77.

The Panel accepted that there are significant mitigating circumstances in this case. The

Student had diagnosed ADHD and depression, for which he received treatment and had been
relatively stable. The evidence amply supports that the illness and death of his mother
significantly affected him and resulted in stress and depression. According to Dr. Mayer, the
Student’s treating psychiatrist, he also did not respond well to his ADHD treatment. Dr. Mayer
attributes the Student’s actions to his ADHD and major depressive disorder, noting a connection
between his misconduct and “symptoms of procrastination difficulty, deficiencies in impulse
control, and inadequate self-regulatory control mechanisms which manifest themselves in ADHD
patients.”
78.

We agree with Counsel for the Student that this is not a question of capacity – the Student

is not arguing that he was incapable as a defence to the charges. This is a question of penalty, and
there is ample evidence to support that the student was deeply affected by the circumstances in

- 20 his life and made the wrong decisions. Dr. Rootenberg and Dr. Mayer connect these decisions to
the Student’s life situation and mental health difficulties.
79.

Assistant Discipline Counsel focused on the actions of the Student in working on his

appeal and requesting some accommodations. He noted that all accommodations had been
granted, even those after the fact, and there was no reasonable basis for the Student’s statement
to Dr. Rootenberg that he did not believe he would receive accommodations if requested,
especially as he had already received extra time for his Legal Ethics examination and for these
papers.
80.

We agree that the Student’s concern about this does not appear reasonable on the record

before us. We also did not hear from the Student so cannot understand his thought process but for
what is contained in Dr. Rootenberg’s report. We are not of the view that we need to understand
that thought process on a granular level to accept that the Student’s stress, depression and ADHD
at least contributed to the Student’s poor decision-making. Both physicians opine on this
connection - one as his clinician and the other after an assessment - and we accept their
professional opinions.
81.

The Panel agrees with Assistant Discipline Counsel that the Faculty of Law has done an

admirable job of accommodating students with mental health problems. We also agree, however,
that sometimes even the best attempts at accommodation do not succeed and students make
regrettable choices. This is one of these cases.
82.

Extenuating circumstances favours a lesser penalty.

(e) the detriment to the University occasioned by the Offence and the need to deter others
from committing a similar Offence

- 21 83.

These two factors are interwoven with the nature of the Offence. As noted above, the

Offence of plagiarism is serious and these charges are on the more serious end of the spectrum.
84.

There is a detrimental effect on the University when students do not complete their own

academic work and attempt to pass off the work of others as their own. The student community
suffers when others attempt to benefit from work that is not their own, especially, such as in this
case, when student work is compared to published works.
85.

In that same vein, it is important to deter others from committing a similar offence with

appropriate sanctions that reflect the seriousness of the offence and the detriment to the
University.
86.

These factors lean in favour of a more serious penalty.

The Appropriate Penalty
87.

The University is seeking a recommendation of expulsion to the President. It also seeks a

five-year suspension until the recommendation is accepted or should the recommendation not be
accepted. In the alternative, should the Panel chose not to recommend expulsion, the University
submits that a five year suspension is the appropriate sentence.
88.

The Student seeks a three-year suspension.

89.

There is no mandatory minimum sentence for plagiarism and no chart, matrix or formula

to apply. Each case must be decided on its own facts. The Panel is not bound by previous
decisions. The Tribunal does attempt to be consistent in its approach to penalty to ensure that
students are treated fairly and equitably.

- 22 90.

The authorities cited by Assistant Discipline Counsel establish a range of penalties for

plagiarism from two years to expulsion. A first offence of plagiarism will often receive a two year
suspension, depending on aggravating or mitigating factors. Repeated acts of plagiarism along
with other aggravating factors may result in expulsion.
91.

Assistant Discipline Counsel relied on the decision of A.B, supra in submitting that

expulsion is an appropriate sanction in this case. The Panel agrees that there are similarities
between A.B. and this case – both are law students with multiple instances of plagiarism and an
agreed statement of fact. A.B. is ultimately distinguishable in several key respects:
(a)

That student sought an adjournment to the penalty phase, and then ceased
communicating with the University and did not attend the hearing;

(b)

There was no evidence of mitigating factors; and

(c)

There was evidence of misleading and untruthful conduct subsequent to the
charges, which were aggravating factors.

92.

Expulsion is not the appropriate penalty in this case. The offences are very serious, but

none of the other factors justify this most extreme penalty. There are significant mitigating factors
and no aggravating ones. The Panel is of the view that these mitigating factors and the low
likelihood of repetition militate in favour of giving the Student as second chance and an
opportunity for rehabilitation.
93.

The question then becomes the appropriate length of the suspension with a view to the C

factors. Assistant Discipline Counsel offered five years as the appropriate length while Counsel
for the Student argued for three years.

- 23 94.

The precedents establish that with serious cases of plagiarism a three-year suspension

appears to be the minimum and most are four or five years. In the University of Toronto v. D.S.
(Case No. 451, DAB Decision 2007-2008), the Discipline Appeal Board overturned a penalty of
27 months in a case involving multiple instances of plagiarism. In that case, the Appeal Board
found that the Tribunal made findings of fact about the student’s state of mind that had no
evidentiary support. The Tribunal also erred in finding that a five-year suspension would end the
student’s academic career and offer him no opportunity for rehabilitation. The Appeal Board
substituted a suspension of four years.
95.

In the I.R. case (Case No. 969, April 29, 2019), the student admitted to plagiarism in

relation to five papers in three different courses over two semesters. There was no evidence of
mitigating circumstances. The Tribunal expressed a concern that some of the offenses had occurred
after the Student had met with his instructor to discuss allegations of plagiarism. The Tribunal
found that this history reflected a high likelihood that the student would reoffend unless he received
a significant penalty. The Tribunal ordered a suspension of just under four years.
96.

In this case, there are numerous counts of plagiarism in several different courses. In that

way, the offences are similar to those of D.S., I.R. and A.B, supra. The primary difference in this
case is that there are mitigating circumstances that were not in evidence in any of those cases.
There are also no aggravating factors unlike the precedents.
97.

In University of Toronto v. S.M. (Case No. 478, October 8, 2008), the student pled to

alteration of a mid-term test worth 40% of his final grade and re-submission of that test for
academic credit. The student used an opportunity to review the scantron sheet from his mid-term

- 24 to change the answers. He then explained to his professor that he had accidentally skipped an
answer, causing the remaining answers to be in the wrong bubble.
98.

The University and the student submitted a joint submission of penalty, which included a

grade of zero in the course and a three-year suspension from the University. The student had
committed two previous offences, which were aggravating circumstances. There were also
mitigating circumstances. The student’s sister had committed suicide several years before the
events in question, which led the student to see a clinical psychologist through to the time that the
offences were committed. He was diagnosed with Chronic Depression and Anxiety. The student
cited his family distress and psychological conditions as the reasons for his previous offences.
The student submitted a report from his psychologist on his condition. The Panel accepted the
joint submission of penalty, but noted that, but for the mitigating circumstances, the penalty would
normally be more severe.
99.

The mitigating circumstances in this case must be taken into account in determining the

length of the suspension. In light of the evidence and the precedents, the panel is of the view that
the appropriate suspension in this case is three years. The offence itself would normally dictate a
longer suspension, but if we are to give true weight to the extenuating circumstances, it is unsound
to impose the same sentence as cases where there are aggravating factors and no mitigating ones.
100.

We believe that this sentence, although less severe than many of the precedents for

multiple instances of plagiarism, is fair and equitable in all the circumstances. The Student will
be still be suspended for three years and receive a failing grade in five courses. Should the Student
return to the University, he will be required to repeat an entire semester to obtain the necessary

- 25 credits. The damage to the University occasioned by the offence and the goal of general deterrence
is adequately reflected by this sentence.
PART 6 - CONCLUSION
101.

Accordingly, the Panel imposes the following penalty:
(a)

the Student receive a final grade of "0" in Law 224H1S, Law278H1S, Law213H1S,
Law226H1S; and Law445H1;

(b)

the Student be suspended from the University for a period of 3 years effective
immediately; and

(c)

this case be reported to the Provost, with the Student's name withheld, for
publication of a notice of the Decision of the Tribunal and sanction imposed.

Dated at Toronto, this 3rd day of October, 2019

Dena Varah
Tribunal, Co-Chair

