Case 1085

   DATE: April 20, 2021
   PARTIES: University of Toronto v. W.Z.

   HEARING DATE: November 27, 2021, via Zoom

   Panel Members:
   Ms. Lisa Talbot, Chair
   Professor Goerges Farhat, Faculty Panel Member
   Mr. David Allens, Student Panel Member

   Appearances:
   Ms. Tina Lie, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg
   Rothstein LLP

   In Attendance:
   Ms. Krista Kennedy, Administrative Clerk & Hearing Secretary, Appeals,
   Discipline and Faculty Grievances

   Not in Attendance:
   The Student

   The Student was charged under ss. B.i.1(a)Â and B.i.1(d)Â of theâ¯Code
   of Behaviour on Academic Matters, 1995â¯(the âCodeâ) on the basis
   thatÂ the StudentÂ knowinglyÂ forged,Â or in any other way altered,Â or
   falsified a document or evidence required by the University of Toronto,
   or uttered, circulated or made use of such forged, altered or falsified
   document and knowingly represented an idea or work of another as his
   own in an assignment to obtain an academic credit.Â In the alternative,
   the Student was chargedÂ with two counts ofÂ knowingly engagingÂ in a
   form of cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or
   misrepresentation in order to obtain academic credit or other academic
   advantageÂ contrary toÂ s. B.i.3(b) of the CodeÂ and one count of
   knowingly obtaining unauthorized assistance in connection with an
   assignment contrary to section B.i.1.(b) of the Code.

   Neither the Student nor a legal representative of
   theâ¯Studentâ¯appeared at the hearing.â¯The University submitted
   evidence regarding service of the charges and
   noticeÂ ofÂ electronicÂ hearing. Upon review of theÂ evidence,
   theÂ Universityâsâ¯Policy on Official Correspondence with Students,
   andÂ RulesÂ 9Â andÂ 17Â of theâ¯RulesÂ of Practice and ProcedureÂ of
   the University Tribunal, the Panel found that the Student was served
   with the charges and notice of hearing and ordered that the hearing
   proceed in the Studentâs absence.

   Regarding the chargesÂ laid under s.Â B.i.3(b)Â of the Code,
   theÂ PanelÂ receivedÂ evidenceÂ that the Student requested to defer his
   final exam due to illness. Approximately four days later, the student
   submitted a completed and signed Verification of Student Illness or
   Injury form in support of his request to defer his exam and obtain
   academic accommodation. At the time that the form was submitted by the
   Student, the Office of the Registrar did not verify the authenticity of
   the form and the studentâsÂ deferral was approved.Â At a later date,
   the Office of Registrar was reviewing previously submitted Verification
   of Student Illness or Injury forms and noted that the one submitted by
   the Student resembled one that hadÂ been submitted by another student
   that hadÂ been confirmed as inauthentic. The Associate Registrar
   provided evidence that she contacted the doctor who allegedly signed
   the formÂ andÂ the doctor confirmed that the Student was not a patient
   of his office and that he was not the author of the form.Â Upon review
   of the evidence, the Panel found that the Student provided a forged or
   falsified medical note to obtain academic accommodationÂ in an attempt
   toÂ obtain academic credit or other academic advantage.Â Regarding the
   charges laid under s.Â B.i.1(d)Â of the Code, the Panel examined
   evidence fromÂ the Professor who taught the course for which the
   assignment in question was submitted. When the assignment was graded,
   one of the teaching assistants noticed that a significant number of
   students had given the same or similar answers to several questions and
   the Student was among this group of students. It was the Professorâs
   evidence that it would be unlikely that a group of students would
   independently come up with the same terms for their answers.Â Upon
   review of this evidence, the Panel found that the
   StudentÂ knowinglyÂ obtained unauthorized
   assistanceÂ fromÂ otherÂ studentsÂ andÂ knowingly submitted
   theÂ assignment with the intention that the University of Toronto
   Mississauga rely on it as containing his own ideas or work in
   considering the appropriate academic credit to be assigned to his work.

   The Panel found that the Student was guilty of one count of knowingly
   engaging in any form of cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct,
   fraud or misrepresentation, in order to obtain academic credit or other
   academic advantage of any kind, contrary to section B.i.3(b) of the
   Code; and one count of knowingly representing an idea or expression of
   an idea or work of another as his own, contrary to section B.i.1(d) of
   the Code.Â Given the Panelâs findings, the University withdrew the
   alternative charges.

   In determining sanction, the Panel considered the principles and
   factors relevant to sanction discussed inÂ University of Toronto and
   Mr. C.Â (âMr. C. factorsâ) and determined that without the Studentâs
   participation there was no evidence of any extenuating circumstances.
   The PanelÂ noted that although the Student did not have any prior
   offences, the Student did engage in two separate offences that occurred
   two years apart. The Panel found that the Student exhibited dishonesty
   and an unethical character, thereforeÂ there wasÂ a likelihood of
   repetition of the offence. The Panel also considered the serious nature
   of the offence, the detriment to the University and the need to deter
   students from committingÂ an offenceÂ of academic dishonesty.Â Upon
   review of the relevant case law and the Mr. C. factors, the Panel
   accepted the sanction proposed by the University. The Panel imposed the
   following sanctions: a final grade of zero in the courses;
   aÂ three-yearÂ suspension; aÂ four-yearÂ notation on
   theÂ transcript;Â and a report to the Provost for a publication.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/29806
