Case No.: 1085
THE UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
IN THE MATTER OF charges of academic dishonesty made on June 25, 2020,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters, 1995,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Act, 1971, S.O. 1971, c. 56 as amended S.O. 1978,
c. 88

BETWEEN:

UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO

- and -

W

Z

(the “Student”)

REASONS FOR DECISION

Hearing Date: November 27, 2020, via Zoom
Members of Panel:
Ms. Lisa Talbot, Chair
Professor Georges Farhat, Faculty Panel Member
Mr. David Allens, Student Panel Member
Appearances
Ms. Tina Lie, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg Rothstein LLP
Hearing Secretary:
Ms. Krista Kennedy, Administrative Clerk and Hearing Secretary, Office of Appeals, Discipline and
Faculty Grievances
Not in Attendance:
The Student

-2THE CHARGES
1.

This matter arises out of charges of academic misconduct filed on June 25, 2020, by the Provost

of the University of Toronto (the “Provost”) under the Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters, 1995
(“Code”).

2.

The charges are as follows.

Charges relating to MGM101
1.

On or about December 19, 2016, [the Student] knowingly forged or in any other way

altered or falsified a document or evidence required by the University of Toronto, or uttered,
circulated or made use of such forged, altered or falsified document, namely a Verification of
Student Illness or Injury form dated December 15, 2016, which [the Student] submitted in support
of [the Student’s] request for academic accommodation or relief in MGM101H5 (“MGM101”),
contrary to Section B.I.1(a) of the Code.
2.

In the alternative, on or about December 19, 2016, [the Student] knowingly engaged in a

form of cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or misrepresentation not otherwise
described in order to obtain academic credit or other academic advantage of any kind, by submitting
a forged, altered or falsified document, namely a Verification of Student Illness or Injury form
dated December 15, 2016, in support of [the Student’]s request for academic accommodation or
relief in MGM101, contrary to Section B.I.3(b) of the Code.

Charges relating to LIN204
3.

On or about November 7, 2018, [the Student] knowingly represented as [his] own an idea

or expression of an idea or work of another in an assignment [the Student] submitted in LIN204H5
(“LIN204”), contrary to section B.I.1(d) of the Code.
4.

In the alternative, on or about November 7, 2018, [the Student] knowingly obtained

unauthorized assistance in connection with an assignment that [the Student] submitted in LIN204,
contrary to section B.I.1(b) of the Code.
5.

In the further alternative, on or about November 7, 2018, [the Student] knowingly engaged

in a form of cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or misrepresentation not otherwise
described in the Code in order to obtain academic credit or other academic advantage of any kind

-3in connection with an assignment [the Student] submitted in LIN204, contrary to section B.I.3(b)
of the Code.
THE HEARING:
3.

The Tribunal heard this matter on November 27, 2020. The Student did not attend the hearing. On

reading the affidavit of service of Nusaiba Khan, sworn November 24, 2020, the affidavit of Kimberly
Blake, sworn November 24, 2020, the affidavit of Lisa Devereaux, sworn November 19, 2020, and the
affidavit of Andrew Wang, sworn November 24, 2020, and in consideration of the Policy on Official
Correspondence with Students approved on May 1, 2006, Rules 9 and 17 of the Rules of Practice and
Procedure of the University Tribunal, the Tribunal was satisfied that the Student was served with the
Charges and Notice of Hearing dated November 11, 2020 and ordered that the hearing proceed in his
absence.
THE FACTS:
4.

At all material times the Student was registered at the University of Toronto Mississauga.

MGM101
5.

In Fall 2016, the Student enrolled in MGM101 (Introduction to Management Functions).

6.

Students in MGM101 were required to write a final exam, which was worth 40% of their final

grades in the course.
7.

If a student is too ill to write a final examination on the day they are scheduled to do so, they may

submit a petition to write a deferred examination. The petition must be supported by a Verification of
Student Illness or Injury form, which the student must submit to the Office of the Registrar within 72 hours
of the missed exam. The Verification of Student Illness or Injury form must be completed by the student’s
physician.
8.

The course syllabus for MGM101 stated (at page 6) with respect to the final examination:
Final Exams:
Final Examinations are scheduled, administered and governed by the policies set by the
Office of the Registrar. Any student that is granted a deferral by the Office of the

-4Registrar will be required to write a deferred examination at the next exam-writing
session scheduled by the Office of the Registrar. Students should note that the deferred
exam may not follow the same format as the exam given in the regular writing session.
Students who cannot write a final examination due to illness or other serious causes must
file an online petition within 72 hours of the missed examination. Original supporting
documentation must also be submitted to the Office of the Registrar within 72 hours of
the missed exam. Late petitions will NOT be considered. If illness is cited as the reason
for a deferred exam request, a U of T Verification of Student Illness or Injury Form must
show that you were examined and diagnosed at the time of illness and on the date of
the exam, or by the day after at the latest. Students must also record their absence on
ACORN on the day of the missed exam or by the day after at the latest. Upon approval of
a deferred exam request, a non-refundable fee of $70 is required for each examination
approved. [Emphasis in original]
9.

On December 15, 2016, the Student submitted a petition to defer his final exam in the course to the

Office of the Registrar. The Student provided the following reason for the deferral request: “Acute
gastroenteritis and fever happened on 14th December night cause [sic] I can not [sic] take the exam today”
10.

On December 19, 2016, in support of his petition, the Student submitted a photocopy of a

Verification of Student Illness or Injury form, purportedly completed and signed by Dr. S.P. Kwong on
December 15, 2016 (the “Medical Note”). The Student submitted the Medical Note to defer his final exam
and to obtain academic accommodation or relief in MGM101.
11.

During the December 2016 exam period, the Office of the Registrar received over 750 deferral

requests. It did not verify the authenticity of each form received at this time.
12.

The Student’s petition was granted and the Student was permitted to defer his final exam in the

course. He wrote the deferred exam on February 23, 2017.
13.

The Office of the Registrar periodically reviews all retained documentation (physical and scanned

copies). In June 2018, while reviewing documentation submitted for the Fall 2016 academic term, a staff
member in the Office of the Associate Registrar, Academic Standards, noted that the Medical Note
resembled a Verification of Illness or Injury form that had been submitted by another student and that had
been confirmed as inauthentic.
14.

The Medical Note indicated that it was completed and signed by Dr. S.P. Kwong, CPSO #56801.

It also provided contact information for Dr. Kwong.

-515.

The Associate Registrar, Michelle Kraus, contacted Dr. Kwong, who confirmed that the Student

was not a patient in his office and that Dr. Kwong did not fill out the Medical Note for the Student in
December 2016.
16.

The Tribunal accepts that the Student knowingly submitted a forged, altered or falsified Medical

Note:
a. understanding that the University of Toronto Mississauga required legitimate medical
documentation and evidence to be presented in order to obtain the academic
accommodation or relief he sought;
b. with the intention that the University of Toronto Mississauga rely on the Medical Note
in considering whether or not to provide him with the academic accommodation or
relief he requested; and
c. in an attempt to obtain academic credit and/or other academic advantage.
LIN204
17.

In Fall 2018, the Student enrolled in LIN204 (English Grammar), which was taught by Dr. Michelle

Troberg, Associate Professor, Teaching Stream in the Department of Language Studies at the University of
Toronto Mississauga. There were approximately 650 students enrolled in LIN204 in Fall 2018.
18.

LIN2014 teaches students fundamental grammatical concepts. One of the focuses of the course is

terminology, including the appropriate terms to be used when discussing grammatical concepts.
19.

Students in LIN204 were made aware of the University’s expectations respecting academic

integrity. The course syllabus stated (at pages 6-7):
Academic Conduct
We have the expectation that students will treat each other and all faculty, staff, and TAs
with respect and honesty. Students can expect the same from us. UTM students are
subject to policies regarding academic honesty as set out by the Code of Behaviour on
Academic Matters. Please read, and become familiar with, policies regarding academic
honesty set out in this code:
http://www.governingcouncil.utoronto.ca/policies/behaveac.htm.

-6Academic Offense
Academic integrity is essential to the pursuit of learning and scholarship in a university,
and to ensuring that a degree from the University of Toronto is a strong signal of each
student’s individual academic achievement. As a result, the University treats cases of
cheating and plagiarism very seriously. Potential offences include, but are not limited to:
In papers and assignments:
-using someone else’s ideas or words without appropriate acknowledgement.
-submitting your own work in more than one course without the permission of the
instructor.
-making up sources or facts.
-obtaining or providing unauthorized assistance on any assignment.
On tests and exams:
-using or possessing unauthorized aids.
-looking at someone else’s answers during an exam or test.
-misrepresenting your identity.
In academic work:
-falsifying institutional documents or grades.
-falsifying or altering any documentation required by the University, including (but not
limited to) doctor’s notes.
All suspected cases of academic dishonesty will be investigated following procedures
outlined in the Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters. If you have questions or
concerns about what constitutes appropriate academic behaviour or appropriate research
and citation methods, you are expected to seek out additional information on academic
integrity from your instructor or from other institutional resources:
http://www.artsci.utoronto.ca/osai/students/students
20.

Students in LIN204 were required to complete a total of six assignments, which they were to submit

online. The assignments were required to be completed independently. Students were not permitted to
collaborate with one another on their assignments.
21.

On or about November 7, 2018, the Student submitted Assignment #4 in LIN204, which was worth

8% of his final grade (the “Assignment”).

-722.

During the grading of the Assignment, one of the teaching assistants noticed that a significant

number of students had given the same or similar answers to several questions, including Questions 25 and
31. The Student was among this group of students.
23.

The Tribunal has reviewed a copy of the Student’s answers to Questions 25 and 31 of the

Assignment, the answer key for Question 31, and answers submitted by other students who had given
similar answers. The answers share a number of similarities:
a. In answer to Question 25, the students gave the answer “ordinal number of
determiner”. The Tribunal accepts Dr. Troberg’s evidence that this is not a term that
was used in the course. The phrase “ordinal number” was used, but never “ordinal
number of determiner”.
b. In answer to Question 31(a), the students gave “Sophie and I” as the answer, when the
correct answer was “I”. The fact that all the students made the same mistake was
noteworthy to Dr. Troberg.
c. In answer to Questions 31(b) and/or (d), the students used the term “joined phrase”,
which was not a term that had been used in the course and did not have any meaning in
connection with the concepts taught in the course.
d. In answer to Question 31(d), many of the students used the phrase “matches its object
of preposition place”, which is not a phrase that had been used in the course and was
not a phrase that made sense in connection with the concepts taught in the course.
24.

The Tribunal accepts the evidence of Dr. Troberg that it is unlikely that a group of students

(including the Student) would independently come up with the same unusual terms given the way that the
course was taught, and in particular, the emphasis on using correct terminology.
25.

The 10 students whose answers were reviewed along with the Student’s admitted to obtaining

unauthorized assistance in connection with Assignment 4. They each received sanctions either at the
departmental or decanal levels.

-826.

There was a total of 76 allegations of academic misconduct in connection with the Assignment in

LIN204 in Fall 2018. Of the 76 allegations, 16 of the allegations were dismissed by the department, meaning
that the Chair, the instructor or their designate was satisfied that no academic offence was committed after
meeting with 16 of the students. Of the remaining 60 cases, 56 were resolved, 24 at the departmental level
and 32 at the decanal level; and 3 were retired (held in abeyance pending a student’s return to the
University).
27.

The only remaining case is the Student’s.

28.

The Tribunal finds that the Student submitted the Assignment:
a. to obtain academic credit;
b. knowing that the Assignment contained ideas, expressions of ideas or work which
were not his own, but were the ideas, expressions of ideas or work of others, including
other students in LIN204 and/or external sources (the “Sources”); and
c. knowing that he did not properly reference the ideas, expressions of ideas or work that
he drew from the Sources.

29.

The Tribunal also finds on the evidence that the Student knowingly obtained unauthorized

assistance from the Sources, and knowingly submitted the Assignment with the intention that the University
of Toronto Mississauga rely on it as containing his own ideas or work in considering the appropriate
academic credit to be assigned to his work.

DISPOSITION ON CHARGES
30.

On the basis of the facts set out above, as well as the documents provided in the Book of Documents

re: Finding of the Offence, the Tribunal entered the finding that the Student was guilty of: one count of
knowingly engaging in any form of cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or
misrepresentation not otherwise described in the Code, in order to obtain academic credit or other academic
advantage of any kind, contrary to section B.I.3(b) of the Code; and one count of knowingly representing
an idea or expression of an idea or work of another as his own, contrary to section B.I.1(d) of the Code.

-931.

On the basis of the Tribunal’s conviction of the Student on charges 2 and 3, the Provost withdrew

charges 1, 4 and 5.

DECISION ON PENALTY
32.

The University submitted that the following penalty should be imposed:
a.

a final grade of zero in the course MGM101H5 in Fall 2016;

b.

a final grade of zero in the course LIN204H5 in Fall 2018;

c.

a suspension from the University of Toronto for a period of three years;

d.

a notation of the sanction on his academic record and transcript for a period of four
years; and

e.

that this case be reported to the Provost for publication of -a notice of the decision
of the Tribunal and the sanction imposed, with the Student’s name withheld.

36.

We are required to consider the Mr. C. factors (Case No. 1976/77-3 November 5, 1976) to support

our decision on penalty: character of student, likelihood of repetition of the offence, nature of the offence
committed, existence of extenuating circumstances, detriment to the University and general need for
deterrence.
Character, Extenuating Circumstances and Likelihood of Repetition
37.

With respect to the Student’s character, the Tribunal notes that the Student has not participated in

the academic discipline process or in this proceeding at all. He did not meet with the Dean’s designate. He
did not respond to the University or its counsel. Consequently, the Tribunal has no evidence before it of
any remorse or insight gained by the Student. It also has no evidence that the Student has learned or taken
responsibility for his conduct.
38.

The Student has no prior offences, however, the Tribunal notes that it is dealing with two offences

in this case, which occurred two years apart.
39.

Because the Student has not participated in this proceeding, there is no evidence before the Tribunal

as to extenuating circumstances.

- 10 40.

The Tribunal finds that the Student exhibited dishonesty and unethical character. There are no

known extenuating circumstances. In light of the factors outlined above, the Tribunal considers that there
is a likelihood of repetition of the offence.
Nature of the Offences Committed, Detriment to the University, and Deterrence
41.

The offences committed by the Student are serious. The Student knowingly submitted a forged,

altered or falsified Medical Note with the intention that the University rely on it to provide academic
accommodation. He also knowingly obtained unauthorized assistance and knowingly submitted the
Assignment with the intention that the University of Toronto Mississauga rely on it as containing his own
ideas or work in considering the appropriate academic credit to be assigned to his work.

42.

The University has an important interest in protecting the integrity of the institution. Such

integrity is fundamental to the academic relationship. It is important that students are deterred from
committing offences of academic dishonesty. Students must know that knowingly breaching the Code
will not be tolerated.

43.

After considering all of the above factors, and the cases provided by the University, the Tribunal

is satisfied that the Provost’s suggested penalty is appropriate.

44.

An Order was signed at the hearing by the Panel on the following terms:
1. The Student shall receive a final grade of zero in the course MGM101H5 in Fall 2016.
2. The Student shall receive a final grade of zero in the course LIN204H5 in Fall 2018.
3. The Student shall be suspended from the University of Toronto from the date of the Tribunal’s
order for a period of three years.
4. A notation of the sanction shall be made on the Student’s academic record and transcript from
the date of the Tribunal’s order for a period of four years.
5. This case shall be reported to the Provost for publication of a notice of the decision of the
Tribunal and the sanction imposed, with the Student’s name withheld.

- 11 -

All of which is hereby ordered this

20th

day of April, 2021.

____________________________
Lisa Talbot, Chair
On behalf of the Panel

