Case 865

DATE:

   February 22, 2017

PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v. S.M. (âthe Studentâ)

Hearing Date(s):

   November 17,2016

Panel Members:

   Ms. Johanna Braden, Barrister and Solicitor, Chair
   Professor Richard Day, Faculty Panel Member
   Ms. Alexis Giannelia, Student Panel Member

Appearances:

   Ms. Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland,
   Barristers

In Attendance:

   Mr. Christopher Lang, Director, Office of the Appeals, Discipline and
   Faculty Grievances
   Ms. Lucy Gaspini, Manager, Academic Integrity and Affairs, Office of
   the Dean, University of Toronto, Mississauga
   Mr. Sean Lourim, Technology Assistant, Office of the Governing Council

Not in Attendance:

   The Student

   Student charged with possession of an unauthorized aid under s. B.i.1(b
   ), and in the alternative, an academic dishonesty under s. B.i.3(b) of
   the Code . The Student did not attend the hearing but the Panel was
   satisfied that the Student had reasonable notice of the hearing and had
   been served several affidavits in accordance with the Rules of Practice
   and Procedure of the University Tribunal. The Panel proceeded in
   accordance with the University Tribunal Rules of Practice and
   Procedure.

   The charges related to the Studentâs possession of unauthorized notes
   during an exam. The Student had been advised in the course materials
   and when she signed in for the exam that memory aids were not allowed
   during the exam.Â  At the end of the exam, an invigilator noticed that
   the Student had typewritten and handwritten notes in her possession.Â
   After being confronted about her notes at the time of the exam, the
   Student gave inconsistent accounts to her instructor and at the Deanâs
   designate meeting as to whether and how she had used these notes. Based
   on the evidence of the instructor and the exam invigilators, the Panel
   unanimously ruled that the Student had violated s. B.i.1(b) of the Code
   and the University withdrew the alternative charge.

   The Panel accepted the Universityâs submission on penalty of a grade of
   zero in the course, a suspension of two years, a notation on the
   Studentâs transcript for three years, and a report to the Provost for
   publication. At issue was when these penalties would take effect
   because, at the time of the hearing, the Student was already a year and
   a half into a three-year academic suspension for a low
   grade-point-average. To determine if the penalty should run
   consecutively or concurrently with the Studentâs ongoing suspension,
   the Panel took into consideration that giving or receiving of
   unauthorized aid generally results in a suspension of at least two to
   three years. Even though this was the Studentâs first offence, it was a
   deliberate and calculated attempt to gain a benefit that she was not
   entitled to.Â  The Tribunal sought to impose a sanction that would be
   meaningful to the Student and also have some practical impact on her
   ability to attend the University, but was concerned that a sanction
   that would effectively keep the Student from attending the University
   for two years on top of her academic suspension would be overly
   punitive. Accordingly, the Panel ordered a one year overlap between the
   Studentâs in-progress academic suspension and the additional sanctions
   imposed for her use of an unauthorized aid at the hearing. One year of
   the suspension and transcript notation took effect concurrently with
   the suspension that was in-progress.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12937
