Case 1359

FILE:

   Case # 1359 (2022-2023)

DATE:

   October 27, 2022

PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v. H.C. (‚the Student‚)

Hearing Date(s):

   September 16, 2022, via Zoom

Panel Members:

   Ira Parghi, Chair

   Professor Paul Kingston, Faculty Panel Member

   Lauren Membreno-Lepore, Student Panel Member

Appearances:

   Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg
   Rothstein LLP

   Arshia Hassani, Student Representative, Downtown Legal Services

   The Student

Hearing Secretary:

   Christopher Lang, Director, Office of Appeals, Discipline and Faculty
   Grievances

   The Student was charged under s. B.i.1(d) Code of Behaviour on Academic
   Matters , 1995‚Ø(the ‚Code‚) on the basis that they knowingly
   represented as their own an idea or expression of an idea or work of
   another in an essay. In the alternative, the Student was charged with
   knowingly engaging in a form of cheating, academic dishonesty or
   misconduct, fraud or misrepresentation not otherwise described in the
   Code in order to obtain academic credit or other academic advantage in
   connection with an essay, contrary to s. B.i.3(b) of the Code.

   The hearing proceeded on the basis of an Agreed Statement of Fact
   (‚ASF‚). The ASF outlined that the Student submitted their essay
   through Turnitin.com which returned a similarity index of 31% where 27%
   of the matches identified by Turnitin.com were to other student papers
   submitted at other educational institutions. The ASF further outlined
   that at the Dean‚s meeting the Student admitted that they had purchased
   the essay from an online source. The ASF contained the same admission
   along with an admission that the Student did no meaningful academic
   work on the essay. After considering the documents contained in the
   Joint Book of Documents and the ASF, the Panel was satisfied on a
   balance of probabilities that the Student knowingly represented as
   their own an idea or expression of an idea, and/or the work of another.
   The Panel accepted the Student‚s guilty plea in respect to the offence
   under s. B.i.1(d) of the Code. The University withdrew the alternative
   charge.

   The Panel received a Joint Book of Documents re Sanction which included
   a Joint Submission on Penalty (‚JSP‚). The Joint Book of Documents re
   Sanction contained an affidavit from the Student outlining various
   personal difficulties that the Student was experiencing at the time
   they committed the offence. The Student‚s affidavit also voiced regret
   and remorse for the wrongdoing. The Panel noted that the Tribunal is
   not bound by the JSP, however, the case law is clear that a JSP should
   only be disregarded where giving effect to the sanction would be
   contrary to the public interest or would bring the administration of
   justice into disrepute. In considering the JSP, the Panel reviewed the
   principles and factors relevant to sanction as articulated in
   University of Toronto and Mr. C. (Case No. 1976/77-3, November 5,
   1976). The Panel considered the serious nature of the offence and the
   great detriment to the University and its students. The Panel noted
   that there is a strong need to deter others from committing a similar
   offence as this type of offence poses a grave threat to the integrity
   of the University‚s processes for evaluating students, is profoundly
   unfair to other students, and jeopardizes the University‚s reputation.
   The Panel also considered the Student‚s personal circumstances at the
   time of the commission of the offence. The Panel noted that the Student
   was experiencing mental health issues and several personal and family
   challenges, some of which were brought on or exacerbated by the COVID
   pandemic. Furthermore, the Panel noted that the Student plead guilty
   early on in the process which demonstrated insight and remorse for
   their actions. The Panel was satisfied that the aforementioned factors
   were appropriately reflected in the JSP and that penalty requested by
   the parties in the JSP was reasonable and appropriate. The Panel
   imposed the following sanctions: a grade of zero in the course; a
   four-year suspension; a five-year notation on the Student‚s transcript;
   and a report to the Provost for publication.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/30733
