Case 858 - Appeal 1

   [1]Case 858 - Tribunal 1
   [2]Case 858 - Tribunal 2
   [3]Case 858 - Appeal 2

DATE:

   June 28, 2017

PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v. A.S. (âthe Studentâ)

Hearing Date(s):

   May 18, 2017

Panel Members:

   Ms. Lisa Brownstone, Barrister and Solicitor, Chair
   Professor Elizabeth Peter, Faculty Panel Member
   Professor Allan Kaplan, Faculty Panel Member
   Ms. Beth Martin, Student Panel Member

Appearances:

   Mr. Robert Centa, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland
   Barristers
   Emily Howe & Glynnis Howe, Students-at-Law, Paliare Roland Barristers
   Ms. Lucy Gaspini, Manager Academics Integrity, University of Toronto,
   Mississauga
   Alexandra DiBlasio, Academic Integrity Assistant, University of
   Toronto, Mississauga
   The Student
   Mr. R.S., Student's Father and Representative

In Attendance:

   Ms. Tracey Gameiro, Associate Director, Office of Appeals Discipline
   and Faculty Grievances, ("ADFG")
   Mr. Christopher Lang, Director, ADFG, University of Toronto
   Mr. Sean Lourim, IT Support, Office of the Governing Council

   DAB Decision
   NOTE: See the [4]Tribunal decisionÂ for detailed facts

   Appeal by the Student from a Tribunal decision that reasonable notice
   had been provided by the University.Â  The Student was suspended for a
   year.Â  During the course of the Studentâs suspension, the University
   filed charges of academic dishonesty against the Student and served him
   with a Notice of Hearing and a revised Notice of Hearing by email to
   his University of Toronto email address.Â Â  As evidence that notice
   had been given to the Student, the Provost provided an email from the
   Universityâs Information Security Department which showed that the
   Studentâs University of Toronto email account had been accessed two
   weeks prior to the hearing, which led the Panel to conclude that the
   Universityâs obligation to give reasonable notice of the hearing to the
   Student had been discharged.Â  The hearing proceeded without the
   Student, who was found guilty of academic misconduct.

   On appeal, the Student argued that he had not received reasonable
   notice. The Student testified that he believed that he was effectively
   suspended until the fall session of 2016 so he was not checking emails
   sent to his University of Toronto email address during his
   suspension.Â  There was no evidence that anyone from the University had
   advised the Student that the Universityâs polices and guidelines would
   continue to apply to him while he was under suspension and unable to
   participate in the academic life of the University, or that he was
   expected to be active on his University email account during his
   suspension.Â  The Student had taken steps to appeal the Panelâs
   decision as soon as he had learned of it. The email from Information
   Security was insufficient proof that the Student had received notice
   because it provided no information as to who accessed the Studentâs
   email account or information about whether any specific emails had been
   accessed.Â  In these exceptional circumstances, the Board exercised its
   discretion under s. 7(b) of the Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters
   to remit the matter for a new hearing at which the Student would
   participate.

   Appeal allowed.
   [5]View Case

References

   1. https://live-the-office-of-the-governing-council.pantheonsite.io/media/28402
   2. https://live-the-office-of-the-governing-council.pantheonsite.io/media/12947
   3. https://live-the-office-of-the-governing-council.pantheonsite.io/media/28403
   4. file:///case-summary/case-858-1
   5. file:///media/13076
