Report 387

DATE:

   November 30, 2016

PARTIES:

   Mr. M.M. v. the Faculty of Nursing

Hearing Date(s):

   November 30, 2016

Committee Members:

   Professor Malcolm Thorburn (Chair)
   Professor Nicholas Terpstra, Faculty Governor
   Mr. Aidan Fishman, Student Governor

Secretary:

   Mr. Chris Lang, Director, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances
   Ms. Sheree Drummond, Chair, Office of the Governing Council, Observer

Appearances:

For the Student Appellant:

   Ms. Rabiya Mansoor, Law Student, Downtown Legal Services
   Ms. Jennifer Fehr, Review Counsel, Observer, Downtown Legal Services
   Mr. Rylee Raeburn-Gibson, Observer, Downtown Legal Services
   The Student

For the Faculty of Nursing:

   Mr. Robert A. Centa, Counsel for the Faculty
   Ms. Emily Home, Student-at-Law
   Professor Ann Tourangeau, Associate Dean, Academic, Faculty of Nursing
   Dr. Francine Wynn, Director, Undergraduate Program, Faculty of Nursing
   Professor Pamela Khan, Faculty of Nursing
   Dr. Tanya Lewis, Director, Academic Success Centre & Accessibility
   Services

   Appeal from two decisions of the Academic Appeals Committee (the âAACâ)
   of the Faculty of Nursing.Â  The first decision denied the Studentâs
   petition to void his FZ grades in two courses from Fall 2012.Â  The
   second decision denied the Studentâs petition to void his FZ grades in
   two courses from Winter 2014 and recommend that the Studentâs
   registration in the BScN (nursing) program be cancelled.Â  The Student
   requested reinstatement in the nursing program; voiding all FZ grades
   and allowing his final assignments in two of his courses to be graded
   and a number of alternative remedies.

   The student suffered from persistent depressive disorder since the age
   of sixteen. In his second year of the nursing program, the Studentâs
   request to register with Accessibility Services was denied. Near the
   end of the Fall term of that year, the Student notified the
   undergraduate program chair at the Faculty of Nursing both in person
   and by email that he would have difficulty completing his course
   requirements due to mental health issues. At an ensuing meeting with
   the undergraduate program chair, the Student alleges that the
   undergraduate program chair represented that the Student had the option
   of receiving an incomplete grade in his two courses with outstanding
   assignments, of late withdrawal (WDR status) or of submitting his
   assignments much later, at the end of a planned leave of absence. The
   Student submitted a request for a leave of absence for three terms,
   which he was granted. The Student did not submit the required
   assignments for his courses and received a failing grade (FZ). When the
   Faculty sent a letter to notify him of his failing grades, the Student
   was on a leave of absence and suffering from a number of illnesses. He
   did not read or even open the letter until after the deadline to appeal
   his grades had passed.

   The Student returned to the Nursing program in the Fall of 2013. Once
   again, he applied for accommodations through Accessibility Services and
   was registered in the Winter term. He retook the courses he had failed
   and passed them. The Student suffered another acute depressive episode
   that continued on to the summer of 2014. As a result, he did not
   complete the coursework in two other courses and was assigned
   incomplete grades.Â  In the summer of 2014, the Student was informed by
   the Faculty that he would have to submit the outstanding assignments in
   those courses by 15 August in order for grades to be submitted by the
   deadline of 30 August. In that same letter, the Faculty made clear that
   should he fail to submit his assignments by the deadline, he would
   receive a grade of FZ, and this would result in âthe termination [of
   his enrolment] from the program.â

   The Student submitted his assignments after the August 15, 2014
   deadline.Â  The Student alleged that he misread the letter because of
   his then-undiagnosed ADHD.Â  As a result of his failure to submit those
   assignments the Student received a grade of FZ in those courses and his
   registration in the nursing program was terminated.

   The student took over three years to start his appeal of the grades he
   received from the Fall of 2012.Â  According to the Faculty of Nursingâs
   Undergraduate Calendar, students have six months from the time of the
   original decision to launch an appeal. The Committee found that the
   Student cannot use the fact that he chose not to read correspondence
   from the university as grounds for extending the deadline of his
   appeal. Nor was the delay justified by any potential misinformation
   given to him by the Faculty that his right of appeal had expired,
   because even if the Faculty had given him that advice, he did not begin
   working with counsel until a year and a half after he allegedly
   received that advice, and did not start his appeal more than six months
   after working with counsel â almost two years later.Â  Finally, the
   Committee held that the Faculty had not waived any right to raise
   arguments of delay simply because it responded to the substance of the
   Studentâs argument in this case. It was open to the Faculty to oppose
   the Studentâs appeals on their merits as well asÂ  point out its
   lateness. The Faculty may insist on the administrative need to ensure
   timeliness while also providing the Student with substantive reasons
   for the dismissal of his claim in their reply.

   The Committee was troubled by the fact that the Faculty of Nursing
   could have offered accommodations to the Student in the fall of 2012
   such as assigning him grades of incomplete (INC) or granting him
   deferred standing (SDF) which they failed to do. The Committee also
   found that matters could have been dealt with more effectively had
   Accessibility Services granted the Student accommodations in the fall
   of 2012. The Committee was also troubled by the idea that the
   undergraduate chair may have given the Student the wrong information
   that he could avoid failing grades if he took a leave of absence. That
   said, the Committee did not find that the student was treated unfairly.
   Although the Student did not receive all the accommodations that might
   have been offered, his treatment by the Faculty of Nursing was in
   accordance with faculty policies and these policies were administered
   fairly.

   For his appeals relating to course work in 2014, the Committee found
   that there was no suggestion that the Faculty misled him about how they
   would treat his case. He was informed in the clearest possible terms of
   the deadline for submission of his work and of the consequences of
   failure to do so. Given the long extension granted to the Student and
   the clarity of the Facultyâs expectations, the Committee found that
   there was no basis for the suggestion that the Student was unfairly
   treated in this case. Appeals dismissed. The Student was appropriately
   awarded failing grades in four courses in the BScN program. In keeping
   with the standards of that program, the CoS was correct in its decision
   to terminate the Studentâs enrolment in that program.
   [1]View Report

References

   1. file:///media/12633
