UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL

IN THE MATTER OF charges of academic dishonesty made on June 26, 2006;
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic
Matters, 1995;
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Act, 1971, S.O. 1971, c. 56 as amended
S.O. 1978, c. 88

BETWEEN:
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
and
Mr. S.D.

REASONS FOR DECISION

Members of the Panel:
Ronald G. Slaght, Q.C.

Chair

Stéphane Mechoulan

Faculty Panel Member

Adrian Asselin

Student Panel Member

Appearances:
Linda R. Rothstein
Robert A. Centa

Counsel for the University of Toronto

William M. Trudell
Mark A. Lapowich

Counsel for the Student

-2Introduction
[1]

The Trial Division of the University Tribunal held a hearing on February 12 and 13, 2007
and March 26, 2007 to consider the following charges brought by the University against
the Student:
1. In or about June 2004, you did knowingly forge or in any other way alter or falsify an
academic record, and/or did knowingly utter, circulate or make use of any such
forged, altered or falsified record, whether the record be in print or electronic form,
namely, a Display of Academic History, contrary to Section B.1.3.(a) of the Code of
Behaviour on Academic Matters, 1995 (“Code”).
2. In the alternative, in or about June 2004, you did knowingly engage in a form of
cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or misrepresentation not
otherwise described in order to obtain academic credit or other academic advantage of
any kind contrary to Section B.1.3.(b) of the Code.

[2]

The matter proceeded on an Agreed Statement of Facts and the Student entered a guilty
plea to Charge #1. Following a review of the Agreed Statement of Facts and upon
hearing the submissions of counsel, the Tribunal accepted the guilty plea and entered a
finding of “guilty” to Charge #1. The University did not proceed with Charge #2.

[3]

The Tribunal then proceeded with a contested hearing into the appropriate sanction. An
Agreed Statement of Facts Relevant to Sanction was filed, and evidence directed towards
penalty was called by the parties.

[4]

At the conclusion of the hearing, following submissions and a period of deliberation, the
panel advised the parties it was reserving its decision on sanction and would issue its
decision and reasons at a later date. These are those reasons, and the panel’s decision on
sanction.

2005 Events
[5]

The events giving rise to Charge #1 occurred in or about June 2004, and concern the
Student’s admission that he submitted an altered academic record to a major Toronto law
firm, representing to the firm that he had obtained a B in three courses where, in truth, his
marks had been C+ in each course. The Student was at the firm as a student for the
summer of 2004. While there, he was offered and accepted an articling position with that
firm. In 2005, as part of a requirement to update his academic record for the law firm,
the Student again altered his academic record in the same manner and in the same
particulars, and submitted a second false record to the firm.

[6]

At the time of the 2005 falsification, the Student had graduated and was not then a
student at the University. It was acknowledged before us that although the University
Tribunal did not have jurisdiction to convene a hearing into the events of 2005, as the

-3Student was not then a student at the University, it would have been possible for the
University to convene a hearing of its Governing Council which, it was acknowledged by
all parties, did have jurisdiction to recall the Student’s degree, if, after a hearing, it had
determined to do so.
[7]

If this avenue had been pursued, then the deliberations over these issues would have
extended to two hearings. The University had decided not to take that step.

[8]

The panel was advised, however, that the parties had agreed that it could take into
account to the extent we considered it appropriate the fact “that he did it again” in 2005.

[9]

We were, however, reminded by counsel on a number of occasions as the matter
proceeded that this hearing and the penalty to be levied was with respect to the plea to
one charge only, for the 2004 altered transcript.

Agreed Facts
[10]

The facts of this matter can be briefly stated, in light of the admissions made by the
Student and recorded by the parties in the Agreed Statement of Facts.

[11]

The Student enrolled at the University of Toronto in a combined Juris Doctor and Master
of Business Administration program, which is a four-year program. The Student
completed the program and in June 2005 the University conferred the degrees of JD and
MBA upon him.

[12]

In September 2003, the Student had applied for a position in the 2004 summer student
program at a well known law firm with a practice extending to complex business
transactions and major litigation. The firm hires numbers of law students to work at the
firm during the summer months and often hires these students back to complete their
articling requirements.

[13]

In November 2003, the Student accepted the firm’s offer of a position in its 2004 summer
student program. The Student’s application had been supported by a transcript including
marks from his first year at the Faculty of Law and his first year in the MBA program.

[14]

The firm’s summer students were asked to provide the firm with an updated transcript or
academic record and in June 2004 the Student provided the firm with a copy of what was
purported to be a display of his academic history. The Student supplied what was
purported to be an accurate academic history taken from the University of Toronto’s
Repository of Student Information (“ROSI”). The record given by the Student to the firm
was false. The Student falsely reported grades in three courses he had taken in the
Faculty of Law in 2003-2004. He reported a grade of B in each of Administrative Law,
Public International Law and Taxation Law, although he had received a grade of C+ in all
three courses.

-4[15]

The Student admitted that he had asked a childhood friend, a computer programmer, to
effect the alterations. In evidence put before the Tribunal, the Student’s friend both
admitted his role in falsifying the transcript and explained the means by which this was
accomplished. The firm did not detect the 2004 altered record and sometime in the
summer of 2004 offered the Student an articling position which he accepted.

[16]

The Student completed his joint program and graduated from the University in June
2005. In order to comply with the firm’s request that its articling students provide the
firm with their final transcript and that the students had obtained a law degree, the
Student again requested his friend to alter his academic record and the same alterations
were made to that transcript, which the Student then submitted to the firm.

[17]

In April 2006 both the Faculty of Law and the firm received a series of anonymous email
messages alleging that the Student had “doctored” the grades on his U of T transcripts
which he had submitted to the law firm.

[18]

When confronted by the firm, the Student admitted that he had falsified his academic
record when he provided the 2004 ROSI record and the 2005 record to the firm. The
Student admitted before the Tribunal that he had forged, altered and falsified the 2004
and 2005 records because he believed it would improve his chances of being offered an
articling position and subsequently a job as an associate lawyer at the firm.

[19]

The Student entered a plea of guilty to Charge #1. On the basis of the Agreed Statement
of Facts and admissions made by the Student, the Tribunal found the Student guilty of
Charge #1.

Sanction
[20]

While the panel was greatly assisted by the parties filing an Agreed Statement of Facts
Relevant to Sanction, the parties were far apart in their positions on penalty and this
phase of the hearing was fully adversarial in nature. Evidence was led and additional
documents filed. Lengthy submissions were made by counsel at the conclusion of the
hearing.

[21]

It was the University’s position that if the Student had still been a student, the appropriate
sanction in this case would have been expulsion from the University. In the current
circumstances, the University argues that the Tribunal should recommend to the
Governing Council cancellation and recall of the Student’s JD degree (although not his
MBA) pursuant to Section C.II.(b).1.(j)(i) of the Sanctions provisions of the Code. The
Student does not dispute the Tribunal’s jurisdiction to order that penalty, but argued that
a period of suspension of his degree of one year was appropriate, when taken with the
period of limbo the Student has already experienced to date, and the fact that the Student
will still need to undergo scrutiny by the Law Society before he may be called to the Bar
and practice law.

-5Agreed Statement of Facts
[22]

Much of the Agreed Statement of Facts and other evidence at the sanction hearing
centered around the highly publicized incident at the Faculty of Law in Spring 2001,
when 17 first-year students in summer job applications submitted statements of grades to
prospective employers that did not accord with the results recorded by the University for
tests written by the students in December 2000.

[23]

This incident garnered much publicity in 2001 and 2002, and was still much in the news
when the Student entered law school in September 2001. Indeed, the Student coauthored an article in Ultra Vires, the Faculty of Law student newspaper, which
discussed one of the student cases that had reached the Divisional Court, Roxanne Shank
v. Daniels et al. Among other things, the Student wrote in the newspaper: “…while
overruling the Dean’s decision in the instant case, the Court affirmed the school’s power
to penalize students for misrepresenting grades to third parties despite the absence of any
official record”. The article went on to discuss penalties that had been sought by the
Faculty in the cases including that the Dean had been seeking long term suspensions or
even expulsion in some cases. In writing the article, the Student read the Shank decision
and the University’s press release in which the University quoted from the Divisional
Court judgment including the following:
“It is surely of fundamental importance that students not misrepresent their
achievements.”

[24]

It was also agreed by the Student that he had participated in a program that the Faculty of
Law had initiated following the 2001 incident to expose first year students to issues of
ethics and professionalism. Associate Dean Lorne Sossin gave evidence before the
Tribunal about the genesis of this “bridge week” program, how it was implemented in
specific response to the 2001 incident and that its purpose was to provide an intense
experience to the students to emphasize the importance to students that they understand
and adhere to standards of conduct. Professor Sossin also gave evidence that individual
courses in that following year, including Civil Procedure which Professor Sossin taught
to the Student, saw a greater emphasis placed on matters of ethics and professionalism in
the classroom.

[25]

As Professor Sossin said in his evidence, there is no doubt that this period at the Faculty
of Law was a period of intense focus on ensuring students were not only exposed to
matters of ethics and integrity but that they participate in these programs both in a
workshop setting and in their coursework, and that they come to understand that such
behaviour as had been exhibited was unacceptable and would not be tolerated.

[26]

Professor Sossin was quite emphatic in his evidence that, with the trauma and its
aftermath at the Faculty of Law, had the Faculty learned of the Student’s conduct while
he was a student, his actions would have been seen as a most serious breach of integrity
and honesty and the Faculty would have sought the Student’s expulsion from the
University.

-6[27]

In June 2002, the Student was not only being educated and reminded of the importance of
ethical conduct at the Faculty of Law, but for its part, the Rotman School of Management
also required its students to accept a code of integrity. The Student signed the Rotman
Code of Conduct and in doing so agreed that he would “…conduct myself with the
utmost integrity throughout my time at Rotman” and “…represent myself honestly to
members of the Rotman community and to outsiders”.

The Paris Exchange
[28]

From September to December 2004, the Student attended an academic exchange at the
Sorbonne in Paris. He was scheduled to return to study at Rotman and the Faculty of
Law in January 2005. Rotman had a policy that required its students to attend the first
day of class, or see them dropped from the class list in favour of the waiting list.

[29]

On January 2, 2005 the Student sent an email to staff at Rotman in which he said:
I wanted to let you know that my first semester law exchange carries me
through the first 2 weeks of January so Im going to miss the first two
weeks of school. I will contact my profs to inform them and make
arrangements [sic].

[30]

This statement was not true. When he wrote this email, the Student had completed his
oral examinations and course work at the Sorbonne, and, in fact, had made arrangements
to spend his vacation in Egypt, where he was for the first two weeks of January 2005.

[31]

Officials at both Rotman and the Faculty of Law pursued the matter in an effort to learn
why the Student was to be detained in France in January 2005, and the Tribunal had
before it a number of email exchanges in which the truth eventually emerged – that the
Student had made his vacation and travel plans some months before and chose simply to
mislead the institutions. A fair reading of the email exchanges supports a conclusion that,
at the very least, the Student showed little insight into his actions even after the truth
emerged.

[32]

The panel heard some evidence, much of it hearsay and uncorroborated, about the
circumstances surrounding the anonymous emails that led to the firm confronting the
Student with the transcripts submitted by him to the firm. Although we make no finding
on the point, it may well be that the author of these emails had no actual knowledge of
what the Student had done. In any event, when confronted with the allegation, the
Student immediately acknowledged his guilt. He was discharged from the firm shortly
thereafter. Subsequently, Mr. V., the managing partner of the firm, wrote a positive letter
about the Student which was put before us, in which Mr. V., in describing the Student’s
time at the firm, wrote that he “…showed significant promise, that he was engaged,
intelligent and conscientious, well liked by the lawyers and made a noticeable
contribution to the firm.”

-7[33]

The Student gave evidence at the hearing and was cross-examined at length by counsel
for the University. The Student, who is now 28, was born and grew up in British
Columbia. He attended high school in Burnaby, British Columbia and went to UBC
where he attained a B.Sc. in biology and psychology. He was admitted to the Faculty of
Law at the University of Toronto and appears to have had an active student life. In
addition to his work at Ultra Vires he was involved in mooting, and was active on the
executive of the joint law and MBA program. He played law school and intramural
sports.

[34]

He explained the process by which he applied to the firm for a summer position. He
appears to have functioned well at the firm and, as a result, was asked to article at the
firm. He described the circumstances of his discharge and that when faced with the
email, which contained a number of different allegations, he admitted that his marks
submitted to the firm were not accurate. He was discharged the next morning. When
asked by his counsel to explain why this had happened and why he had conducted
himself this way he conceded that it was an entirely selfish act, difficult to explain,
selfish and thoughtless and that all he could say was that he didn’t see the forest for the
trees or the implications of his act and that he had become overly concerned with
symbols and status and wanted to hide that he had obtained these grades, which, at least
in his view, would disqualify him from opportunities at the firm.

[35]

He readily admitted in direct evidence and in cross-examination to misleading the
Rotman School in January 2005.

[36]

Some days following his discharge, the Student wrote a letter of apology to the firm
which was before the panel in which he took responsibility for his actions and offered no
excuses for his conduct. The Student also self reported himself to the Law Society,
where he still faces scrutiny from that body.

[37]

Fortunately for the Student, following his discharge from the firm, he was referred by a
friend to Mr. P. S. Mr. S. is a senior barrister, well known in litigation circles in Toronto
where he has been practicing civil litigation at a high level of competence and integrity
for over thirty years.

[38]

Mr. S. wrote letters in support of the Student and also gave evidence at the hearing.

[39]

Mr. S. employed the Student in order that the Student could complete his articles and
continues to employ the Student pursuant to some agreement that has been made with the
Law Society for that purpose.

[40]

The Student told the panel he has benefitted greatly from his association with Mr. S., who
taught him to face up to his shortcomings and his failures; that he recognizes his conduct
was both unacceptable and severe and that he simply wants at some point to be able to
practice and live up to the faith that his family, his partner and Mr. S. and others have
shown in him.

-8[41]

He has been working with Habitat for Humanity and has found that work both rewarding
and an opportunity to gain further perspective into his actions as well as make a
contribution to others.

[42]

The panel found the Student to be forthright in his cross-examination, which was
unsparing. He admitted to some youthful indiscretions which he had apparently
volunteered in documents which were not put before us. He agreed that he had learned
nothing from the 2001 student incident and that what he had done was worse both
because of the earlier precedent and that his actions were more calculated than those of
the earlier students, in misrepresenting his actual final marks, and that he had taken
advantage of a friend. He admitted that a C+ would not have deprived him of an articling
job somewhere and all he thought about was his own advantages and that he then waited
a whole year and proceeded with the same dishonest act all over again.

[43]

He admitted that his email to the Rotman School was a misrepresentation and that when
challenged he had not come clean even then.

[44]

He agreed with these suggestions but told the panel that, while he would not defend his
actions, he now had insight and had learned the importance of trust and integrity as
necessary ingredients in life and in the law.

[45]

In his evidence, Mr. S. described how he had agreed to take the Student on so that his
articles could be completed, which he had understood would be a twelve-week
commitment.

[46]

He described his discussions with the Student, the expectations that he had of the Student
and the level of scrutiny that he has brought to this relationship.

[47]

Following the completion of the articles, Mr. S. has continued to employ the Student,
who is unable to advance towards the Bar so long as these charges remain outstanding
and he has continued to be impressed with the Student. His description of the Student
was of a person who had blundered horribly but whom, on his assessment, is an upright
person and an ethical man who has a future in the legal profession. He sees no attempts
to manipulate or take advantage. The Student works hard and shows promise.

[48]

In cross-examination and in argument it was suggested that Mr. S. was not the most
objective witness, and that his evidence should be approached with some caution.

Submissions on Penalty
[49]

The University made it clear that based on these facts and like cases, the Tribunal should
recommend the cancellation or recall of the Student’s JD and that a notation be placed on
his record permanently that his law degree has been cancelled. The University was not
seeking cancellation of the MBA degree and not seeking cancellation of the Student’s
earned academic credits.

-9[50]

The University suggested that if the Student were still a student, the University would
have asked for expulsion, and expulsion is the most common penalty when an offence of
this nature is committed, and here, the offence had been committed not once but twice.
Ms. Rothstein suggested that like cases should be treated alike and if the Student had
been a student he would have neither a JD nor an MBA, but rather would have been
expelled, in accordance with the usual penalty for such conduct, indeed, as in two cases
decided by the Tribunal in the previous two weeks where that penalty had been meted
out.

[51]

In the course of submissions of counsel for the University and for the Student the panel
was referred to many previous decisions of the Tribunal, in detail, including two very
recent cases, Mr. L. and Mr. Y, both decisions of the Tribunal released in March 2007, in
which cases students had falsified academic records. In Mr. L., upon a joint submission
following a plea, a recommendation was made to Governing Council that it cancel and
recall Mr. L’s degree. In Mr. Y, a similar decision was made – that Mr. Y’s degree be
cancelled and recalled. In that case, Mr. Y. did not appear at the hearing.

[52]

As stated, the panel had the benefit from counsel of an exhaustive review of previous
decisions of the Tribunal. Some of these cases were decided by jury under an earlier
discipline regime, some were decisions on appeal from penalties imposed by juries and
some were decisions of this Tribunal in the so-called modern era. There are then the two
very recent decisions to which we have referred.

[53]

We approached the jury decisions and older cases with some caution and have placed
little emphasis on them. The reports of the cases are often quite cryptic, lacking in detail
and penalties appear to have been imposed in some cases without much consideration of
principle. The cases from the modern era are much more complete and do give this panel
a good understanding of the reasons for the penalties imposed in those cases.

[54]

What can be said overall is that this Tribunal and its predecessors have, by and large,
treated the falsification of an academic record as a most serious offence, striking directly
at the core values of the University, and demonstrating a fundamental failure to act with
the integrity and the necessary shared values of honesty and standards which members of
the University community must display and adhere to. Expulsion from the University or
recall of the degree has more often than not been the penalty imposed for falsified
reporting. One sees in the cases some emphasis on the deception of third parties as
particularly offensive conduct and of course this is present in this case. Acts of
falsification and deception like these are intentional and purposeful and, as here, there is
no room for any suggestion of mere negligence or even recklessness as mitigating
features.

[55]

Notwithstanding all of this and the instructive value to be gained form previous cases, it
must be said that each case did turn and of course must turn on its individual features and
facts, and on the response of the accused to the charges. Some were cases where the
student did not attend the hearing. Some are cases where a plea of guilty was entered and
a joint submission on penalty proposed that expulsion was to be imposed. In other cases

- 10 there was no evidence of mitigation put before the Tribunal and, as this panel considers
particularly important, there was no evidence before some Tribunals of post incident
conduct, of character or other evidence of mitigation, all of which are present in this case.
Sanction
[56]

At the end of the day this panel approached the issue of the penalty, as the Tribunal often
does, by adverting to the principles articulated by John Sopinka, Q.C., as he then was,
sitting as a member of the University Tribunal in Chelin. In our view, a proper statement
of the basis upon which we are to address penalty in this case is not that like cases must
result in like penalties but rather that any penalty imposed must reflect the Tribunal’s
application of the principles which govern all cases.

[57]

We did have the benefit of counsels’ submissions on the Chelin principles and we have
considered the submissions of counsel on those principles in reaching our decision.

[58]

The relevant principles in this matter include consideration of the character of the person
charged, the nature of the offence committed, the detriment to the University resulting
from the offence, deterrence, and any extenuating circumstances. Applying these
principles permits us to place this conduct in an overall context for our ultimate decision
on penalty.

[59]

There can be no doubt about the detriment to the University from the Student’s egregious
conduct. Not only was the Student a sophisticated and senior student, enrolled in a law
school, but he was fully aware of both the traumatic effect of the 2001 incident upon the
Faculty and he had been exposed to both academic teaching and practical instruction, if
any were needed, underlying the requirement for ethical behaviour not just within the
University community but also, as has been the case with the 2001 incidents, in contact
towards third parties specifically with respect to grades and representations to outsiders.
He signed and committed himself to uphold the highest standards of integrity at the
Rotman School, and he had been caught making misrepresentations in January 2005
(after he had submitted his falsified transcript to the firm) to responsible University
officials.

[60]

His acts were deliberate, and he involved a long-time friend in his misconduct.

[61]

Moreover, of course, the University did suffer from the commission of this offence, as
this incident, demonstrated by the internet commentary which we reviewed, was widely
publicized as yet another failure at the Faculty of Law.

[62]

Not only is that which the Student did in this case to be strongly condemned but we do
recognize the concern of the University for a penalty that will act as a deterrent, having
regard to the publicity that this matter has generated and the fact that in a sense, “the
whole world is watching”.

- 11 [63]

There was much debate in the submissions, and, for that matter, in the evidence over
what conclusions this Tribunal should reach in assessing the Student’s character. Firstly
in our judgment, this issue is highly relevant to the disposition we make in this case,
although we recognize the exercise is not a personality contest.

[64]

The University suggests that there is good reason to doubt the Student’s character, taking
the evidence as a whole and assessing the earlier transgressions to which he admitted: the
Sorbonne incident and the deliberate and intentional nature of the acts in question.

[65]

And yet it is this feature of this case which has given the panel much anxious
deliberation. For, unlike in so many cases, we did have the benefit of an opportunity to
observe the Student deal not only with the facts surrounding the incident itself but also
his post incident conduct, and his current circumstances. And we had the benefit of a
body of opinion from others, including Mr. S., Mr. V., representing the firm, and other
evidence of character that was presented to us. Ultimately, it was our judgment in this
case, taking all the factors into account, the appropriate penalty is not to cancel or recall
the Student’s law degree and with it any chance that he could practice law, but something
less.

[66]

In reaching this conclusion the panel makes it as plain as it can that the University was
fully justified in seeking the penalty that it did, for the reasons that it did. The Student
committed the ultimate act of deception and dishonesty in a university setting and
perpetrated a fraud and deception upon a third party. He did all this as a law student and
then a law graduate in breach of trust with a Faculty that had, to his certain knowledge,
done everything possible to bring home to him what ought to have been intuitively
understood by him in the first place.

[67]

For this, the Student should be punished, and severely punished, and it is only because
this panel has concluded, on all the evidence, and based on our assessment of him as he
answered questions and we observed his demeanour in the witness box, that the Student
may yet be fully rehabilitated, and he should be given the opportunity to continue on
towards an eventual call to the Bar, should he ultimately persuade the Law Society to
permit that.

[68]

In applying the principles laid down in Chelin we also must take into account, as John
Sopinka stated, that punishment must serve a useful function. In addition to the need for
deterrence and protection of the public, a goal of enlightened punishment includes
reformation. In this case we are persuaded on the evidence before us that the Student
should not suffer the ultimate penalty for his transgressions.

[69]

Mr. Trudell in his submissions suggested that a period of suspension of the Student’s
degree for a one year period would be appropriate. We strongly disagree. In this case,
our conclusion is that the Student should be severely punished, but not destroyed as we
are satisfied would be the result should we cancel his law degree. Nonetheless, we want
there to be no doubt that this panel condemns the Student’s conduct in the strongest
possible terms, and while we were persuaded he should be permitted an opportunity to

- 12 prove whether our assessment, that there is a genuine reformation underway, is illusory
or real (and that will now be for the Law Society to decide) our concern is to impose a
meaningful sanction for this behaviour.
[70]

In our judgment, taking all factors into account and exercising our discretion as best we
can, the appropriate penalty in this case is a three year suspension of the Student’s
degree, commencing from the date of this decision. We make that recommendation to
the Governing Council and that this penalty be recorded permanently on the Student’s
academic record and that, as usual, there be publication of this matter and these sanctions
with the Student’s name withheld.

Date: May 1, 2007

Ronald G. Slaght, Q.C.
Ronald G. Slaght, Q.C., Chair
Stéphane Mechoulan
Stéphane Mechoulan, Faculty Panel Member
Adrian Asselin
Adrian Asselin, Student Panel Member

