Report 321

DATE:

   February 19, 2008

PARTIES:

   Mr. J.V. (the Student) v. Graduate Department of Architecture,
   Landscape and Design

Hearing Date(s):

   Monday December 10, 2007

Committee Members:

   Professor L. Sossin (Chair)
   Mr. Ken Davy (Student)
   Professor Ellen Hodnett
   Professor Joel Kirsh
   Professor Louise Lemieux-Charles

Judicial Affairs Officer:

   Ms. Nancy Smart

Appearances:

For the Student Appellant:

   Mr. J.V. (the Student)

For the Graduate Department of Architecture, Landscape and Design:

   Professor J. Danahy
   Professor E. Kesik

   Appeal from a grade of B- in a course and from a grade of B in another
   course. The grounds of the appeal related to alleged bias of the
   coursesâ instructor. The Student disputed a failing grade of 50% which
   had been assigned to the class participation mark, worth 5% of the
   total course mark, and a B grade in the fourth assignment worth 40% of
   the of the total course mark. The Student believed that his grade in
   one of the courses was not calculated properly. The Committee upheld
   the majority of the Divisional Appeal Boardâs finding that the
   instructorâs recollection was sufficient for the purposes of the
   participation grade. The Committee found that there was no basis to
   question the instructorâs overall assessment of the Studentâs
   participation. The Committee agreed with the majority of the Divisional
   Appeal Board that the issue regarding the calculation of the grade was
   one of consistency and equity to all students. The Committee found that
   if the same grading scheme was applied to all students, and was not
   contrary to any information provided to students, then no unfairness
   could arise in relation to the Student. The Committee accepted the
   Divisional Appeals Board finding of no evidence of bias on the part of
   the instructor, finding that there was no credible basis in the
   evidence presented for the Studentâs view that he had been treated
   unfairly. Appeal dismissed.
   [1]View Report

References

   1. file:///media/12574
