THE UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO

IN THE MATIER of charges of academic dishonesty made on June 27, 2011
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour 011 Academic .Mallers, 1995,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the U11iversityo/Toro11t0 Act, 1971, S.O. 1971 , c. 56 as amended S.O. 1978,
C. 88

BETWEEN:
UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO (the "University")

l\'-

- an<l -

~ (the "Student")

Hearing Date: November 23, 2011

Panel Members:
Ms. Roslyn M. Tsao, Barrister and Solicitor, Chair
Professor Annette Sanger, Faculty of Music, Faculty Panel Member
Ms. Amy Gullage, Student Panel Member
Appearances:

Mr. Robert Centa, Assistant Discipline Counsel for University, J>aliare Roland Barristers
Dr. Michael Ratcliffe, Faculty of Medicine, Department oflmmunology
Dr. James Carlyle, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Immunology
Mr. rv~ ~ . the Student
In Attendance:
Ms. Jane Alderdice, Director of Quality Assessment and Governance, School of Graduale
Studies
Professor Berry Smith, Dean's Designate, Vice-Dean of Graduate Studies
Mr. Christopher Lang, Director, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances

2
REASONS ON PENALTY

l.

The University and the Student have submitted written submissions regarding penalty.

2.

The University requests a penalty as follows:

(a)

Assign the Student a final grade of O in the Research Course RST 9999Y;

(b)

Immediately suspend the Student from the university for up lo 5 years; and

(c)

Recommend to the President that you ask the Governing Counsel to expel the
Student.

3.

We agree with the University that the deliberate falsification of research results by the
Student in a Ph.D. program is a serious and inexcusable offence.

We further agree that

the Student lacks insight into his actions and their effect on the University's reputation
and status.
4.

In addition, although the Student has made written submissions which are presumed to
provide mitigating circumstances to consider in determining Penalty, the Panel is
concerned that the Student raises, for the first time, serious allegations of intimidation by
his supervisor.

S.

We have found that the Student's credibility is more than questionable and his claim of
such a serious allegation (intimidation) against the faculty member at this time (when no
response can be made) is an agg.rnvating factor.

6.

Accordingly, penalty will ordered on the above tenns as requested by the University.

Dated at Toronto, this 22nd day of March, 2012.

L

M. TSAO

