Case 1054 - Appeal

DATE:

   November 17, 2020

PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v. A.M. ("the Student")

HEARING DATE:

   August 18, 2020, via Zoom

Panel Members:

   Ms. Patricia D.S. Jackson, Chair
   Professor Aarthi Ashok, Faculty Panel Member
   Mr. Said Sidani, Student Panel Member

Appearances:

   Ms. Tina Lie, for the Respondent, Appellant by
   Cross-Appeal,Â PaliareÂ Roland Rosenberg Rothstein LLP
   Mr. SeanÂ GrouhiÂ for the Appellant, Respondent by Cross-Appeal,
   Downtown Legal Services

Hearing Secretary:

   Mr. Christopher Lang, Director, Office of Appeals, Discipline and
   Faculty Grievances, University of Toronto
   Ms. Krista Kennedy, Administrative Clerk & Hearing Secretary, Office of
   Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances, University of Toronto

   DAB Decision
   NOTE:Â See the [1]Tribunal case summary for detailed facts.

   The Student appeals the finding of the Tribunal on the basis that
   theÂ standard of review is correctnessÂ and thatÂ theÂ Tribunal erred
   in law by permitting the University to call reply evidenceÂ from two
   teaching assistants.Â Relying onÂ theÂ Supreme Court of Canadaâs
   decision inÂ R. v. Krause, [1986] 2 SCR 466, the Student argued, among
   other things, thatÂ the University should have anticipated his
   evidence.

   The University cross-appeals on the basis that the Tribunal erred in
   acquitting theÂ Student of a charge under s.Â B.i.1(a) of theÂ CodeÂ of
   Behaviour on Academic Matters, 1995Â (âCodeâ),Â whichÂ makes it an
   offence to forge, alter or falsify a document required by the
   University and to make use of such forgery. This wasÂ theÂ first of
   three charges that wereÂ subject of the hearing before the Trial
   Division.Â Alternatively,Â theÂ University hadÂ also chargedÂ the
   StudentÂ underÂ s.Â B.i.1(b) of the CodeÂ forÂ knowingly
   obtainingÂ unauthorized assistance in connection with aÂ midterm
   examinationÂ (âsecond chargeâ),Â and under s.Â B.i.3(b) of theÂ Code
   forÂ knowingly engagingÂ in a form of cheating, academic dishonesty or
   misconduct, fraud or misrepresentation to obtain academic credit or
   other academic advantage of any kind in connection with aÂ midterm
   examinationÂ (âthird chargeâ).

   In dismissing the Studentâs appeal,Â theÂ BoardÂ agreed thatÂ it isÂ an
   important element of a fair hearing that the University
   shouldÂ notÂ split its case, leading in replyÂ evidence that it could
   and should have made part of its initial case against a student. It
   alsoÂ held that,Â in general terms,Â the principles enunciated
   inÂ cases such asÂ R. v. KrauseÂ andÂ R. v. Sanderson, 2017 ONCA
   470Â apply.Â However, itÂ noted that the Tribunal is not bound by the
   strict rules of evidenceÂ and highlighted thatÂ thereÂ have been in the
   past,Â and thereÂ may in the future be,Â circumstances where
   fairnessÂ justifiesÂ the calling of reply evidence which might not be
   permitted in a criminal case.

   Further, theÂ BoardÂ held thereÂ was no obligation on the University to
   prove the contents of the Agreed StatementÂ of FactsÂ and
   thatÂ itÂ would beÂ unwise and a waste of hearing resources to have
   multiple witnesses confirm facts that the parties have agreed to.
   Relying onÂ R. v. Sanderson, itÂ statedÂ thatÂ theÂ principles that
   govern the calling of reply evidence should not be interpreted so
   rigidly that the University should call as part of its case evidence
   that addresses any possible issue that a student may raise and to
   address a position that is at odds with the facts to which the student
   appears to have agreed. The obligation is to lead evidence on the
   issues that are relevant to material issues in dispute or to a defence
   that they can or ought reasonably to anticipate.Â While recognizing
   thatÂ theÂ StudentÂ may chooseÂ not to disclose his defence to the
   University, including by declining to deliver an opening,Â the
   BoardÂ also indicatedÂ thatÂ in this case,Â the decision not to do so
   meant that the University had no reason to suspect that the Student
   intended to depart from the facts to which he appeared to have agreed.

   Ultimately, the BoardÂ concludedÂ that it couldÂ not be said that the
   University ought reasonably to have anticipated the defence that the
   Student put forward in his evidence.Â According to the Board,Â the
   Tribunalâs decision was both reasonable and correct.Â ItÂ would have
   come to the same result as theÂ Tribunal without regard to the reply
   evidence.

   In allowing the Universityâs cross-appeal, theÂ BoardÂ indicated
   thatÂ the issue itÂ raisesÂ lies in the definition of the offence which
   the Tribunal found had been committedÂ and that thisÂ offence can only
   be found inÂ circumstances where the conduct in question is not an
   offence under any other section of the Code.Â TheÂ TribunalÂ hadÂ found
   the StudentÂ guiltyÂ of violatingÂ s. B.i.3 of the Code, which
   constitutes the thirdÂ charge.Â To find theÂ Student guilty under this
   section,Â the Tribunal was in effect determining that the conduct that
   was the subject of the charges was ânot â¦otherwise describedâ in the
   Code.Â ThisÂ implies that theÂ firstÂ charge could not be
   established.Â According to the Board,Â it is not apparent that the
   Tribunal was alive to this issueÂ becauseÂ itsÂ reasons for decision
   contain no analysis of whether or why theÂ firstÂ charge was not made
   out.

   The BoardÂ consideredÂ that the facts found by the Tribunal made out
   the offence contained in theÂ firstÂ charge.Â ItÂ agreedÂ with the
   University that the Student should not also be convicted for the same
   conduct under theÂ thirdÂ chargeÂ and thatÂ as soon as it is found that
   the conduct is an offence under the section of the Code referenced in
   theÂ firstÂ charge, the offence referenced in theÂ thirdÂ charge ceases
   to apply.Â Accordingly, the BoardÂ substitutedÂ a conviction under
   theÂ firstÂ charge for the conviction found by the Tribunal.

   Finally,Â the BoardÂ agreedÂ that the substitution of a conviction
   under theÂ firstÂ charge ought not to alter the sanctions imposedÂ by
   the Tribunal.

   Studentâs appeal dismissed.Â Universityâs cross-appeal allowed.
   [2]View Case

References

   1. https://governingcouncil.utoronto.ca/case-summary/case-1054
   2. file:///media/29520
