Report 290

DATE:

   February 2, 2004

PARTIES:

   Ms. L. (the Student) v. The School of Graduate Studies

Hearing Date(s):

   December 3, 2003

Committee Members:

   Assistant Dean Jane Kidner, Chair
   Professor Phil Byer
   Professor John Furedy
   Professor David Jenkins
   Mr. Adam Watson

Secretary:

   Mr. Paul Holmes, Judicial Affairs Officer

Appearances:

For the Student:

   Ms. L. (the ‚Student‚)

For SGS:

   Professor Joan Cherry, Associate Dean, Division II (Social Sciences),
   SGS
   Ms. Jane Alderdice, Coordinator, Policy, Program and Liaison, SGS
   Professor Anne Jordon, Associate Chair, Department of Curriculum,
   Teaching and Learning (the ‚Graduate Department‚), OISE/UT

   Request to have a comprehensive examination remarked by an external
   examiner in accordance with the Faculty‚s Procedural Guide for
   Externally Rereading an Examination. The Student challenged the
   capacity of the examiners to properly evaluate her approach to the
   questions, asserted that her answers had not been read fully and
   carefully, claimed that the examiners displayed an incomplete and
   distorted knowledge of the literature, and had distorted what she said
   in her answers. She also asserted that there was a generalized bias
   against her ‚scientific‚ approach, and a personal bias against her on
   the part of one or more examiners, both of which were operating against
   her and which contributed to the result on the exam. On the issues of
   the substantive correctness of the assessments of the exam, the
   Committee found that it was not the job of the Committee to assess the
   correctness of exam marks or the competence of the University‚s
   examiners. The Committee agreed with the reasons of the Graduate
   Academic Appeals Board that ‚[u]nless there is something, such as a
   reasonable apprehension of bias, to cause a failure of confidence in
   what has been done, the assessment process must come to an end.‚ On the
   issue of personal bias, the Committee found no evidence to suggest that
   the faculty who marked the Student‚s exam knew her identity, and found
   no evidence to substantiate an allegation of bias based on the
   Student‚s status. On the issue of general bias, the Committee found it
   improbable that the faculty possessed a collective mindset against the
   acceptance of the Student‚s theoretical approach, and no evidence was
   presented to support the claim. A minority of the Committee stated that
   it was concerned with the discrepancy between the Student‚s prior marks
   on her coursework and her failure on the comprehensive exam, and with
   the potential lack of specific math expertise of the faculty who marked
   the Student‚s exam. The minority observed that a letter from the
   Faculty to the Chair of the Graduate Department‚s Student Appeals
   Committee appeared to be an attempt to intimidate the Student. Appeal
   dismissed.
   [1]View Report

References

   1. file:///media/12553
