UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
GOVERNING COUNCIL
REPORT NUMBER 290 OF THE ACADEMIC APPEALS COMMITTEE
February 2, 2004
To the Academic Board,
University of Toronto
Your Committee reports that it held a hearing on December 3, 2003 at which the following
members were present:
Assistant Dean Jane Kidner, Chair
Professor Phil Byer
Professor John Furedy
Professor David Jenkins
Mr. Adam Watson
Secretary: Mr. Paul Holmes, Judicial Affairs Officer
Appearances:
For the Student
Ms. L. (the “Student”)
For the School of Graduate Studies (“SGS”)
Professor Joan Cherry, Associate Dean, Division II (Social Sciences), SGS
Ms. Jane Alderdice, Coordinator, Policy, Program and Liaison, SGS
Professor Anne Jordon, Associate Chair, Department of Curriculum, Teaching
and Learning (the “Graduate Department”), OISE/UT
This is an appeal from the decision of the Graduate Academic Appeals Board (“GAAB”) dated
November 28, 2002. In her appeal to Your Committee, the Student asks that her comprehensive
examination written in June 2001, part of the Ed.D. degree requirements, be remarked by an
external examiner in accordance with the SGS Procedural Guide for Externally Rereading an
Examination (the “Procedural Guide”). The appeal process began when Professor Dennis
Thiessen, Coordinator of Graduate Studies in the Graduate Department, in a decision dated
October 25, 2001, refused to interfere with the decision of the Graduate Department’s
Comprehensive Examination Committee failing Ms. L. The Student’s appeal to the Graduate
Department’s Student Appeals Committee was denied in a decision dated February 6, 2002.
From there the Student appealed to Professor Susan Howson (Professor Cherry’s predecessor at

Report 290 of the Academic Appeals Committee
SGS) and was again denied in a decision dated March 21, 2002. The next step was an appeal to
GAAB, and when that was unsuccessful, an appeal to Your Committee.
Your Committee has had the advantage of having read the facts set out in the GAAB decision
dated November 28, 2002, which is appended here as Appendix “A”. As no substantial new
facts were presented at the hearing, Your Committee will only briefly recount the facts here and
relies on the facts as set out in Appendix “A”.
The Student enrolled in the Ed.D. program at OISE/UT in the Fall Term of 1999. She had
previously obtained a B.Sc. in 1967, an M.Sc. in 1971, and a B.Ed. in 1973. She has extensive
teaching experience in mathematics and physics at collegiate and polytechnic levels. Thus far the
Student has completed 10 courses and achieved an “A” standing in her Ed.D. program. The
Student informed the committee that she had recently been diagnosed with cancer. The illness
was not present during the period at issue.
The Graduate Department’s comprehensive examination consisted of three “take-home”
questions. Each question could receive one of four possible marks, “Pass”, “Marginal Pass”,
“Marginal Fail”, or “Fail”. Departmental policy requires that any mark other than a “Pass” be
marked again by another faculty member. Faculty members marking in the second round are not
informed of the original examiners’ grades, although they would necessarily know that the
original grade was not a “Pass”. Students write the examinations under a pseudonym. Once the
exam has been marked twice, if any of the marks remaining are not a “Pass”, all of the marks,
together with the examiners’ commentaries are considered as a whole by the Graduate
Department’s Comprehensive Examination Committee. This committee is composed of five
faculty members who have not previously read the student’s responses. The Examination
Committee makes the final determination as to whether a passing grade ought to be assigned to
the comprehensive examination.
On the first marking of the Student’s comprehensive exam questions, the Student received a
“Marginal Pass” on the first question; a “Marginal Fail” on the second question; and a “Marginal
Fail” on the third question. On the required reread by three new examiners, the Student received
the same grades on the first and third questions, but a lower mark of “Fail” on the second
question. The Student’s three questions together with the six marks and six commentaries were
then passed on to the Graduate Department’s Comprehensive Examination Committee who
reviewed all of the questions, commentaries, and the assigned grades in their entirety. The
Examination Committee determined that the Student had failed the comprehensive examination.
Ms. L.’s argument at the appeal is best summarized by the written reasons of GAAB:
Essentially [the Student] challenged the capacity of the examiners to properly
evaluate her approach to the questions due to their lack of mathematical, physics or
computer science backgrounds, asserted that her answers had not been read fully and
carefully, claimed that the examiners displayed a very incomplete and distorted
knowledge of the literature, and had distorted what she actually said in her answers.
She also asserted that there was bias operating against her and that this must have
Page 2 of 4

Report 290 of the Academic Appeals Committee
contributed to the result on the comprehensive examinations. This bias is alleged to
consist of a generalized bias against her “scientific” approach, and a personal bias
against her on the part of one or more examiners.
On the issue of the substantive correctness of the assessments of the Student’s comprehensive
exam, and the allegations of lack of necessary background of the examiners, a majority of Your
Committee agreed with the written reasons below that it is not the job of Your Committee to
assess the correctness of exam marks or the competence of the University’s examiners. The
Student’s comprehensive exam questions were marked and remarked by a total of six faculty
members, and then reviewed by five additional faculty members who were members of the
Graduate Department’s Comprehensive Examination Committee. All of these faculty were
chosen for their general expertise in the Math/Science/Technolgy field and were appointed by
the University to carry out these tasks. The Student argues that her exam answers ought to have
been marked by a pure Math expert, and that all of the markers instead had Science expertise.
Your Committee heard testimony from Associate Dean Joan Cherry and Professor Anne Jordon
that OISE/UT does not recognize pure Math as a separate area of expertise for marking purposes.
Instead they offer “Math/Science/Technology” as one of the options for students to request in the
marking of their comprehensive exams. The majority of Your Committee agreed with the
written reasons below that “[u]nless there is something, such as a reasonable apprehension of
bias, to cause a failure of confidence in what has been done, the assessment process must come
to an end.”
On the issue of personal bias, Your Committee found no evidence to substantiate the Student’s
allegations of bias based on her status as a [deleted to maintain confidentiality]. The Student’s
comprehensive exam was written by pseudonym. None of the faculty who marked the Student’s
exam was aware of her identity. The exam questions were read and evaluated by a total of
eleven faculty members who were not aware of the grades previously assigned to the Student,
and who were not aware of the Student’s identity. All markers agreed that the Student’s answers
were at best a “Marginal Pass” and at worse a “Marginal Fail” or “Fail”. Further, even if the
Student’s identity had been known to the exam markers (which the Student alleges by virtue of
her subject area and theoretical position), the Student herself admitted that she had no prior
personal dealings with any of these faculty except Professor Hodson who the Student noted was
abrupt with her during their initial meeting. However, the Student also admitted that Professor
Hodson had given her an “A” in a course she subsequently took with him, and that she had no
other negative dealings with him. Your Committee found no evidence to suggest that the
professors who marked her papers knew her identity and found no evidence to substantiate an
allegation of personal bias.
On the issue of general bias against the approach taken by the Student, the majority of Your
Committee agreed with the reasons of the GAAB decision below. Specifically, the majority of
Your Committee found it improbable that the faculty of the Graduate Department possessed a
collective mindset against the acceptance of the Student’s theoretical approach, and no evidence
was presented to support the claim.

Page 3 of 4

Report 290 of the Academic Appeals Committee
A minority was concerned with what it felt was a “gross mismatch” between the Student’s prior
marks on her coursework, and her failure on the comprehensive exam. The minority was also
concerned with the potential lack of specific math expertise of the faculty who marked the
Student’s exam. Finally, the minority noted the letter from the Coordinator of Graduate Studies
dated December 11, 2001 to the Chair of the Graduate Department’s Student Appeals
Committee, which in its final paragraph stated:
Finally I urge [the Student] to discontinue her appeal efforts. To persist in an appeal
based solely on the accusations she makes about the professor, though perhaps not
quite in the category of false charges (and thus could be considered as offences under
the Code of Student Conduct), are certainly unsubstantiated charges. She would be
better advised to rewrite the comprehensive examination.
The minority found that this paragraph amounted to an attempt to intimidate the Student.
The majority of Your Committee instead agreed with GAAB that while the paragraph should not
have appeared in a formal reply to an appeal, it did not deter the Student and did not have the
effect of intimidating her. Further there is no reason to believe that it influenced in any way the
decision of the Student Appeals Committee, nor GAAB, nor was the majority of Your
Committee influenced in any way by the statement in the letter.
The procedure of externally rereading an examination is a discretional remedy that may be
invoked by the divisional Associate Dean, or GAAB. The majority of Your Committee did not
find any evidence to warrant overriding the GAAB decision, refusing to order an external reread.
The Decision of Your Committee is by a majority decision and therefore the appeal is denied.
Respectfully submitted,

Paul J. Holmes
Secretary

Jane Kidner
Chair

#28783 v7 – Public

Page 4 of 4

APPENDIX “A”
Report 290 of the Academic Appeals Committee
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
SCHOOL OF GRADUATE STUDIES
THE GRADUATE ACADEMIC APPEALS BOARD
Decision in the Appeal of Ms L.
November 28, 2002

The Graduate Academic Appeals Board:
Ms R. Carrara
Professor J. Galloway
Professor R. MoClelland
Professor R. Reisz
Professor R. Scane (Chair)
Professor G. Silano
Appearances:
For the Appellant:
Ms L.
Mr. S. Laubman
Ms A. Stacey
For the Graduate Department of Curriculum, Teaching and
Learning:
Professor V. Darroch—Lozowski
Professor D. Thiessen
Professor M. Wahlstrom

Appendix “A”
Report 290 of the Academic Appeals Committee

This is an appeal from the decision of Associate Dean S.
Howson, dated March 2, 2002, which dismissed an appeal from the
Graduate Department’s Student Appeals Committee, dated February
6, 2002. The latter Committee dismissed an appeal from the
decision of Professor D. Thiessen, Associate Chair of the
Department, dated October 25, 2001. Professor Thiessen had
refused to interfere with the decision of the Graduate
Department’s Comprehensive Examination Committee that Ms L. had
failed the comprehensive examination written in June, 2001 as
part of her Ed.D degree requirements. In her appeal to this
Board, Ms L. asks that the examination papers submitted for the
comprehensive examination be remarked by an external examiner in
accordance with the procedures established by SGS for such
circumstances.
On a preliminary matter, a member of the Board raised the
question whether the SGS Procedural Guide for Externally
Rereading an Examination Written by a Graduate Student applied
to comprehensive examinations, as well as to examinations held
in courses. The member points out that the Guide refers to
discussions with an “instructor’, which would be inappropriate
for comprehensive examinations, and also considers that a reread
by a single examiner is inappropriate for an examination which
in most divisions would be adjudged by a group of faculty. The
member also thinks it invidious to adopt as a remedy in disputes
regarding comprehensive examinations a procedure which would be
inapplicable to oral comprehensive examinations. The remedy
already available of requiring a new examination would avoid
such discrimination between oral and written comprehensives and
better satisfies the other goods with which the member is
concerned. However, the majority of the Board considered that
the entire context of the Guide, including its unrestricted
title, required that the Guide apply to any written
comprehensive examination.
On a second preliminary matter, the Board notes that in the
written argument presented to the Board on behalf of Ms L., it
seemed to be argued that, once an unresolved disagreement
between a student and an examiner or examiners as to the grading
of an examination paper was established, the Student was
entitled as of right to have the remarking procedures contained
in the Guide invoked. That position was abandoned at the
hearing, and the Board holds that it is obvious from the wording
of the Guide that its application is discretionary.
Ms. L. enrolled in the Ed.D programme of OISE/UT in the
Fall Term of 1999. She had previously obtained a B.Sc in 1967,
an M.Sc in physics in 1971, and a B.Ed. in 1973. She has
extensive teaching experience in mathematics and physics at
collegiate and polytechnic levels. In her Ed.D programme’s
1

Appendix “A”
Report 290 of the Academic Appeals Committee

course work, she has received three grades of A+, four of A and
one of B+, as well as a credit in a pass/fail course. She is
entitled to repeat the comprehensive examination once. At
present, she is on leave from the programme.
The Graduate Department’s comprehensive examination
consisted of three “take—home” questions to be answered within a
period of a week, and with a maximum word limit for each
question. The first question offered no choice. The remaining
two questions each offered a theme from which a choice of
questions was available. Each question could receive one of four
possible marks, “Pass”, “Marginal Pass”, “Marginal Fail”, or
“Fail”. Different faculty from the Graduate Department marked
each question. Departmental policy requires that any mark other
than “Pass” be marked again by another faculty member. The
faculty marking in the second round are not informed of the
original examiners’ grades, although they would necessarily know
that the original grade was not “Pass”. The examination
questions are written under a pseudonym. All of the marks,
together with examiners’ commentaries, are then considered as a
whole by the Graduate Department’s Comprehensive Examination
Committee, which makes the decision whether the examination as a
whole has been passed.
On the first marking, examiners awarded a “Marginal Pass”
on the first question, and “Marginal Fail” on each of the second
and Third questions. On the required reread, the new examiners
repeated the grades originally awarded on the first and third
questions, but the examiner on the second question awarded a
grade of “Fail”. The Comprehensive Examination Committee
subsequently determined that Ms L. had failed the examination.
Ms L. received access to the commentaries submitted by the
various examiners, and submitted a lengthy refutation of aspects
of these comments by various individual examiners to Professor
Thiessen, in his capacity of Associate Chair, as the first stage
of these appeal proceedings. This document, with subsequent
supplementary comments which Ms L. submitted to Professor
Thiessen and to the Departmental Appeals Committee, made up part
of her case before this Board.
The Board will not attempt to replicate Ms L.’s indictment
of the assessments of the two papers on which she received
either “Marginal Fail” or “Fail” grades on the two readings.
Essentially, she challenged the capacity of the examiners to
properly evaluate her approach to the questions due to their
lack of mathematical, physics or computer science backgrounds,
asserted that her answers had not been read fully and carefully,
claimed that the examiners displayed “a very incomplete and
distorted knowledge of the literature”, and had distorted what
she actually said in her answers. She also asserted that there
2

Appendix “A”
Report 290 of the Academic Appeals Committee

was bias operating against her and that this must have
contributed to the result on the comprehensive examinations.
This bias is alleged to consist of a generalized bias against
her “scientific” approach, and a personal bias against her on
the part of one or more examiners.
With respect to the allegations of some examiners’ lack of
necessary background (denied by the witnesses from the Graduate
Department) or the correctness of the assessments made, the
Board must again repeat that it cannot enter into the evaluation
of disagreements between students and examiners over the
correctness of assessments, nor over the competence of the
University’s examiners to make those assessments. In a decision
of this Board dated February 15, 2000, the Board said:
[T]he Board does not mark papers and
examinations. It is only by chance that any Board
member may have any competence at all in the
academic field in question. A student entering
the University must take the faculty,
individually and collectively, including their
intellectual and knowledge base, as they exist
from time to time.
The critiques of the examiners’ commentaries provided to
the Board are Ms L.’s selection of extracts from those
commentaries, and the references back to her answers on the
original questions are also her selection. If the Board could
not read the entirety of the original answers and adjudicate
whether, taken together, they demonstrated the level of
competence required of an Ed.D candidate at the stage of
comprehensive examinations, a fortiori it cannot do so on the
basis of the more limited material before the Board. These
questions have been marked, remarked, reviewed again in
committee, and assessed by Professor Thiessen as part of the
appeal process, all by persons whom the University has appointed
to carry out these tasks in this area of intellectual pursuit.
Unless there is something, such as reasonable apprehension of
bias, to cause a failure of confidence in what has been done,
the assessment process must come to an end.
As mentioned above, the bias alleged consists of a
generalized bias against her scientific approach, and specific
bias against her personally by certain examiners.
As to the former alleged source of bias, the Board believes
that it can best be described in Ms L.’s own words, taken from
her letter to Professor Thiessen dated September 28, 2001.
C.P.Sncw wrote of “two cultures”, the scientific
3

Appendix “A”
Report 290 of the Academic Appeals Committee

versus the liberal arts. I am now beginning my
3rd year in the doctoral program at OISE/UT and
have seen how the liberal arts culture has become
so dominant that the interest and concerns of
someone like myself with a strong background in
mathematics and science are ignored.
The evidence to substantiate the existence of this alleged
bias in approach consists of Ms. L.’s own impressions, garnered
from some conversations with faculty members and other students.
To the extent that any faculty were critical of Ms L.’s
“scientific” approach, the Board finds it improbable that the
faculty of the Graduate Department possess a collective mindset
against acceptance of the scientific method. The representatives
of the Graduate Department have denied any such systemic bias in
the Department, and given even the brief description presented
to the Board of some of the areas of interest pursued in the
Graduate Department, such a general attitude is inherently
unlikely. The evidence did not establish that any of the
individual examiners of her comprehensive examination possessed
such an attitude.
In the course of pursuing this ground of bias, there was
reference to the possibility that, because Ms L.’s scientific
background would be well known to the examiners, the anonymity
of the examination process would be defeated in her case. The
Board mentions this because, in the course of the hearing,
counsel for Ms L. was specifically asked by the Board if it was
part of her case that the University had acted improperly in any
way in the conduct of the examinations with respect to the
preservation of Ms L.’s anonymity. The Board was told that there
was no such allegation, any breach of anonymity being caused by
self-revelation in the course of the answers. The Board
understands that the issue was introduced in an attempt to
explain how examiners might bring any existing bias possessed by
them to bear against one of many candidates writing under
pseudonyms. Given the fact that 30 candidates were writing the
examination, and that six different faculty were involved in the
marking and remarking, the Board finds that a general leakage to
the examiners of Ms L.’s identity as the author of a particular
answer is not only speculative but unlikely.
With respect to the allegations of personal bias against Ms
L. as an individual, these are based upon the fact that, early
in her Ed.D programme, Ms. L. was assigned to Professor Hodson
as an advisor. In her letter to Professor Thiessen of September
28, 2001, she describes a first meeting as follows:
My first encounter with Dr. Hodson, my assigned
advisor, was a disaster. He did not seem friendly
4

Appendix “A”
Report 290 of the Academic Appeals Committee

and helpful; I still did not know why he took a
dislike towards me. I confided with Harriet and
requested to switch advisor (sic).
In her oral evidence she described the attitude of
Professor Hodson in terms that may be summarized as brusque.
Professor Hodson was the second examiner on the third question.
He did not give evidence before the Board, but the Board finds
that there is no case for him to answer. Assuming for the
purpose of the argument the truth of Ms L.’s description of the
meeting, the Board does not find that it is more likely than not
that, on this evidence, a dispassionate and reasonable observer
would suspect that this professor might, almost two years later,
be negatively influenced in his appraisal on such an important
matter. Ms. L. did take a course from Professor Hodson, two
semesters prior to the comprehensive examinations, and received
a high mark.
In summary, the Board finds that, on the evidence presented
to it, there is no reasonable danger of bias on the part of the
examiners at the comprehensive examination or any of them, or on
the part of the Comprehensive Examination Committee.
A further ground of appeal was that there were procedural
errors in the process which entitled Ms L. to relief. No such
error in the examination or evaluation process was pointed out
to the Board, and the Board finds that there was none. Ms L.
pointed to a passage in a letter from Professor Thiessen, dated
December 11, 2001, to the Chair of the Student Academic Appeals
Committee of the Graduate Department. This letter was the formal
response of the Graduate Department’s administration to the
Student’s appeal. The final paragraph of that letter read:
Finally I urge [Ms L.] to discontinue her appeal
efforts. To persist in an appeal based solely on
the accusations she makes about the professors,
though perhaps not quite in the category of false
charges (and thus could be considered as offences
under the Code of Student Conduct, are certainly
unsubstantiated charges. She would be better
advised to rewrite the comprehensive examination

-

Ms L. argues that this was an attempt to intimidate her
into abandoning her appeal. The paragraph should not have
appeared in a formal reply to an appeal, and Professor Thiessen
apologized for it at the hearing before this Board. However, Ms.
L. was not deterred, there is no reason to believe that the
decision of the Student Academic Appeals Committee was
influenced by it, and that of this Board certainly was not.

5

Appendix “A”
Report 290 of the Academic Appeals Committee

The appeal is dismissed.

R.SCANE
For the Graduate Academic Appeals Board

6

