Report 312

DATE:

   December 5, 2006

PARTIES:

   Mr. R (for the Student) v. UTSC

Hearing Date(s):

   December 5, 2006

Committee Members:

   Assistant Dean Kaye Joachim, Chair
   Professor Ellen Hodnett
   Professor Michael Marrus
   Ms. Estafania Toledo
   Dr. John Wedge

Judicial Affairs Officer:

   Dr. Anthony Gray

Appearances:

For the Student:

   Mr. R

For UTSC:

   Professor and Associate Dean, Nick Cheng

   Request for continued registration at UTSC and leave to extend the 90
   day deadline for appeal. The notice of appeal was submitted
   approximately 5 months from the date of the decision of the Divisional
   Appeals Committee. The Student claimed that he delayed for two months
   in filling the appeal because, at the time he received the Divisional
   Appeals Committee decision, he did not initially think it was
   worthwhile and later he changed his mind. The Divisional Appeals
   Committee decision was not accompanied by written material specifically
   advising the Student of the deadline to appeal. The Committee found
   that the Student was aware throughout the process of his right to
   appeal to Governing Council. The Calendar and UTSC Petitions Guide for
   Students clearly stated the appeal process and deadlines. Thus, the
   lack of written material on the 90 day deadline played no part in the
   Studentâs failure to meet the deadline. The Committee noted that
   effective September 1, 2006, the existence of the right to appeal to
   Governing Council should be clearly communicated, in writing, to
   students for whom the appeal was denied, as stated in the University
   Policy on Academic Appeals within Divisions. The Committee considered
   section 3.2.1 the Terms of Reference and found that the Student did not
   offer a reasonable explanation nor demonstrated exceptionable
   circumstances for the delay in filing the appeal. Request for
   permission to file the appeal beyond the 90 day deadline was refused.
   Appeal dismissed.
   [1]View Report

References

   1. file:///media/12567
