UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
GOVERNING COUNCIL

REPORT NUMBER 312 OF THE ACADEMIC APPEALS
COMMITTEE

December 5, 2006

To the Academic Board,
University of Toronto.

Your Committee reports that it held a hearing on Tuesday December 5, 2006 at which the
following were present:
Assistant Dean Kaye Joachim, Chair
Professor Ellen Hodnett
Professor Michael Marrus
Ms. Estafania Toledo
Dr. John Wedge
Mr. Anthony Gray
Secretary of the Academic Appeals Committee
Appearances:
For the student:
Mr. R
For the University of Toronto at Scarborough
Professor and Associate Dean, Nick Cheng

The Appeal
The student is appealing the April 17, 2006 decision of the Sub-Committee on Academic
Appeals (the Sub-Committee) to refuse his petition for continued registration at the
University of Toronto at Scarborough.

38022

1

Leave to extend the 90 day deadline for appeal.
The UTSC calendar and petition guidelines state that a student has 90 days
(approximately 3 months) to appeal a decision to the Academic Appeals Committee of
Governing Council (“Governing Council”). The student’s notice of appeal was submitted
on September 13, 2006 (approximately 5 months) from the date of the decision of the
Sub-Committee.
The preliminary issue for the panel was whether to extend the time limit for filing an
appeal.
Background Facts
The student was admitted to UTSC for the Fall 2004 term on the written condition that he
achieve a cumulative GPA of 1.6 in the first three full courses (six term-courses).
The student registered for five half-courses in September 2004 and obtained a sessional
GPA of 1.48. In January 2005 he enrolled in a further five half-courses and obtained a
sessional GPA of 1.6; thus the cumulative GPA was below the required 1.6.
The student was denied permission for further registration. The deadline for filing a
petition against that decision was 90 days after May 31, 2005 (approximately August
2005).
The student filed a petition seeking to continue his registration at UTSC on January 20,
2006, which was considered on the merits despite the delay in filing the petition.
The basis for the student’s petition was that he had been suffering from chronic allergic
symptoms throughout the fall of 2004 and early 2005. He was seen by a specialist in
February 2005 and was diagnosed with a deviated nasal septum and chronic allergic
rhinitis for which he was treated with inhalants and medication. He asserts that his
condition worsened after March 6, 2005 (the deadline for dropping courses) and
negatively affected his academic performance.
His petition was denied on February 17, 2006 on the basis of inadequate documentation
to support his petition that his condition worsened significantly during the winter 2005
term and based on the fact that he should have withdrawn from the courses if his medical
condition was interfering with his academic performance.
He filed a second petition on the same grounds on March 3, 2006 which was again denied
for the same reasons on March 8, 2006.
The student then appealed to the Sub-Committee on April 3, 2006. At this stage he
submitted a medical report from an ENT specialist which confirmed the diagnosis of

38022

2

deviated nasal septum and chronic allergic rhinitis. He was first seen by the specialist in
February 2005 with follow up visits in March and June 2005. He underwent surgery in
September 2005.
The Sub-Committee released its decision on April 17, 2006 denying the student’s petition
on the basis that the medical documentation presented did not support a significant
worsening of the student’s medical condition between January and April 2005 to excuse
either the poor academic performance or the failure to withdraw from the courses before
March 6, 2006.
Reasons for failing to file an appeal within 90 days.
The student confirmed that he was aware of his right to file a petition, and then proceed
with an appeal to the Sub-Committee, with a further appeal to Governing Council.
When he received the Sub-Committee decision he was so disappointed by their decision
he did not think it was worth while to proceed any further. Later he changed his mind and
decided to pursue the appeal. That is the extent of the student’s reasons for the late
appeal.
The student also pointed out that the Sub-Committee’s decision was not accompanied by
any written material specifically advising him of the deadline to appeal. However, as
mentioned above, the student was aware throughout the process of his right to appeal to
Governing Council and the Calendar and UTSC Petitions Guide for Students clearly
stated the appeal process and deadlines. Thus, the lack of written material on the 90 day
deadline played no part in this student’s failure to meet the deadline.
Nonetheless we note that subsequent to this student’s appeal, and effective September 1,
2006, the University Policy on Academic Appeals within Divisions states that the
existence of the right to appeal to Governing Council should be clearly communicated, in
writing, to students for whom the appeal was denied.
The Decision
According to the process at UTSC, students may appeal the denial of an academic
petition twice (to the Sub-committee on Academic Appeals and then the Academic
Appeals Committee of Governing Council). Each appellate body is charged with
considering the student’s petition with fresh eyes, without any deference to the previous
decision-maker. There is no obligation on the student to establish grounds for an appeal
in the sense of proving that the previous decision-maker made an error, overlooked
significant evidence, etc. Each level of appeal is asked to consider the decision on the
merits, based on the evidence before it.
Thus, students are offered a very generous appeal process to challenge negative academic
decisions. The only restriction on the student’s right to appeal is the relatively modest
requirement to pursue appeals diligently, within 90 days of the decision appealed from.

38022

3

This Committee’s Terms of Reference state at section 3.2.1:
An appeal to the Committee shall, except in exceptional circumstances, be
commenced by filing a Notice of Appeal in accordance with the rules of the
Academic Appeals Committee no later than 5:00 p.m. on the ninetieth (90th)
calendar day after the date of the decision from which the appeal is being taken.
Establishing deadlines for an appeal serves the important purpose of ensuring that
academic disputes are dealt with in a timely and efficient manner.
If the 90 day deadline means anything, it appears to this panel that a student seeking
permission to file a late appeal has an obligation to offer an explanation of the
“exceptionable circumstances” for the delay in filing an appeal. What constitutes
exceptional circumstances will vary, depending on the facts of the case, the length of the
delay, the complexity of the issues in dispute, medical incapacity, etc.
Once exceptional circumstances have been established, it would be appropriate to
consider other factors such as the prejudice, if any, to the responding party in permitting a
late appeal.
In this case, the panel is satisfied that the student has not offered a reasonable explanation
or demonstrated exceptionable circumstances for the delay of two months in filing the
appeal. Indeed, the student has offered no explanation other than that he did not initially
think it was worth while at the time and later changed his mind.
The request for permission to file the appeal beyond the 90 day deadline is refused.
The appeal is dismissed.

Respectfully submitted,
Kaye Joachim
Chair

38022

4

