Case 1520

   DATE:

   July 26, 2024

   PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v. X.Q.Y. ("the Student")

   HEARING DATES:

   December 19, 2023 & February 26, 2024, via Zoom

   PANEL MEMBERS:

   Christopher Wirth, Chair
   Professor Ted Kesik, Faculty Panel Member
   David Lio, Student Panel Member

   APPEARANCES:
   Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg
   Rothstein LLP
   Janet Song, Co-Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg Rothstein LLP

   IN ATTENDANCE:

   The Student

   HEARING SECRETARY:

   Nadia Bruno, Special Projects Officer, Office of Appeals, Discipline
   and Faculty Grievances

   The Student was charged with one count of concoction under B.i.1(f) of
   the Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters, 2019 (the ‚Code‚) for
   knowingly submitting academic work in the form of an oral presentation
   based on a final report containing and describing research inputs,
   tools, methodologies, data and results that had been concocted. In the
   alternative, the Student was charged with one count under section
   B.i.3(b) of the Code for knowingly engaging in a form of cheating,
   academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or misrepresentation in order
   to obtain academic credit or other academic advantage of any kind.

   The Student was enrolled in a Course in which students were evaluated
   on the basis of, among other things, a final report on a supervised
   research project worth 90% of their final grade, consisting of a
   written report and an oral presentation. The University tendered the
   evidence of one witness, Associate Professor David Dubins (‚Professor
   Dubins‚), who provided his evidence by both affidavit, which was
   accepted by the Panel pursuant to rule 66 of the University Tribunal‚s
   Rules of Practice and Procedure (‚Rules‚), and orally. The Student
   testified on their own behalf.

   Professor Dubins testified that he was the Student‚s research
   supervisor for a project to determine the pedagogical effectiveness of
   using a computer-generated voice for teaching as opposed to a human
   voice. The project involved creating two video presentations using the
   same script with one narrated by a human and the other a
   computer-generated voice. The videos would be presented to a group of
   students who would be surveyed, rating and comparing the methods.
   Professor Dubins and the Student met throughout the fall semester, and
   he provided comments to the Student as part of a mid-point evaluation
   expressing concerns that the data for the research project would not be
   ready by the end of the of Course. Professor Dubins did not see the
   human-voice video or any of the research inputs before the Student‚s
   oral presentation at the end of the winter semester. When Professor
   Dubins ultimately received the report, he became concerned with the
   authenticity of the data for several reasons, including the research
   methodology and the purported research participants.

   During the Student‚s oral presentation, over Zoom, Professor Dubin‚s
   requested that the Student share both the human-narrated and
   machine-generated voice videos. The Student left the call, without
   explanation, and returned fifteen minutes later. The Student
   subsequently produced a copy of a low-quality video, without audio,
   which the Student claimed was the human-voice version of the video.
   Professor Dubins was concerned that the video had been prepared during
   the period the Student had left the call, and that the entirety of the
   research report‚s findings had been concocted. These concerns were
   based primarily on inconsistencies between the video and the
   description of the human voice video in the report and the metadata of
   the actual video file.

   The Student testified and denied that they had concocted their data.
   They asserted that the video had been prepared before the presentation,
   and that they had conducted the study with 20 random participants
   through WeChat, documenting the results through written notes.

   The Panel accepted the evidence of Professor Dubins, finding that his
   evidence was credible and reliable. The evidence of Professor Dubins
   combined with the totality of the evidence demonstrated that the final
   report contained research inputs, tools, methodologies, data and
   results that had been concocted. Specifically, the Panel noted the fact
   that there were multiple inconsistencies in the Student‚s report, their
   presentation of it and the data file. These inconsistencies included
   the identity and age of the research participants, the quality and
   duration of the video, and the Student‚s strange behaviour and
   disappearances from the presentation.

   The Panel noted that the Student did not respond well to
   cross-examination, offering contradictory evidence and refusing to
   answer questions. As a result, and based on the other evidence, the
   Panel rejected the evidence of the Student, finding it to be unreliable
   and implausible. Accordingly, the Panel was satisfied on a balance of
   probabilities based upon clear, cogent and convincing evidence that it
   was more likely than not that the Student had in fact concocted their
   data, contrary to s. B.i.1(f) of the Code .

   In determining the appropriate sanction, the Panel considered the
   submissions of Assistant Discipline Counsel and the Student and the
   factors and principles relevant to sanction in The University of
   Toronto and Mr. C. (Case No. 1976/77-3, November 5, 1976). The Panel
   additionally considered a chart of prior decisions of the Tribunal
   involving similar misconduct provided by the University. The Panel gave
   no weight to evidence provided by the Student, namely a medical note
   and questionnaire, since they were created a significant length of time
   after the Student‚s conduct, were based upon a self-report, did not
   provide any formal diagnosis, and did not address the Student‚s
   condition at the time of their conduct. The Panel noted that the
   Student committed a serious academic offence knowingly and deliberately
   in a course that was singularly focused on research, and that the
   University is vulnerable to, and suffers detriment from, the type of
   offence committed by the Student. The Panel further noted that the
   Student‚s prior offence was an aggravating factor, and that in the
   absence of any mitigating factors, including an expression of remorse,
   a severe sanction was required for specific and general deterrence.

   The Panel imposed the following sanction: a final grade of zero in the
   course; a five-year suspension; a six-year notation on the Student‚s
   academic record and transcript; and a report to the Provost for
   publication.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/31813
