Case 894

DATE:

   May 31, 2017

PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v. J.W.Â  (âthe Studentâ)

Hearing Date(s):

   April 3, 2017

Panel Members:

   Ms. Johanna Braden, Barrister and Solicitor, Chair
   Professor Louis Florence, Faculty Panel Member
   Ms. Alexis Giannelia, Student Panel Member

Appearances:

   Ms. Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland,
   Barristers
   Mr. Nathan Korneberg, Paralegal, Juslaw Legal Services

In Attendance:

   Ms. Lucy Gaspini, Academic lntegrity & Affairs, Office of the Dean,
   University of Toronto
   Mississauga
   Ms. Krista Osbourne, Administrative Clerk & Hearing Secretary, Office
   of the Appeals,
   Discipline, Faculty Grievances
   Mr. Sean Lourim, Technology Assistant, Office of the Governing Council

Not in Attendance:

   The Student

   Student was charged with five charges of forging or falsifying
   information contained on a University Verification of Student lllness
   or lnjury Form, a Medical Absence Report, and in her petitions for
   academic accommodation contrary to s. B.i.1(a) of the Code , or in the
   alternative, two charges of academic dishonesty under s. B.i.3(b) of
   the Code . The Student did not attend the hearing, but had a
   representative attend. In an Agreed Statement of Facts, the Student
   admitted to committing the five charges that related to forging and
   falsifying information in her applications for academic accommodation.
   Based on these admissions, the Panel found the Student guilty of five
   counts of forging or falsifying information contrary to s. B.i.1(a) of
   the Code . The University withdrew the alternative charges of academic
   dishonesty.

   The charges related information contained in, and documents submitted
   in support of, the Studentâs petitions to have two of her final exams
   deferred. In each separate petition for accommodation, the Student
   purported to had visited a clinic and received advice from âDr. John
   Winstonâ who had signed her Verification of Student Illness or Injury
   Forms and Medical Absence Reports submitted in support of her
   petitions. A later investigation turned up that Dr. Winston did not
   exist.Â  In the Deanâs Designate meeting, the Student admitted to
   purchasing the documentation that supported her petition from a third
   party.

   The parties submitted a Joint Submission on Penalty (JSP) of a final
   grade of zero in the two affected courses, a suspension from the
   University for three years and eight months, an order on the Studentâs
   record and transcript for five years, and a report to the Provost for
   publication.Â  The Student had been sanctioned for one prior academic
   offence.Â  In deciding whether to accept the JSP, the Panel applied the
   factors set out in University of Toronto and Mr. C (Case No. 1976177-3,
   November 5, 1976) and reviewed other cases that involved similar
   circumstances.Â  The Panel found in cases involving forgery or
   falsifying documents, students consistently received a final grade of
   zero for the affected course or courses and sanctions ranging from
   suspensions for as low as two years (for a first offence involving one
   forged medical certificate) and as high as five years. On the more
   stringent end, some cases involving egregious, sustained dishonesty
   warranted a recommendation of expulsion. The Panel found that the JSP
   was fair and within that range, ordering a final grade of zero in the
   two affected courses, a suspension from the University for three years
   and eight months, an order on the Studentâs record and transcript for
   five years, and a report to the Provost for publication.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12941
