UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
IN THE MATTER of charges of academic dishonesty made on September 9, 2014

AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters, 1995,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Act, 1971, S.O. 1971, c. 56 as amended S.O.

1978,c. 88
BETWEEN:
UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO (the "University")

- and-

.e a-...

(the "Student")

REASONS FOR DECISION

Hearing Date: November 12, 2014
Panel Members:
Ms. Roslyn M. Tsao, Barrister and Solicitor, Chair
Professor Ernest Lam, Faculty of Dentistry, Faculty Panel Member
Mr. Simon Czajkowski, Student Panel Member

Appearances:
Ms. Tina Lie, Assistant Discipline Counsel for University, Paliare Roland Barristers
Ms. Sonya Tors, Downtown Legal Services, for the Student

In Attendance:
Ms . •
~ I~ , the Student
Dr. Kristi Gourlay, Manager of Office of Academic Integrity, Faculty of Arts and Science
Ms. Sinead Cutt, Administrative Assistant, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances

-2-

1.

The Trial division of the Tribunal heard this matter on November 12, 2014. The Student
was charged on September 9, 2014 with eight (8) charges relating to the falsifying and/or
forging of documents or evidence which were submitted to the Committee on Standing
("Committee") in support of two (2) petitions for examination deferral and one (1)
request for accommodation for a missed mid-term test on the basis of medical reasons.

2.

The Student has been charged with:
May 2012
1)

On or about May 2, 2012, you knowingly falsified a document or evidence
required by the University of Toronto, or uttered, circulated or made use of any
such falsified document, namely, a petition form seeking academic
accommodations or relief that you submitted to the Committee on Standing of the
Faculty of Arts and Science at the University of Toronto (the "Committee"),
contrary to Section B.I.l(a) of the Code.

2)

On or about May 2, 2012, you knowingly falsified evidence required by the
University of Toronto, namely, a Personal Statement, which you submitted to the
Committee in support of your request for academic accommodation, contrary to
Section B.I.l(a) of the Code.

3)

On or about May 2, 2012, you knowingly forged or in any other way altered or
falsified a document or evidence required by the University of Toronto, or uttered,
circulated or made use of any such forged, altered or falsified document, namely,
a University of Toronto Student Medical Certificate, dated April 13, 2012, which
you submitted to the Committee in support of your request for academic
accommodations, contrary to Section B.I.l(a) of the Code.

4)

On or about May 2, 2012, you knowingly forged or in any other way altered or
falsified a document or evidence required by the University of Toronto, or uttered,
circulated or made use of any such forged, altered or falsified document, namely,
a University of Toronto Student Medical Certificate, dated April 18, 2012, which
you submitted to the Committee in support of your request for academic
accommodations, contrary to Section B.I.l(a) of the Code.

- 3CSB351

5)

On or about March 4, 2014, you knowingly forged or in any other way altered or
falsified a document or evidence required by the University of Toronto, or uttered,
circulated or made use of any such forged, altered or falsified document, namely,
a University of Toronto Student Medical Certificate, dated March 4, 2014, which
you submitted to the Committee in support of your request for academic
accommodations, contrary to Section B.I.l(a) of the Code.

6)

On or about May 5, 2014, you knowingly falsified evidence required by the
University of Toronto, namely, a Personal Statement dated May 5, 2014, which
you submitted to the Committee in support of your request for academic
accommodation, contrary to Section B.I.l(a) of the Code.

7)

On or about May 5, 2014, you knowingly forged or in any other way altered or
falsified a document or evidence required by the University of Toronto, or uttered,
circulated or made use of any such forged, altered or falsified document, namely,
a University of Toronto Verification of Student Illness or Injury Form, dated
April 21, 2014, which you submitted to the Committee in support of your request
for academic accommodations, contrary to Section B.1.l(a) of the Code.

Alternative charges
8)

3.

In the alternative to each of the charges above you knowingly engaged in a form
of cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or misrepresentation in
order to obtain academic credit or other academic advantage of any kind, which
violated section B.I.3(b) of the Code.

The Hearing proceeded by way of an Agreed Statement of Facts ("ASP") and with the
University withdrawing the one (1) alternative charge (Charge 8).

Facts of the Case
4.

In addition to the admissions set out in the ASF, the Student also testified under oath to

supplement some of the factual background.
5.

A summary of the facts based on the ASF and the Student's testimony at the hearing is as
follows:

-4-

BIO130H, CHM139H, JMBI 70Y and MAT 136H
1)

In May, 2012, the Student submitted a petition to the Committee, seeking
permission to write deferred examinations in four (4) courses. The examinations
in those four courses occurred between April 11 and 25, 2012 ("Petition 1").

2)

In support of Petition 1, the Student submitted a personal statement which
contained false statements and two (2) Student Medical Certificates which she
had altered. The Student was, in fact, ill and did attend for a medical appointment
to treat illness during this time frame but she changed the date of the attendance
on the certificates believing that she needed to have attended for medical attention
on the dates of the examinations.

3)

Petition 1 was granted by the Committee on the basis of the false and altered
documents.

CSB351Y
4)

In March, 2014, the Student sought to excuse her absence from a mid-term test in
her Virology course based on a "Verification of Student Illness or Injury"
certificate purportedly dated March 4, 2014.

This certificate was forged and

falsified in its entirety as the Student had not attended for medical attention.
5)

The professor of the course accepted the certificate without verification and
excused the Student from the mid-term test.

6)

The Student testified that she later learned that her failure to complete the midterm test disqualified her from passing the course even if she completed the other
evaluations in the course.

7)

In any event, in about May, 2014, the Student submitted a petition to the
Committee seeking permission to write a deferred examination in the course
which was originally held on April 22, 2014 ("Petition 2").

-5-

8)

In support of Petition 2, the Student submitted a personal statement which
contained a false statement regarding the date she attended at the medical clinic
and a Verification of Student Illness or Injury Certificate which she had altered
vis-a-vis the date she attended at the clinic and the date on which the doctor
signed the certificate.

9)

Again, the Student was apparently ill at around April 20-23, 2014 and did attend
at the medical clinic for such illness but she changed the dated on the certificate
instead of relying on the original certificate from the doctor.

Dean's Designate Meeting
10)

On May 16, 2014, the Student met with the Dean's Designate and admitted having
committed the offences described above.

Background of Student
11)

The Student testified that she was now 22 years old and was residing with
roommates at the time of the offences. Her mother and father, separated about 56 years ago and she lived immediately thereafter with her mother who was
financially responsible for the family. The Student's mother told her that she had
to do well academically in order to have a different life from her. Her mother was
proud of her attending university and the Student has always wanted to pursue a
career as a pharmacist.

12)

Her mother moved back to South Korea in about April, 2012, leaving the Student
here to attend university in Toronto .. The Student has funded her education
through OSAP loans and bursaries.

13)

The Student has repeatedly suffered from health issues during university with
symptoms of vomiting, diarrhea and low blood pressure. The Student has tried
acupuncture and Chinese medicine, exercise and good diet to combat her
ailments.

-6-

14)

In the spring of 2012, the Student faced a lot of new things arising from her
mother moving away, her having to find part-time employment and finding
roommates. She was often stressed, pressed for time and staying up late with
caffeine.

15)

In May, 2012, March 2014 and May 2014, the Student was apparently ill with the
symptoms described above. In May 2012 and May 2014, the Student did see
doctors who confirmed her illness. In March, 2014, the Student stated that she
did not see a doctor (but rather fabricated a medical note) because she did not
have the money to get such a medical certificate (the cost of such certificate was
stated to be $20). In particular, in May, 2014, the doctor who saw the Student
confirmed in a letter dated May 5, 2014 that although his medical certificate had
been altered, the Student did see him on April 23rd after having been ill for 3 days
with a kidney infection, confirmed by objective laboratory testing.

16)

The Student expressed remorse and indicated that she wanted to return to the
University to become a pharmacist and states that she would, in future, not alter
documents but submit what she had and hope for the best.

Decision of the Tribunal

6.

Based on the foregoing admitted facts, the Tribunal finds the Student guilty of Charges 17. The University has withdrawn Charge 8.

Penalty

7.

The Student and University submitted an Agreed Statement of Facts on Penalty ("ASFP")
and the following Joint Submission on Penalty ("JSP"):
1)

The Student will receive a final grade of zero in the five (5) courses which were
the subject matter of Petitions 1 and 2;

2)

The Student will be suspended from the University for a period of five years from
the date of the order;

-7-

3)

There will be a notation of the sanction on the Student's academic record and
transcript from the date of the order until graduation; and

4)
8.

The Tribunal should report the decision to the Provost for publication.

The ASFP confirmed the following:
1)

The Student has suffered from hypotension, headache, dizziness, indigestion and
neck and back pain since as early as fall 2011.

The Student has sought

acupuncture treatment on a regular basis since October, 2011;
2)

Since the Winter 2012 term, the Student has sought and obtained permission to
defer various tests and examinations on the basis of medical reasons;

3)

On August 28, 2012, the Student was sanctioned for having a cell phone in her
possession during an examination on August 16, 2012 and received a written
reprimand and notation on her transcript for 8 months (there was no allegation
that the cell phone was used as an aid during the examination); and

4)

On February 1, 2013, the Student was again sanctioned for having a cell phone in
her possession during an examination written on December 12, 2012 and received
a reduction of 5 marks on her final grade in that course and a notation on her
transcript for 2 years (again, there was no allegation that the cell phone was used
as an aid during the examination).

9.

The University and Student submitted a Joint Book of Authorities and a summary of six
of these cases which all involved a guilty plea and Joint Submissions on Penalty
("Summary"). I do not believe that the Panel is bound by decisions based on JSPs given
the high deference given by panels to follow JSPs.

10.

The University submitted that a five (5) year suspension in this case was in the range of
sanctions and noted that the University was not treating the two prior cell phone offences
as "prior" aggravating offences.

-811.

Attention was drawn to the recent ~

appeal decision (where I was the co-Chair at

the hearing of first instance). In that case, the panel "jumped" the joint submission of a 5
year suspension and recommended expulsion: On appeal to The Discipline Appeals
Board, the sanction was set aside and replaced with the 5 year suspension penalty
tendered in the joint submission. In allowing the student's appeal and confirming the

high burden upon a tribunal which chooses to reject a joint submission, the Appeals
Board stated:
[22}
In an effort to make more specific ·and understandable the high
burden upon a tribunal which chooses to reject a joint submission,
various expressions of the test have been attempted in a variety of
decisions released by bodies and tribunals bound to apply these
principles. One particularly illuminating expression of the concept is
found in a decision of the Law Society Appeal Panel in a case that came
before it on appeal, raising the same issues as this Appeals Board now
has before it. In that matter, that Appeal Panel stated that only truly
unreasonable or "unconscionable" joint su/;Jmissions should be rejected.
We think this is good, understandable expression of the test. 8

[25]
It may be that a penalty of expulsion from the University was one
reasonable sanction in the circumstances of this case, as evidently the
Panel believed to be so, but that is not the test. The fact that the penalty
actually imposed by the Tribunal may itself be reasonable, does not
permit the Panel as a matter of law to substitute its conclusion for that
called for in the JSP, on that ground alone.

12.

As such, the panel accepts the recommendation set out in the JSP as such result would
not be "truly unreasonable or unconscionable".

13 .

There is no doubt, based on the Summary of decisions, that a five (5) year suspension for
forging/fabricating of multiple medical certificates would appear to be in alignment with
other like joint submissions on penalty.

We note that we were not provided with

decisions where there was no joint submission and how panels had considered other
aggravating or mitigating circumstances.
14.

To be clear, the Panel considers falsification and alteration of medical notes to be a very
serious offence. However, the Panel may have, in this case, weighed the mitigating
circumstances in this Student's case, such as her family history and apparent genuine

-9-

illnesses since October, 2011, her guilty plea at the earliest opportunity and cooperation,
had there not been a joint submission on penalty as it appears that this Student is
distinguishable from students sanctioned in the Summary cases.

However, given the

strong direction of the Appeals Board in Fernando, this Panel feels bound by the JSP
tendered.
15.

The Tribunal, therefore, makes the following Order regarding penalty:
I)

The Student will receive a final grade of zero in MAT136Hl, BIO130Hl,
CHM139Hl, JMBl 70Yl and CSB351 Yl;

2)

The Student will be suspended from the University for a period of five years from
November 12, 2014; and

3)

There will be a notation of the sanction on the Student's academic record and
transcript from November 12, 2014 until graduation.

16.

The Tribunal shall report this decision to the Provost for publication of a Notice of this
decision and the sanction in the University newspaper, with the Student's name withheld.

17.

The Tribunal signed an Order at the Hearing per the above findings.

Dated at Toronto,

~
'os

fc:C:

this/~

of December, 2014.

;;A.---::;?'
-~

(///'(
. TSAO

