Case 856

DATE:

   October 6, 2016

PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v. T.C. (âthe Studentâ)

Hearing Date(s):

   July 6, 2016

Panel Members:

   Mr. Paul Morrison, Chair
   Professor Dionne Aleman, Faculty Panel Member
   Ms. Sue Mazzatto, Student Panel Member

Appearances:

   Ms. Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel
   Dr. Kristi Gourlay, Manager & Academic Integrity Officer, Faculty of
   Arts and Science
   Ms. Brenda Thrush, Faculty Registrar, Leslie Dan Faculty of Pharmacy

In Attendance:

   Ms. Krista Osbourne, Administrative Assistant, Office of Appeals,
   Discipline and Faculty Grievances

   The Student was charged with two offences under the Code .Â  The
   charges related to alleged representations that were made by the
   Student in a cover letter and resume that were submitted to Safeway
   Food and Drug (âSafewayâ) for employment as a Pharmacist (the
   "Application").Â  Though the Student had not completed any degree
   program at the University of Toronto, the Application falsely claimed
   that she had graduated with an Honours Bachelor of Science in Human
   Biology and Physical Anthropology from the University and was a
   candidate in the Doctor of Pharmacy program at the University.

   The Student denied the allegations with respect to falsifying her
   academic record at the meeting with the Deanâs Designate.Â  Upon
   further investigation after that meeting, the University found that the
   student had previously been under academic suspension for plagiarism
   and had also previously been suspended by the University for failure to
   maintain a 1.5GPA.Â  Neither the Student nor counsel for the Student
   attended the hearing. The Panel was satisfied that appropriate efforts
   to effect service on the Student had been made and that the provisions
   of the Tribunal's Rules of Practice and Procedure had been satisfied.

   The Panel concluded that the Student forged and falsified her academic
   record. Upon the entering of a finding of guilt with respect to s.
   B.i.3(a) of the Code , counsel for the University withdrew the charge
   in relation to s. B.i.3(b) .Â  The Panel considered the aggravating
   facts that the student had previously been suspended by the University
   for failure to maintain a 1.5 GPA and that that she had also previously
   admitted to plagiarism and had been warned, in writing, that a second
   offence would be dealt with more severely.Â  The Panel found that the
   offense of falsification of one's academic record for advantage to the
   Student is a most serious offense and one that, absent sufficient
   mitigating circumstances, would call for a recommendation of expulsion.
   In this case, there were also significant concerns with respect to the
   safety of the public as a result of a falsified degree in pharmacy. The
   Panel held that the University has an obligation to uphold and maintain
   the integrity of its academic degrees and its Degree-granting
   process.Â  The Panel accepted the Universityâs submission on penalty
   and imposed a penalty of immediate suspension from the University for a
   period of up to five years; recommended that the Student be expelled;
   and that a permanent notation be placed on the Student's academic
   record and transcript.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12917
