THE UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO

IN THE MATTER OF charges of academic dishonesty made on March 31, 2016.
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters,
1995,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto, Act, 1971, S.O. 1971, c. 56 as amended
S.O. 1978, c. 88.

BETWEEN:
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO

--

- and -

REASONS FOR DECISION

Date of Hearing: July 6, 2016
Members of the Panel:
Mr. Paul Morrison, Chair
Professor Dionne Aleman, Faculty Panel Member
Ms. Sue Mazzatto, Student Panel Member

Appearances:
Ms. Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel
Dr. Kristi Gourlay, Manager & Academic Integrity Officer, Faculty of Arts and Science
Ms. Brenda Thrush, Faculty Registrar, Leslie Dan Faculty of Pharmacy

In Attendance:
Ms. Krista Osbourne, Administrative Assistant, Office of Appeals, Discipline and Faculty
Grievances

Not in Attendance:
~ ~ ( t h e "Student")

-2-

1.

The student, ~ ~ ( t h e "Student") was charged with the following academic
offenses, which came before the Tribunal for hearing on July 6, 2016:

Charges

2.

1.

On or about May 17, 2015, you knowingly forged or in any other way altered or
falsified an academic record, and/or uttered, circulated or made use of such
forged, altered or falsified academic record, namely, the information contained in
an application that you submitted to a prospective employer, contrary to
section B.l.3(a) of the Code

2.

On or about May 17, 2015, you engaged in a form of cheating, academic
dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or misrepresentation not herein otherwise
described, in order to obtain academic credit or other academic advantage of any
kind when you submitted an application to a prospective employer, contrary to
section B.l.3(b) of the Code.

The Charges contained a statement of Particulars, including the following :

Particulars
3.

At all material times you were a student at the University of Toronto, enrolled in
the Faculty of Arts & Science.

4.

On or about May 17, 2015, you submitted an application for employment to
Safeway Food and Drug for a position as Pharmacist. Your application consisted
of a cover letter and a resume ("Application").

5.

The Application did not accurately reflect your academic record with the
University of Toronto. In particular, it claimed that you were a graduate of and a
candidate in the Doctor of Pharmacy (Pharm D) program at the University, and
that you had graduated with an Honours Bachelor of Science in Human Biology
and Physical Anthropology from the University.

Procedure
3.

The Student did not appear at the hearing. The University sought an order that the
hearing proceed in the absence of the Student. In support of that Order, the University
submitted the affidavit of Veenu Goswami, a student-at-law in the firm of Paliare Roland
Rosenberg Rothstein, counsel for the University.

4.

The Affidavit of Mr. Goswami contained considerable detail, together with supporting
exhibits, as to the University's efforts to effect service upon the Student of the Notice of
Hearing and material with respect thereto.

5.

Based on the evidence of Mr. Goswami, the Tribunal was fully satisfied that appropriate
efforts to effect service on the Student had been made and that the provisions of the
Tribunal's Rules of Practice and Procedure had been satisfied. Accordingly, the Tribunal
granted an order that the hearing proceed in the absence of the Student.

-3-

Evidence and Findings

6.

The evidence of Brenda Thrush, Registrar of the Leslie Dan Faculty of Pharmacy at the
University, confirmed that she was contacted by Safeway Food and Drug ("Safeway")
which had received an application from the Student for a position as a pharmacist. After
reviewing the University's records, Ms. Thrush determined that the Student had been
registered at Woodworth College, but never at the Leslie Dan School of Pharmacy. At
her request, Safeway sent her the Student's application .

7.

The Student's application included a letter and curriculum vitae which falsely
represented that she was a Graduate of the Doctor of Pharmacy program at the
University of Toronto.

8.

The University also called the evidence of Dr. Kristi Gourlay, Manager & Academic
Integrity Officer, Faculty of Arts and Science, at the University. Upon receipt of a copy of
the Student's employment application to Safeway, Dr. Gourlay undertook an
investigation of the University's records. Her search revealed that the Student had made
two requests for her transcripts from the University. Her transcripts were sent to the
Student's address on her curriculum vitae, in Rossland, B.C. The investigation also
revealed that the transcripts had been ordered by email from a computer located in Trail
B.C.

9.

Dr. Gourlay was in touch with Safeway herself, and received, as had Ms. Thrush, a copy
of the Student's application for employment as a pharmacist with Safeway, and her
falsified curriculum vitae. Safeway further advised that Safeway had terminated the
Student's employment.

10.

The University convened a meeting with the Student and Professor Donald Dewees, the
Dean's Designate for Academic Integrity. The Student attended the meeting, which was
held on September 14, 2015, by Skype. In the course of the meeting, the Student
denied the allegations with respect to falsifying her academic record with the University.

11.

Following the meeting, Dr. Gourlay caused further investigation to be done, and
determined that the Student had previously been under academic suspension by the
University. By email letter to the Student, dated September 16, 2015 on behalf of
Professor Dewees, the University recounted the allegation of falsification of her
academic record and advised that her case would be sent to the Vice-Provost with the
recommendation that charges be laid . The Student responded by email to indicate that
she would be obtaining legal advice.

12.

Based upon the evidence presented, the Tribunal concluded that the Student, as
charged, forged and falsified her academic record, in particular in claiming that she had
received a degree in pharmacy from the University, which claim was false to her
knowledge, and that she had submitted her falsified academic record to Safeway for the
purpose of seeking employment as a pharmacist.

13.

Accordingly, the Tribunal entered a finding of Guilty with respect to Charge 1, above.
Upon the entering of a finding of Guilt with respect to Charge 1, counsel for the
University withdrew Charge 2 above.

-4-

Penalty
14.

For purposes of the penalty/sanction to be imposed, the University submitted evidence
as to further incidents in the Student's academic history. In 2009, the Student admitted
to plagiarism with respect to assignments which she purported to submit in ANT1 OOY, a
course offered by the Department of Anthropology. She was sanctioned for that offence
and warned, in writing, that any second offense would be dealt with more severely.

15.

The evidence also discloses that the Student had previously been suspended by the
University for failure to maintain a minimum 1.5 GPA.

16.

Counsel for the University sought a penalty that would include that the Tribunal
recommend that the Student be expelled from the University.

17.

The Tribunal accepts that the offense of falsification of one's academic record for
advantage to the Student is a most serious offense and one that, absent sufficient
mitigating circumstances, would call for a recommendation of expulsion. The offence
raises significant concerns with respect to the safety of the public as a result of a falsified
degree in pharmacy so as to be granted a job as a pharmacist. In addition , the
University has an obligation to uphold and maintain the integrity of its academic degrees
and its Degree-granting process.

18.

Accordingly, the Tribunal is satisfi ed that a penalty including a recommendation of
expulsion from the University is appropriate and warranted in this case .

19.

The Tribunal, accordingly, issued the following Order:
1.

The hearing may proceed in the absence of the Student.

2.

The Student is guilty of 1 count of knowingly forging, altering or falsifying an
academic record, or uttering, circulating or making use of such an academic
record, contrary to section B.l.3(a) of the Code of Behaviour on Academic
Matters.

3.

The Student shall immediately be suspended from the University for a period of
up to five years.

4.

The Tribunal recommends to the President of the University that he recommend
to the Governing Council that the Student be expelled from the University.

5.

A permanent notation be placed on the Student's academic record and transcript.

-5-

6.

This case shall be reported to the Provost for publication of a notice of the
decision of the Tribunal and the sanctions imposed, with the name of the student
withheld.

Dated at Toronto, the

c~

F. Paul Morrison, Chair

l --H--day of October, 2016.

