Case 828

DATE:

   April 11, 2016

PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v C.A.

Hearing Date(s):

   January 8, 2016

Panel Members:

   William C. McDowell, Chair
   Chris Koenig-Woodyard, Faculty Member
   Yusra Qazi, Student Member

Appearances:

   Robert Centa, Assistant Discipline Counsel
   Lauren Pearce, Articling Student, Paliare Roland Barristers

In Attendance:

   Christopher Lang, Director, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances
   Tracey Gameiro, Observer, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances
   Krista Osbourne, Administrative Assistant, Appeals, Discipline and
   Faculty Grievances
   Student charged under s. B.i.3(a) of the Code . The charge related to
   allegations that the Student knowingly forged, altered or falsified a
   document that purported to be his unofficial transcript from the
   University. The Student submitted the altered document in application
   to another university. The other university brought the atypical
   transcript to the attention of the University. The Student was not
   present at the hearing. The Panel concluded that reasonable notice of
   the hearing had been given pursuant to the Code and the Rules of
   Practice and Procedures of the University Tribunal . The Panel noted
   that even if the Student did not have actual notice of the charges laid
   against him, the Student should be taken to have had notice of a
   serious academic discipline issue by reason of the correspondence
   issued to him by his College. The Panel concluded that it could proceed
   with the hearing.
   Student was found guilty of the forged academic record charge. The
   Panel accepted the evidence of the manager of the University
   transcripts centre, who confirmed that the transcript submitted was
   incomplete and inaccurate. The Panel found that the Student had not
   received a degree from the University as indicated on the document, but
   rather falsely represented to the other university that he had done so.
   The Student also falsified the individual grades on the purported
   transcript. The Student did not respond to requests to meet with the
   Deanâs Designate or other members of the University. The Panel noted
   that the penalty typically handed down in cases of forged academic
   records is expulsion. Here, the Student claimed a degree which had not
   been awarded and falsely suggested that he had achieved academic
   success considerably at variance from the results recorded on his
   transcript. The Panel took into account The University v MK , which
   emphasized the need to protect the integrity of the University and to
   deter such conduct. The Panel imposed a recommendation of expulsion; a
   permanent notation on the Studentâs academic record and transcript; a
   5-year suspension; and that the case be reported to the Provost for
   publication.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12899
