Case #557

   DATE: November 3, 2009
   PARTIES: University of Toronto v. L.O.
   Hearing Date(s): August 27, 2009
   Panel Members:
   Ms. Rodica David, Chair
   Prof. Graeme Hirst, Faculty Member
   Mr. Sybil J. Derrible, Student Member
   Appearances:
   Ms. Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel for the University
   In Attendance:
   L.O., the Student

   Trial Division ‚ s.B.i.1(d) of Code ‚ plagiarism ‚ course work ‚
   Student attended hearing but did not give any evidence ‚ finding of
   guilt ‚ sentencing principles in Mr. C -- the character of the Student
   ‚ the likelihood of repetition ‚ the nature of the offence ‚ the
   extenuating circumstances ‚ Student‚s education abroad and length of
   time spent away from school -- the detriment to the University ‚
   general deterrence -- seriousness of offence ‚ Tribunal varied the
   University‚s submission on penalty‚ Tribunal ordered: a grade of zero
   in the course; an 18 month suspension; a 3 year transcript notation;
   and a report to the Provost

   The Student was charged under s.B.i.1(d) of Code . The charges related
   to allegations of plagiarizing an essay submitted for academic credit.
   The Student attended the Hearing but chose not to give any evidence.
   The Panel found that there was no evidence that the Student plagiarized
   knowingly, but that nevertheless there was clear and convincing
   evidence that the Student ought reasonably to have known that she was
   plagiarizing. The Professor provided an official University document
   entitled ‚A Warning About Plagiarism‚ to all students in the course.
   The TA provided a writing tutorial which included instruction on how to
   avoid plagiarism. The Panel found the Student guilty. The Panel
   considered the sentencing factors in Mr. C (November 5, 1976), as cited
   in The University of Toronto and Mr. S.B. The Panel heard that the
   Student was combative during the process. The Panel noted the
   seriousness of the offence, although the Panel was not convinced that
   the Student had actual knowledge of the offence. The Panel noted the
   extenuating circumstance of the Student‚s education abroad, where she
   claimed the system was different, and the fact that the Student had
   been out of school for a long time. The Panel noted the detriment to
   the University and the need for deterrence. The Panel noted the range
   of established sentences for plagiarism and recognized a two year
   suspension as the threshold for plagiarism offences as noted in The
   University of Toronto and A.K.(November 9, 2007). However the Panel did
   not accept the University‚s request for a two year suspension and found
   that the circumstances warranted a lighter sanction. The Panel imposed:
   a zero in the course; an 18 month suspension; a 3 year transcript
   notation; and a report to the Provost.

   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12999
