THE UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
IN THE MATTER OF charges of academic dishonesty made on April 21, 2009;
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code ofBehaviour on Academic
Matters, 1995;
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Act, 1971, S.O. 1971, c. 56 as
amended S.O. 1978, c. 88

BETWEEN:
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
-and-

IallO
Hearing Date: August 27, 2009

Members of the Panel:
• Ms Rodica David, Q.C,, Chair
• Professor Graeme Hirst, Faculty Panel Member
• Mr. Sybil J. Denible, Student Panel Member

Appearances:
• Ms Lily Hru.mer, Assistant Discipline Counsel
•

Ms L• OIIIII, the Student, in attendance

REASONS FOR DECISION
[1] The student is charged with plagiarizing various portions of an essay that she
submitted for academic credit in POL208. She chose not to give evidence although she
participated actively in the hearing.

2

[2] There are two elements to this offence:
1. The plagiarism itself; in other words, the representation of the work of another as
one's own;
2. Doing so k.i1owingly.

The Plagiarism
[3] The essay is contained at Tab 4 of Exhibit 3. There is no question that significant
portions of the essay were copied precisely or substantially from outside sources. These
passages were not in quotation marks; there were no footnotes. The evidence indicates
that there is only one reference contained in her bibliography that relates to the copied
material in her essay, namely the ruticle by James Kurth contained at Tab 5 of Exhibit 3,
but the essay itself did not cite this article as the source of the copied material. The
sources of the other copied material were not referenced in her bibliography at all.

Was the Plagiarism done knowingly?
[4] The second preamble set out in Section B of the Code states that if the student ought
reasonably to have known, then she did so knowingly. There is no direct evidence to
indicate whether the student had actual knowledge that she was plagiru-izing. However,
the University has presented clear and convincing evidence that the student ought
reasonably to have known that she was plagiarizing, which we infer from the following
evidence:
1. The course outline at Exhibit 3, Tab 3 contains significant infonnation about
plagiarism in the official University document "A Warning about Plagiarism".
According to Dr. Yaniszewski, this was provided to all students as prui of the
course.
2. Teaching assistant Mr. McKee testified that he conducted a full tutorial on the
elements of writing, including the methods of avoidance of plagiarism and that
plagiarism is prohibited by the University.
3. The student appeared to be aware of the use of quotation marks as she used them
in some po1iions of her essay.

3
The Verdict
[5] The student is therefore guilty oft.11.e offence set out in Charge 1 of Exhibit 1 which
states as foliows:
L On or about July 21, 2008, you knowingly represented as your own an idea or
expression of an idea or work of another in connection with your essay entitled
"Should the International community use military force to stop the genocide in
Darfur even if the government of Sudan opposes any such action?", submitted for
academic credit in POL208, contrary to Section B.I.l.(d) of the Code.

SA"l\JCTION
[6] The University seeks the following:

1. Zero in tlie course pursuant to Section C.II.(b) I (g);
2. Two-year suspension pursuant to Section C.II.(b) 1 (h);
3. Recording the sanction on the student's academic record for 3 years pursuant to
Section C.II.(b) 2.
4. Report a notice of the decision and sanctions with the name of the sh1dent
withheld pursuant to Section C.IL(b) 3.
[7] The student again chose not to give evidence on sanction. However, in her
submissions, the student stated that she thought that the appropriate sanction is a zero in
the paper and a two-year suspension.

B-

[8] Ms. Harmer, counsel for the University, refen-ed to the well-known and often-cited
six factors originally established in the Appeal of Mr. C. (November 5, 1976). These are
delineated in the case of Mr. S •
at Tab 4 of the University's Brief of Authorities:

1. The character of the student:
We have little evidence of the student's character. Dr. Y aniszewski stated
that the student was combative in the meeting with the Dean's
representative. However, he conceded in cross-examination that she was
not combative when she met with him. Her conduct before this Tribunal
was in some respects uncooperative and disrespectful.

4
2. The likelihood of repetition:
No evidence was presented on this issue.
3. The nature of the offence:
The offence itself is serious; however the University did not convince us
that the student had actual knowledge that she was committing an offence.
4. The extenuating circumstances:
The only evidence on this issue is contained in Exhibit 4, namely the notes
of Dr. Yaniszewski and his testimony on his recollection of what the
student told him when he met with her. As the student did not give
evidence, there was no opportunity for the University to cross-examine the
student on the veracity of these statements. However, she did advise that
she did high school in Trinidad, that the system was very different there,
and that she was out of school for a long time. She suggested to him that
"her not approaching the instructor prior to submitting her essay was an
e1Tor in retrospect and contributed to her mistakes in citation". However
her attitude in this hearing did not indicate that she recognized the
seriousness of the offence that she had committed. This is her first
offence.

5. The detriment to the University:
Such conduct is always detrimental to the University, which prides itself
on having an exemplary reputation.

6. General deterrence:
It is impmtant that plagiarism be emphatically deterred by the imposition
of a significant sanction.
[9] It appears that a two-year suspension is usually imposed for plagiarism. In the case of

Pal K;■--1, the Tribunal stated in its Reasons dated November 9, 2007 at
paragraph 12:
In reviewing the history of decisions of this Tribunal in plagiarism cases,

it appears in the more modern era, particularly as plagiarism has
increasingly become the bread and butter of this Tribunal, the Tribunal
through a number of cases has established virtually a tl1reshold penalty for

5
those convicted of plagiarism - the two year suspension. A suspension
may increase, depending on particular factors in particular cases, including
the nature of the plagiarism, the response of the student to the allegations,
the conduct of the students throughout the proceeding, ·whether the
charges represented a first or repeated offence, the passage of time since
the incident occurred and who contributed to any delay, the expression of
remorse, a plea of guilty or not, any specific extenuating circumstances
and other factors. But the consistent minimum penalty appears to be a two
year suspension. The panel in this case is of the view that a two year
suspension here is really the minimal period of suspension that could
reasonably be imposed in this case.

[1 OJ In our view the circumstances set out in paragraph 4 above wan-ant a slightly lesser
sanction than is the usual case. We therefore have decided that the appropriate sanction
is as follows:
1. Zero in the course pursuant to Section C.II.(b) 1 (g);

2. Eighteen-month suspension pursuant to Section C.IL(b) 1 (h);
3. Recording the sanction on the student's academic record for 3 years pursuant to
Section C.II.(b) 2;
4. Report a notice of the decision and sanctions with the name of the student
withheld pursuant to Section C.II.(b) 3.

I certify that this is the decision of the Panel

Rodie David, Banister and Solicitor (Chair)

