Case #260

   DATE : December 19, 2001

   PARTIES : S.G. (the ‚Student‚) v. Faculty of Applied Science and
   Engineering

   HEARING DATE : November 29, 2001

   Committee Members :
   Assistant Dean Bonnie Goldberg, Acting Chairperson
   Professor Clare Beghtol
   Professor Sherwin Desser
   Professor Ian McDonald
   Ms. Geeta Yadav

   Appearances :

   For the Student Appellant:
   S.G. (the ‚Student‚)
   Mr Vaino Poysa, student caseworker, Downtown Legal Services

   For the Faculty of Applied Science and Engineering:
   Ms Barbara McCann, Registrar, Faculty of Applied Science and
   Engineering
   Professor Raymond Kwong, Faculty of Applied Science and Engineering
   Professor Andrew Jardine, Faculty of Applied Science and Engineering
   Ms Margaret Tompsatt, Faculty of Applied Science and Engineering

   In Attendance:
   Mr. Paul Holmes, Judicial Affairs Officer, University of Toronto

   The Student appealed a decision of the Faculty of Applied Science and
   Engineering (the ‚Faculty‚) Ombuds Committee confirming a decision of
   the Faculty Registrar. That decision determined that there was no basis
   on which to alter the assessed grade awarded to the Student in a course
   taken at the University in the 2000 Winter Session.

   The course evaluation comprised of two midterms (worth 25% each of the
   final grade) and a final examination (worth 50% of the final grade).
   The Student obtained a higher than average grade in the first midterm
   and a lower than average grade in the second. The Student contracted
   the flu the day prior to the final examination. The Student wrote the
   examination anyway, and performed very poorly. As a result, the Student
   submitted a Petition for Consideration in Final Examination for the
   course, which was granted. The Student was assessed a mark of 59% in
   the course, which fell below the required minimum of 60%. As a result,
   the Student was refused further registration in the Faculty. The
   Faculty‚s Committee on Examinations refused the Student‚s request to
   re-examine the assessed grade.

   The Academic Appeals Committee (the ‚AAC‚) noted that the Faculty did
   not offer students the ability to write supplemental examinations where
   circumstances beyond the control of the student adversely affected the
   student‚s performance. Rather, the Faculty used a ‚Term Work Report‚,
   which states that to make the necessary assessment of the student‚s
   performance on the final grade, the Committee on Examinations requests
   information about the student‚s term work and any additional
   information from the professor. The Report includes a table with
   information about the Final Examination, Closely Supervised Term Work,
   Term Work Not Closely Supervised, and class averages for each category.
   When the student performs poorly on the final exam for valid reasons,
   the Report states that the Committee ‚often infers a candidate‚s final
   course mark‚ using a formula. In the Student‚s case, the instructor
   only used the second of the Student‚s midterm tests to determine her
   assessed grade and that the first midterm test had been ‚easy‚. The
   ‚inferred mark‚ formula suggested by the Faculty for these cases was
   not used.

   The AAC stated that the case turned on whether the first midterm should
   have counted in the student‚s assessed mark, and whether the Faculty
   erred in the procedure it used to determine the grade. While the AAC
   concurred with the Faculty‚s opinion that a professor‚s impressions of
   the appropriate grade for a student should not be ignored, it stated
   that if the Faculty is to offer assessed grades rather than
   supplemental exams, the Term Work Report should be used in its entirety
   and the full consequences of the assessed grade should be considered
   more closely. The AAC was satisfied that the Committee on Examinations‚
   faith in the instructor‚s comments that the second test results more
   closely correlated with the final examination was not a sufficient
   reason to break from established and expected practice. The Committee
   stated that an assessment that assumes so much about a student‚s
   performance, and which has such a drastic result, is problematic. If
   the Faculty wishes to employ a system that infers marks, the AAC
   stated, it cannot do so in an opaque manner. The Faculty accepted the
   student‚s petition that she was ill, and yet awarded her an assessed
   grade that in the end was punitive. The AAC further stated that the
   Student should not be penalized because the instructor gave an
   examination which he later considered too easy.

   In allowing the appeal, the AAC held that the Faculty must award the
   Student an assessed exam grade based on the formula outlined in the
   Term Work Report. While the AAC took the view that this formula was
   complicated and mechanistic, it noted that this was the formula
   suggested by the Faculty to provide additional information in these
   situations. As such, it found no compelling argument by the Faculty as
   to why it was not employed in the Student‚s situation.

   The Student‚s appeal was allowed.
   [1]View Report

References

   1. file:///media/12681
