Report 270

DATE:

   November 7, 2002

PARTIES:

   Ms M.S. (The Student) v. UTSC

Hearing Date(s):

   October 10th, 2002

Committee Members:

   Professor Emeritus Ralph Scane (Senior Chair)
   Mr. Brian Davis
   Professor David Jenkins
   Professor Gretchen Kerr
   Mr. Sean Mullin

Secretary:

   Mr. Paul Holmes (Judicial Affairs Officer)

In Attendance:

For the Student:

   Ms M.S. (The Student)

For UTSC:

   Associate Dean Ian McDonald

   Request to defer a one-year suspension imposed for failure to attain a
   required minimum GPA.Â  The Student had served the suspension. The
   Student requested that the notation of the suspension be removed from
   her transcript. Due to visa difficulties, the Student could not start
   her courses until a month into the term. The Student claimed that
   marital difficulties between her aunt and uncle, whom she was living
   with, created a difficult study situation, that she had a long commute
   to UTSC, that she suffered from migraine headaches and that just prior
   to her examinations, she learned that her parents were proposing to
   divorce, and shortly thereafter, that her father had been hospitalized.
   The Committee found that the news concerning her parents' situation was
   not something she could have foreseen prior to the drop date. While the
   other factors did not justify relief in themselves, they did put the
   Student in an already disadvantaged position when she received the news
   about her parents. The Committee found that the Student could have
   applied to defer all of her examination but that relief should not be
   denied on that ground because of the Studentâs situation in the period
   between receipt of the news and the beginning of examinations and the
   fact that deferred examinations would not have been easily granted by
   the Faculty. The Committee observed that it had the advantage of seeing
   and weighing the credibility of the Student during her oral testimony,
   where the Divisional Appeals Committee did not have the opportunity
   because the University's notice of the forthcoming hearing did not
   reach the Student.Â  Appeal allowed in part. The Committee ordered that
   the one year suspension be treated as deferred, and the Student's
   academic status in future years established accordingly. The Committee
   found no basis for removing the notice of the deferred suspension from
   the official transcript, and the request to do so was denied.
   [1]View Report

References

   1. file:///media/12647
