Case No.: 883
UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
IN THE MATTER OF charges of academic dishonesty made on August 3, 2016
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code ofBehaviour on Academic
Matters, 1995,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Act, 1971, S.O. 1971, c. 56 as amended
S.O. 1978, c. 88
B ETWEEN:
UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO (the "University")
- AND —
L Y

(the "Student")

REASONS FOR DECISION
Hearing Date: May 9, 2017
Panel Members:
Ms. Roslyn M. Tsao, Chair
Professor Louis Florence, Faculty Panel Member
Mr. Chad Jankowski, Student Panel Member
Appearances:
Ms. Tina Lie, Assistant Discipline Counsel for University, Paliare Roland Barristers
Ms. Emily Home,Student-at-law, Paliare Roland Barristers
Mr. Jonathan G.V. Hendricks, Counsel for the Student
In Attendance:
Ms. L Y
, the Student(by Skype)
Ms. Kristy Gourlay, Manager, Manager and Academic Integrity Officer, Office of the Student
Academic Integrity, Faculty of Arts and Science
Ms. Krista Osbourne, Administrative Clerk and Hearing Secretary, Office of Appeals, Discipline
and Faculty Grievances
Mr. Sean Lourim, Technology Assistant, Office of the Governing Council

Charges and Appearances
1.

The Trial Division of the Tribunal heard this matter on May 9, 2017. The Student was
charged on August 3, 2016 with forgery/falsification on or about March 1, 2016 contrary
to section B.I.1(a) of the Code, relating to a test booklet for the midterm test in
RSM220H1 (the "Course"). The Student was also charged, in the alternative, with
engaging in a form of cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or
misrepresentation not otherwise described in the Code.

2.

The May 9, 2017 hearing date was peremptory to the Student following the granting of an
adjournment on February 27, 2017, the last scheduled hearing date in this matter.

3.

The Student participated in the hearing via Skype connection (from Australia) and her
lawyer, Mr. Hendricks was present in person.

4.

The Student agreed to the admission of eight(8) Affidavits from Teaching Assistants and
two(2)signed statements of two (2) other Teaching Assistants into evidence.

SUMMARY OF EVIDENCE AND REASONS FOR DECISION
5.

Witnesses were excluded during the hearing.

6.

The University's evidence comprised:
(a)

testimony by Amy Kwan, one of the Course instructors;

(b)

testimony of Joanne (Amy) Du, a Teaching Assistant in the Course, who marked
the question at issue;

(c)

Dr. Kristy Gourlay, Manager and Academic Integrity Officer, Office of the
Student Academic Integrity, Faculty of Arts and Science

7.

(d)

eight(8) Affidavits of8 Teaching Assistants in the Course; and

(e)

two (2) unsworn Statements of 2 other Teaching Assistants in the Course.

The Student testified, via Skype, in her own defence.

2

University's Evidence
8.

The University set out to establish that the Student re-submitted her mid-term answer
booklet for grading after altering it, namely, by inserting a loose page into the booklet
with an answer to Question 4/Part I, and claiming that such loose page had, in fact, been
handed in at the time of the test.

9.

The evidence of the University's witnesses, in aggregate, relevant to proving the above
offence can be summarized as follows:
(a)

There were approximately 280 students in the Course, in 6 sections. A mid-term
test in the Course was held on February 25, 2016 worth 25% of the final grade.

(b)

There were 7 invigilators at the mid-term test written by the Student, comprised of
5 Teaching Assistants and 2 instructors. Of the 5 Teaching Assistants, 4 affirm
that they do not recall any "student handing in a test paper with a loose page or
being advised by a student that their exam booklet contained any loose pages".
The 5th Teaching Assistant did not recall his invigilating the mid-terms test
though he apparently did so. The 2 instructors (males) who invigilated did not
give evidence.

(c)

As outlined by Ms. Amy Kwan,the third instructor, there were standard protocols
followed during the set up and sitting of the mid-term test. In particular, at the
end of the test, the students would be told to place everything, including the
question booklet into their answer booklet for the invigilators to pick up. There
was also attendance noted on sign-in sheets.

(d)

At the end of the test, the invigilators were responsible to collect all booklets,
reconcile the number of physical students counted at the test with the sign-in
sheets and the number of test booklets handed in. The invigilators then brought
the answer booklets directly to the Rotman Centre, Room RT548, for immediate
marking.

3

(e)

At Room RT548, the other 5 Teaching Assistants for the Course and Ms. Kwan
joined the seven (7) invigilators at the Student's mid-term test sitting. All 13 of
these persons were involved in the marking of the mid-terms.

(0

In Room RT548, the group of 13 markers ("Markers") sat around one large round
boardroom table to mark the tests. Each Teaching Assistant (not instructors) was
assigned to mark one question of the mid-term and there could be one or two
Teaching Assistants assigned to a question. The answer booklets were divided
into "piles" and placed in the middle of the table. A Marker would pick a pile to
mark his or her assigned question and, when that pile was completed, it was
returned to the middle of the table and another pile was taken, until all booklets
had been marked.

(g)

Question 4 was marked by Juan (Amy) Du (a Teaching Assistant who had not
invigilated the Student's test) and Alex Zhenqian Guo, another Teaching
Assistant.

(h)

Nothing was permitted to be removed from the marking room during the
approximately 10 hours of marking from 1 pm to 11 pm.

(i)

If any loose pages were found by any of the Markers, the Marker would have
discussed it with Instructor Kwan and/or the loose page would have been stapled
into the answer booklet.
By the time a test was completely marked, anywhere from between 6-8 Markers
would have looked at any given answer booklet.

(k)

Ms. Du, one of two Markers assigned to mark Question 4, confirmed that it was
not necessary to answer Part I correctly to answer Part II.

(1)

Ms. Du, as did the other 9 Teaching Assistant Markers, confirmed that she never
saw a loose page in any of the answer booklets and had she seen a loose page, she
would have brought it to the attention of Instructor Kwan and/or stapled it into the
answer booklet.

4

(m)

On February 29, 2016 at 12:23 pm, an email was sent to the students that the
graded mid-terms were available for pick up at the Rotman Commerce office
starting at 2:30 p.m. The mid-term would be reviewed in tutorials that week. The
email also advised that a solution/guideline had been posted to the course site.

(n)

The Student picked up her mid-term from the Commerce office on February 29th
and attended at the class that day at 4:00 pm and the tutorial later at 6:00 p.m.

(o)

On March 1, 2016, the Student submitted a request for re-marking of her midterm on the basis that the loose page inside her answer booklet, had been
overlooked. On her cover note, the Student stated that she picked up her answer
booklet on February 29th at approximately 3:00 p.m. and at about 4:00 p.m., she
approached Instructor Scott Douglas to advise that there was a loose page with the
answer to Question 4/Part I which had not been marked. At the tutorial at 6:00
p.m., the Student showed the page to the Teaching Assistant, Mr. Y

, who took

a picture of the page to capture its form at that time.
(p)

Ms. Du was responsible for re-grading all tests which were re-submitted for
marking.

(q)

Ms. Du graded the Student's loose page which had the answer to Question 4/Part
I. The Student would have obtained an additional 19 marks for that answer.

(r)

There was well-founded skepticism by the Instructors that all Markers had missed
seeing the Student's loose page in her booklet. Further investigation about
whether the Student had engaged in some form of academic misconduct was,
therefore, undertaken.

(s)

Instructor Kwan firstly emailed each of the Teaching Assistant Markers to ask
whether he or she had noticed any "ripped out pages" during the marking process
and if so, whether he or she had marked such a page or stapled it into the answer
booklet. Each Teaching Assistant responded that he or she had not seen any
ripped out pages.

5

(t)

Furthermore, Ms. Du was able to confirm that she marked the Student's Part II of
Question 4 and that she did not see any loose or ripped out pages in the course of
marking all the tests.

(u)

When the Student did not receive any response to her re-marking request, she
emailed her academic advisor, Robert Michaud. In this email dated April 6, 2016,
she advised:
• During the exam, she wrote a question wrong (presumably Part I/Question 4),
crossed that page off and tore it offfrom the exam booklet.
• She then wrote the answer for that same question on the next page.
• That when the Teaching Assistant in the exam centre came and collected her
paper at the end of the mid-term, the Student informed her of the torn out page
with the answer to be marked. The Student emailed that this Teaching Assistant
"saw that page and fold (sic) it and put it into the exam booklet" (emphasis
added). The Student implies that she kept the other page (from the folio).
• The Student stated that she picked up her test paper from the Commerce Office at
about 3:30 pm, then went to class at 4:00 pm and told Instructor Douglas about
the issue of the unmarked loose page. Instructor Douglas told her to speak to the
Teaching Assistant later.
• At the 6:00 pm tutorial later that same day, the Student brought the matter up to
the Teaching Assistant, Mr. Keith Yuen, who took a picture of the page and
suggested she hand it in to the Rotman office.
• The Student complained that the results of the re-marking had not been provided
by March 17th, the deadline for response, and that she had wanted to know the
results in advance of the deadline to drop the course.

10.

It is noted, and, in fact, critical, that the loose sheet, when examined by the panel, had
clearly never been folded.

6

11.

Furthermore, none of female invigilators (nor any of them) recalls a discussion at the test
centre with a Student about handing in a loose page with her booklet.

12.

There were three (3) Dean's Designate meetings with the Student (the Student's lawyer
attended with the Student at the latter two meetings). The Student denied guilt to any
offence.

Student's Evidence
13.

The Student testified in chief and re-affirmed her version of events as set out in her email
of April 6, 2016 (described above) including that the loose page was folded by the
invigilator and put inside her answer booklet.

14.

The Student did not, however, confirm when she picked up her test booklet from the
Commerce Office. The test booklets were available from 2:30 pm for pick up.

DECISION OF THE TRIBUNAL
15.

The University bears the onus of proving the elements of the offence based on clear and
convincing evidence"(Code: s. C.II.(a) 9.). In this particular matter, the University must
prove that the Student altered her answer booklet (by inserting a page with additional
answer material) after it had been graded and before she re-submitted it to be re-marked.

16.

The evidence of the numerous witnesses tendered by the University (both in person and
by Affidavit) relating to the procedure and methodology surrounding the chain of custody
of the examination booklets from the sitting of the mid-term test, through to marking and
return of the booklets to the student was consistent, compelling and not shaken by the
Student's version of events.

17.

The Student's version of events cannot be reconciled with the other evidence. The loose
page that was to be re-marked was not folded despite the Student stating that the female
invigilator had seen the page at the test centre, folded it and inserted it into her answer
booklet.

18.

It is also wholly untenable that the loose page, had it been inserted in the Student's
original answer booklet, made its way to the marking centre and through the hands of 6-8

7

Markers who would have been flipping through the whole booklet to find their particular
assigned questions with no one seeing such loose page over the course of the 10 hours of
marking. It is even more untenable that the loose page somehow remained intact in the
Student's answer booklet, after being unseen by anyone in the foregoing process, at the
time of return to the Student.
19.

The more clear and compelling explanation is that the loose page was never in the
Students original answer booklet and was inserted after the return of the test to the
Student and before the Student re-submitted it for marking. It does not matter when the
answer on the loose page was actually written, be it during the test but perhaps it was not
handed in or whether it was subsequent and based on the solutions/guidelinesl. The act
of misconduct is the submitting of the page for re-marking in the guise that it was part of
the original answer booklet.

20.

The Panel, therefore, finds that the elements of the offence have been established and that
the Student is guilty of the forgery/falsification charge.

21.

The alternative charge, if it was not formally withdrawn by the University at the hearing,
is dismissed.

Penalty
22.

The University requested the following penalty:
(a)

a final grade of zero in the course RSM220H1;

(b)

a suspension for two-and-a-half years; and

(c)

a notation of the sanction on the Student's academic record and transcript from
the date of this order for a period of three-and-a-half years.

1 The University submitted that the Student's purported score on the impugned question, at 88%, was evidence of
misconduct given the Student's poor responses on the other parts of the test. The Panel does not consider this
argument to be compelling as poor performance by a Student on other parts of the test (or even during the
Course) cannot be used to bootstrap an allegation of misconduct. There is a danger of presuming that a poorlyperforming student who improves his/her performance is more likely to have committed academic misconduct
and the Tribunal does not accept that premise or its corollary.

8

23.

The University submitted and the Panel agrees that the Student has displayed limited
remorse and caused a significant level of resources to be expended by the University at
this hearing.

24.

The University also submitted that there is an obvious level of conscious thought which
went into this offence and there were a number of occasions when the Student could have
chosen to take a different course in disputing the evidence.

25.

Mr. Hendricks advised that the Student's parents abruptly booked a plane ticket for the
Student to return home the same day that she finally told them about the charges shortly
before the last hearing date in February, 2017. It is presumed and hoped that her parents
were appropriately alarmed at the allegations and the jeopardy to the Student's education
at the University given the significant financial cost.

26.

The Student has no previous history of academic misconduct and appears, from her
transcript, to have performed reasonably well at university.

27.

The Panel also reviewed a summary of similarly-situated cases provided by the
University.

28.

Accordingly, the Panel finds that the appropriate penalty in this case is:
(a)

a final grade of zero in the course RSM220H1;

(b)

a suspension from the University of Toronto from the date of this order for a
period of two years, ending May 8, 2019; and

(c)

a notation of the sanction on the Student's academic record and transcript from
the date of this order for a period of three years, ending on May 8, 2020; and

29.

An Order was signed at the hearing by the Panel. The Tribunal is to report this decision
to the Provost for publication of a notice of the decision of the Tribunal and the sanctions
imposed in the University's newspapers, with the name of the Student withheld.

9

z7
-Z"‘
Dated at Toronto, this /4 day of July, 2017

Roslyn Tsao

o-Chair

10

