Case 883

DATE:

   July 11, 2017

PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v. L.Y. ("the Student")

Hearing Date(s):

   May 9, 2017

Panel Members:

   Ms. Roslyn M. Tsao, Chair
   Professor Louis Florence, Faculty Panel Member
   Mr. Chad Jankowski, Student Panel Member

Appearances:

   Ms. Tina Lie, Assistant Discipline Counsel for University, Paliare
   Roland Barristers
   Ms. Emily Home, Student-at-law, Paliare Roland Barristers
   Mr. Jonathan G.V. Hendricks, Counsel for the Student

In Attendance:

   The Student (by Skype)
   Dr. Kristy Gourlay, Manager, Manager and Academic Integrity Officer,
   Office of the Student Academic Integrity, Faculty of Arts and Science
   Ms. Krista Osbourne, Administrative Clerk and Hearing Secretary, Office
   of Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances
   Mr. Sean Lourim, Technology Assistant, Office of the Governing Council

   The Student was charged with one offence of forgery or falsification
   under s. B.i.1(a) of the Code, and alternatively, academic dishonesty
   under s. B.i.3(b) of the Code.

   The Student submitted a test for re-marking including a forged "extra
   sheet" they claimed was missed in the first round of marking. The
   Student's mark on the question on this extra sheet was unusually high
   compared to their other marks on the test, but the Tribunal found this
   could not be considered evidence of misconduct. Poor performance
   elsewhere in a course or on a test cannot be used to boot-strap an
   allegation of misconduct. To do so would be unfair to students who
   improve their performance. The University was able to establish a chain
   of custody showing that the test had been looked at by 6-8 separate
   markers before being returned to the Student. The Tribunal found it
   unlikely that the extra page had been missed by all of them yet was in
   the booklet when returned to the Student. Thus the Student was found
   guilty of forgery. The academic dishonesty charge was dismissed.

   In determining the penalty, the Tribunal noted that the Student had
   displayed limited remorse and that this offence demonstrated conscious
   thought, though no previous record. The Student received a grade of
   zero in the course, a two year suspension, and a three year notation,
   and the decision was reported to be published with the name of the
   Student withheld.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12948
