Report 432

   DATE:

   February 9, 2024

   PARTIES:

   P.Y. ("the Student"). v. the Faculty of Applied Science and Engineering

   HEARING DATE(S):

   November 17, 2023 via Zoom

   COMMITTEE MEMBERS:

   Sara Farherty, Chair
   Professor Nhung Tuyet Tran, Faculty Governor
   Dveeta Lal, Student Governor

   SECRETARY:

   Nadia Bruno, Special Projects Officer, Office of Appeals, Discipline
   and Faculty Grievances

   APPEARANCES:

   FOR THE STUDENT APPELLANT:

   Thomas Mathew, Counsel, Thomas Mathews Litigation
   The Student

   FOR THE FACULTY OF APPLIED SCIENCE & ENGINEERING

   Professor Thomas Coyle, Vice Dean, Undergraduate

   The Student appeals from the decision by the Faculty of Engineering‚s
   Academic Appeals Board (the ‚AAB‚), denying the Student‚s request to
   continue his studies in the Faculty of Engineering (the ‚Faculty‚). The
   Student required permission to continue in the Faculty‚s program
   because they had been refused further registration on the basis of the
   grade in ECE241H1 Digital Systems (the ‚Course‚).

   In the course of the appeal, the Student requested that the Academic
   Appeals Committee (the ‚Committee‚) award three different remedies.
   First, the Student requested Aegrotat standing which would give them
   credit for the Course but exclude the Course from calculations of their
   grade point average, because they were ill while writing the exam for
   the Course. Second, the Student requested an assessed mark that
   excludes the low final exam grade and would result in a mark above the
   required threshold. Third, the Student requested a Late Withdrawal
   without Academic Penalty on compassionate grounds because his mark was
   affected by circumstances outside his control.

   The Student requested Aegrotat standing due to his illness during the
   exam, which the Committee noted was corroborated by a Verification of
   Student Illness form. The Committee stated that while Aegrotat standing
   would have been appropriate if the Student had abandoned the final
   assessment, the Student‚s decision to complete the exam made Aegrotat
   an inappropriate remedy.

   The Committee found that the AAB was justified in refusing to assign an
   assessed mark to the Student. The Committee noted that the AAB‚s
   decision rested on their evaluation of the difference between the mark
   the Student earned on the final exam in the Course, and their other
   closely supervised work in the Course. In particular, the Student
   sought to the grades earned in the course from laboratory work (‚Lab
   Work‚) included in the Faculty‚s evaluation for the purpose of
   assigning an assessed mark to the Student. The Committee found that the
   Faculty was justified in excluding the Student‚s Lab Work in making
   such evaluation and was willing to defer to the Faculty Committee
   members and their academic judgement on the issue. The Committee noted
   that its conclusion would be more certain if the Faculty had
   established guidelines regarding the assignment of assessed marks.

   With respect to the Student‚s request for a Late Withdrawal from the
   Courseed for a Student at the University to be allowed to withdraw from
   a course after the drop deadline and even after an exam is written. The
   Committee noted that the Student‚s clear medical documentation, and
   prompt request for late withdrawal one day following the exam,
   supported the Student‚s request for a LWD on compassionate grounds.
   Since the Faculty had a policy against allowing students to repeat
   courses that have already been completed, as in this case, the
   Committee held that, if the course is required for graduation, the
   Student must be permitted to take this course, or a suitable substitute
   course.

   Finally, the Committee did not find the decision of the AAB to be
   reasonable in view of its brief reasons. In particular, it found that
   the AAB‚s decision did not illuminate the Faculty‚s reasoning and made
   it difficult for the Committee to assess what factors were important in
   their decision, and whether the Student was treated fairly in the
   process. The Committee further stated that clarity in the Faculty‚s
   policies and explanations for decisions are important components of a
   fair grading and appeal system.

   The Committee allowed the appeal.
   [1]View Report

References

   1. file:///media/31487
