UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
GOVERNING COUNCIL
Report #432 of the Academic Appeals Committee
February 9, 2024
To the Academic Board
University of Toronto
Your Committee reports that it held a hearing on Friday, November 17, 2023, at which the
following members were present:
Academic Appeal Committee Members:
Sara Faherty (Chair)
Professor Nhung Tuyet Tran, Faculty Governor
Dveeta Lal, Student Governor
Hearing Secretary:
Nadia Bruno, Special Projects Officer, Office of Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances
For the Student Appellant:
P.Y. (the “Student”)
Thomas Mathews, Thomas Mathews Litigation, Counsel for the Student
For the Faculty of Applied Science & Engineering:
Professor Thomas Coyle, Vice Dean, Undergraduate

The Appeal
This is an appeal from a decision made on April 12, 2023, by the Faculty of Applied Science &
Engineering’s Academic Appeals Board. The Appeals Board communicated its decision that
day, explaining they were denying the Student’s request to continue his studies at U of T
Engineering. In his decision Professor Don Kirk, Chair of the Academic Appeals Board
expressed sympathy for the Student but found there was “insufficient justification” to grant the
Student’s request.
The Student needed to request permission to continue in the program because following the Fall
2022 semester he had been refused further registration based on the grade he had been assigned
in ECE241H1 Digital Systems. While this was a passing mark (a “D”), and the Student received
credit for the course, the mark brought his sessional GPA beneath the threshold for continued
enrolment in the Faculty. As we discuss below, the Student sought a number of remedies that
would alter the treatment of the mark in ECE241H1, Digital Systems and raise his sessional
average above the required minimum, including requesting an assessed mark, being granted
Aegrotat status, or being allowed Late Withdrawal without Academic Penalty.

1

The Facts
The Student has had a long and challenging academic career at the Faculty of Applied Science &
Engineering. He first enrolled as an undergraduate working towards his BASc in Computer
Engineering during the Fall of 2004, almost twenty years ago. For the first few years of his
enrollment his progress was not strong. He was first placed on academic probation during his
second semester, the Winter 2005 term, when his sessional average dipped below 60%. He
continued to struggle academically, falling below a 60% sessional average again in the Fall of
2006, and for a third time during the term that is the subject of this appeal, during the Fall term
of 2022. We note that he had long leaves during this period, including a five-year gap between
the Fall of 2015 and the Fall of 2020. This student is clearly unwell and has struggled in this
program for almost two decades.
During the Fall, 2022 term the Student enrolled in ECE241H1, Digital Systems. The Student’s
mark for this course was based on three evaluations:
Lab Work (weighted as 20% of final mark) —
82.5%
Midterm Exam (weighted as 30% of final mark) — 65.3%
Final Exam (weighted as 50% of final mark) —
39.8%.
This resulted in a course mark of 56%, or a D.
The Student attended his exam for ECE241H1, Digital Systems, on December 19, 2022. He
became ill during the exam, suffering severe headaches and blurred vision. He did not abandon
the exam, or even notify an invigilator of his health problems. He explained that he believed
disturbing the other students taking the examination would have been inappropriate. Rather, the
Student completed and submitted the exam. The Student concluded that the exam was a problem
relatively quickly and requested either Aegrotat standing or an assessed mark in the course the
following day, on December 20, 2022. In support of his request, he submitted a Verification of
Student Illness form dated January 22, 2023, signed by Dr. Hung-I Henry Ho, a physician whom
he sees regularly. On the form, Dr. Ho indicated that the impact of the Student’s condition
caused impairment that was between “severe” and “serious.” He wrote that the Student suffers
chronic illness with acute exacerbation, adding “I recommend AEG.”
The stakes in this course are high for the Student, since this mark he was given brings his
sessional average below 60% threshold required for continued enrolment, given his repeated
probation status.
The Faculty of Applied Science & Engineering does not consider Aegrotat standing for courses
in which all the work is completed and submitted. The Faculty also ruled out offering a deferred
examination since the Student had completed the final exam as offered. The assignment of an
assessed mark was complicated by the Faculty’s practice of excluding work that was “not closely
supervised” in determining whether an exam mark is significantly lower than the marks earned
during a term (which would confirm a student’s argument that there was an unanticipated issue
during the writing of the examination.) Vice Dean Coyle explained that the Faculty compared
the final exam mark (39.8) to his closely supervised work on the midterm (65.3) and concluded
2

that there was not a sufficient difference to warrant an assigning of an assessed mark that
excluded the unsupervised Lab Work. This eliminated three remedies that might have been
available if the Student had abandoned the exam and earned a lower mark.
Decision
The Student is anxious to have the mark he earned in ECE241H1 Digital Systems excluded from
his transcript because the consequences of the mark are dire: they bring his sessional mark
below the threshold for continued registration. In the course of his appeal, he has asked for three
different remedies:
Aegrotat standing which would give him credit for the course but exclude the course
from calculations of his grade point average because he was ill while writing the exam;
an assessed mark that excludes the low final exam grade and would result in a mark
above the threshold on the grounds that his course work establishes his mastery of the
material; or
Late Withdrawal without Academic Penalty on compassionate grounds because his mark
was affected by circumstances outside his control.
He also challenges the reasonableness of the Academic Appeals Board decision and the
reasonableness of the results.
Aegrotat standing
The Student requests Aegrotat standing due to his illness during the exam. The illness is
corroborated by the Verification of Student Illness form submitted by Dr. Ho. There is no
disagreement that the Student is unwell, and he has worked hard to overcome the challenges
posed by his condition. Had he abandoned the exam when he began to experience symptoms
Aegrotat would have been a reasonable remedy. The Student’s decision to complete the exam
makes Aegrotat an inappropriate solution. His concern for the other students writing the exam
should not have prevented him from quietly approaching an invigilator and seeking guidance.
His transcript indicates that he has written at least nineteen examinations at the Faculty of
Applied Science & Engineering, and he has a responsibility to be aware of his division’s exam
policies. It is difficult to conceive that in all these exams he has never interacted with an
invigilator or seen other students interacting with invigilators. While the Student asserted that he
was unwell and under pressure, and consequently he did not have the details of University
policies at the front of his mind on the day of the examination, this does not exempt him from
being subject to those policies. The Student’s mistaken belief that he should not disturb other
exam writers is unfortunate, but it cannot mean he will be treated as if he had abandoned the
examination.
Your Committee is sympathetic to the Student’s plight that day, and gives great deference to the
form submitted by Dr. Ho. We note, however, that while Dr. Ho is a medical expert, he does not
have expertise in academic accommodations or in University or divisional policies. His role is to
3

identify the level of impairment of the Student due to his medical condition—not to prescribe
academic accommodations. Your Committee disagrees with Dr. Ho that Aegrotat is the
appropriate remedy in these circumstances, given the Faculty’s policy, which is clearly stated in
its Academic Calendar at page 21: “Aegrotat standing granted on the basis of session work and
medical or similar evidence where the student was not able to write the final examination in the
course.” [Emphasis added.]
An assessed mark
The Faculty of Applied Science & Engineering declined to assign an assessed mark to the
Student in ECE241H1 Digital Systems. The decision rested on their evaluation of the difference
between the mark the Student earned on the exam in question (a 39.8%) and his other closely
supervised work in the course. The Student understandably wanted his Lab Work mark included
as part of the “other work in the course,” since he did so well on his Lab Work. Including the
Lab Work would have led the Faculty to compare the 39.8% mark on the final to an “other
work” average of 72.2%. Excluding the Lab Work mark meant the comparison was between the
39.8% final mark and the 65.3% midterm mark. The Faculty did not find that difference to be
compelling.
The first issue raised by the Student is that in his view the difference between the midterm and
the final exam grades is significant, and the Faculty should have given him an assessed mark
based on that difference. His second argument is that if they had included the Lab Work mark the
even greater difference would have been even more compelling.
The Vice Dean explained that Lab Work and other work that is not closely supervised is
reasonably excluded from these comparisons because they are not earned in tightly controlled
settings like exam rooms, and often include contributions made by other students. The Student
characterised the failure to include the Lab Work as a “glaring omission,” but your Committee
finds this position to be reasonable.
Your Committee is of the view that the Faculty is justified in excluding work that is not closely
supervised from these comparisons. Our view of the significance of the 25% difference in the
midterm mark and the final mark is clouded by the lack of clarity in the Faculty of Applied
Science & Engineering’s policies. While we are willing to defer to the Faculty’s Committee
members and their academic judgement on this issue, we would be more certain in this
conclusion if there were established guidelines on this important issue. The Faculty explained
that they do not consider assessed marks in cases where a student has completed the exam.
The Committee notes that members asked which policies the Faculty administrators applied in
this circumstance and was not given a response.
Late Withdrawal without Academic Penalty
The third remedy requested by the Student, Late Withdrawal without Academic Penalty, would
deny the Student credit for the course but will give him an opportunity to remain enrolled at the
Faculty of Applied Science & Engineering. It is unusual, but not unprecedented for a Student at
4

the University of Toronto to be allowed to Withdraw from a course after the drop deadline and
even after an exam is written. Vice Dean Coyle explained that the mark is not appropriate based
on the Faculty’s normal procedures, suggesting that LWD is reserved for students who have
struggled throughout the term. Your Committee finds that it would be confusing to tell a student
his marks were too low throughout the term to warrant an assessed mark (see above), but too
high throughout the term to warrant a late withdrawal. Your Committee notes that it gave the
Faculty several opportunities to point to an existing policy related to these decisions. They were
unable to do so. It would be important to have such a clear policy.
The Student provided clear medical documentation of his situation. While it would have been
better if he had abandoned the examination on December 19th, he made a relatively prompt
request for late withdrawal on December 20th, the following day. This remedy was not driven by
an effort to manipulate the sessional average, since he made this request before he saw the final
mark. The fact that the Student’s circumstances are beyond his control lead your Committee to
allow this request on compassionate grounds.
Vice Dean Coyle told us that the Faculty has a policy against allowing students to repeat courses
they have completed. Your Committee agrees that the Student should not take ECE241H1
Digital Systems again unless the course is required for graduation. If the course is required for
graduation, then the Student must be permitted to take this course, or a suitable substitute course.
The reasonableness of the Academic Appeals Board decision and the Reasonableness of the
result
The Academic Appeal Board decision is brief. The section devoted to reasoning is two
sentences:
“The AAB is sympathetic to your situation and acknowledges the difficult circumstances you
faced due to health conditions. After carefully considering the information presented, the Board
finds insufficient justification in granting your request.”
This summary decision does not illuminate the Faculty of Applied Science & Engineering’s
reasoning and made it hard for your Committee to assess what factors were important, which
facts were determinative, and whether they were fair to the Student. We do not doubt the
Faculty’s respect for the Student and sympathy for his condition—it has accommodated him
generously and patiently over the almost twenty years of his enrolment. As Vice Dean Coyle
pointed out, they have been willing to bend policies in his favour more than once. A more
expansive explanation of their thinking would have been helpful here. Were they concerned
about the timing of the Student’s submission of the Verification of Student Illness? Did they
want more detail or more information about the Student’s condition? It would have been helpful
to the Student and your Committee if the decision had provided more insight into how the
Academic Appeal Board assessed the Student’s request.
Related to the above, your Committee could not find the result of the Academic Appeal to be
reasonable. While he ultimately received a clear explanation in the Faculty’s response to his
Appeal and in Vice Dean Coyle’s explanations at the hearing, the process within the Faculty was
5

too skeletal to be helpful. Your Committee finds that clarity in the policies and more fulsome
explanations for decisions are important components of a fair grading and appeal system.
For the reasons outlined above the Appeal is allowed.

6

