THE UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO

IN THE MATTER OF charges of academic dishonesty made on August 16, 2012,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code ofBehavior on Academic Matters,
1995,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Act, 1971, S.O. 1971, c. 45 as amended
S.O. 1978, C. 88

BETWEEN:
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO

-and -

Date of Hearing: February 22, 2013
Tribunal :Members:
Ms. Rodica David Q.C., Barrister and Solicitor, Chair
Professor Louis Florence, Department of Management, University of Toronto Mississauga,
Faculty Panel Member
Ms. Saneea Tanvir, Student Panel Member
Appearances:
Ms. Lily Hanner, Assistant Discipline Counsel for the University, Paliare Roland Barristers
Professor David Cochrane, Department of Political Science, University of Toronto

In Attendance:
Professor Wayne Dowler, Dean's Designate, University of Toronto Scarborough
Ms. Natalie Ramtahal, Coordinator, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances
Not In Attendance:
M s . ~ ~ the Student

2

Proof of Service
1. The student had a very short lived attendance at the University of Toronto. The Affidavit
of Betty-Ann Campbell, Exhibit 1 sets out numerous and persistent efforts of personnel
of the University and the office of the counsel for the University to contact the student.
Notices of the charges and the date of the hearing were properly served in accordance
with Section 6 of the Statutory Powers Procedure Act and Parts 3 and 4 of the Rules of
Practice and Procedure of the University, as appears from Exhibits 0, P, Q, Rand S of
Ms. Campbell's Affidavit. The identity of the student was confirmed by the evidence of
Professor Chris Cochrane who identified the student from the photograph contained at
Exhibit S of Ms. Campbell's Affidavit.
2. The Tribunal proceeded in the absence of the student in accordance with Section 7 of the
Statutory Powers Procedure Act and Part 4 of the Rules of Practice and Procedure of the
University.

The Charges (Exhibit 3)
3. The University proceeded on Charges 1 and 2 which states as follows:
1)

On or about March 17, 2011, you knowingly represented the ideas of another
person as your own work, or knowingly represented the expression of the ideas
of another person as your own work, in an essay submitted in the University of
Toronto course POLA51H3 (Course"), contrary to section B.I.l(d) of the Code.

2)

On or about March 17, 2011, you knowingly submitted an essay containing
purported references to sources that had been concocted to obtain academic credit
in the Course, contrary to section B.I.1 (f) of the Code.

4. The alternative at Charge 3 was withdrawn.

The Evidence
5. Professor Chris Cochrane gave evidence on behalf of the University. He is an assistant
professor at the university in the political science department. In the spring of 2011, he
taught a course entitled POLA51H3S Critical Issues in Canadian Democracy; the course
syllabus is Exhibit 4. It is also available electronically through various means.
6. The syllabus clearly sets out the requirements of essay writing. Paragraph 2.3.5 describes
in detail the University's policy on cheating and plagiarism. This was emphasized at the
beginning of the first class in the course. Exhibit 5 sets out the Writing Guide for the
tutorial in the course and is provided to the teaching assistant who conducts the tutorial.

3

This provides a detailed explanation of what practices constitute plagiarism and are not
permitted.
7. The student is reminded in Essay Questions (exhibit 6) and the notice of a further session
at Exhibit 7 of the requirements for essay writing.
8. The student submitted her essay both in hard copy (Exhibit 8) and electronically (Exhibit
9). Exhibit 8 was examined by the teaching assistant.
9. Exhibit 9 was tested with turnitin.com, which indicated a 51 % similarity index, 3 8% from
internet sources and 51 % similar to other student papers. Professor Cochrane gave an
internet demonstration on how he used turnitin.com. Exhibit 10 is the essay highlighted
and cross-referenced to the original works.
10. Detailed evidence was given by Professor Cochrane on the similarities between the essay
submitted by the student and outside sources not referenced in the essay. The first line of
the essay is almost identical to an excerpt from studymode.com (Exhibit 11 ). As is
common, the essay was progressively plagiaristic. The first main area of concern for
Professor Cochrane appears at page 3 of Exhibits 9 and 10 - 6 highlighted lines in the
middle of the page - a 2 sentence verbatim excerpt from a paper at diffen.com (Exhibit
12) which can be found through tripatlas.com. The paper at Exhibit 12 has footnotes
which references excerpts from Wikipedia (Exhibit 13), portions of which are contained
in the student's essay. The source given by the student attributed to this excerpt is
unknown "Cathy 55", and obviously concocted. Page 4 of the essay is primarily
plagiarized and page 5 is entirely plagiarized. On page 5 the source is stated as "Collins
1999", a source that does not appear to exist and also clearly concocted. In any event,
none of the alleged sources are in the format required of citations.
11. After testing the essay through turnitin.com, Professor Cochrane attempted to meet with
the student, but was not successful and she did not attend to write the exam.

The Verdict
12. The University has presented clear and convincing evidence on both charges. It is clear
that the majority of the essay submitted by the student was plagiarized from a number of
sources, contrary to section B.1.l(d) and that she concocted sources contrary to section
B.l.3(b). The student is guilty of both charges.

The Sanction
13. The University asks for the following sanctions:

4

1) The Student shall receive a final grade of zero (0) in the course POLA5 1H3:
Critical Issues of Canadian Democracy;
2) The Student shall be immediately suspended from the University for a period
of two (2) years, beginning on the date of this Order;
3) A notation shall be made on the Student's academic record and transcript to

the effect that the Student has been sanctioned for academic misconduct for a
period of three (3) years; and,
4) That this case shall be repo1ted to the Provost for publication of a notice of the
decision of the Tribunal and the sanctions imposed, with the name of the
student withheld.
14. This was a first offence for this student. However, as stated in numerous case authorities,
it is a very serious offence, and increasing in frequency because of the easy availability of
sources through the internet. Deterrence of such behavior is critical to maintaining the
reputation of the University. The detriment to the University is obvious. There is no
evidence of any extenuating circumstances. She has ignored the entire process and chose
not to appear. In fact it appears that she has left Canada.
15. A two year suspension for a first offence has been imposed in a number of previous
cases.
16. We therefore have no hesitation in accepting the sanctions as requested by the university.

An Order with the penalty was signed by the Panel at the hearing.

Dated at Toronto, this 18th day of March, 2013.

