Case #676

   DATE: March 18, 2013
   PARTIES: University of Toronto v. O.E.
   Hearing Date(s): February 22, 2013
   Panel Members:
   Ms. Rodica David, Chair
   Professor Louis Florence, Faculty Member
   Ms. Saneea Tanvir, Student Member
   Appearances:
   Ms. Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel for the University

   David Cochraine, Professor
   In Attendance:
   Prof. Wayne Dowler, Dean's Designate

   Ms.Â Natalie Ramtahal, Coordinator, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty
   Grievances

   Trial Division â s. B.i.1(d) and s. B.i.1(f) of the Code â plagiarism
   and concocted sources â submitted essay containing plagiarized passages
   and references to concocted sources â Student did not attend hearing â
   finding of guilt â first offence â Student appeared to have left Canada
   â deterrence an important consideration â grade assignment of zero in
   the course; two-year suspension; three-year notation on transcript;
   report to Provost for publication

   Student charged with one offence under s. B.i.1(d) and one offence
   under s. B.i.1(f) . The charges related to an allegation that the
   Student submitted an essay that included references to non-existent
   sources and verbatim or nearly verbatim passages from sources that were
   not properly cited. The Student did not attend the hearing, but the
   Panel was satisfied notice requirements were met and therefore
   proceeded. The Panel found the student guilty of both offences. This
   was the Studentâs first offence. The Panel noted there was an absence
   of evidence of any extenuating circumstances and that the Student
   appeared to have left Canada and ignored the entire disciplinary
   process. The Panel observed that the offences committed by the Student
   are increasing in frequency as a result of the easy availability of
   sources through the internet and that deterrence was therefore an
   important consideration. The Panel imposed a final grade of zero in the
   course, a two-year suspension, a notation on the Studentâs transcript
   lasting three years, and ordered that the case be reported to the
   Provost for publication.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12799
