Case 1465

   DATE:

   May 6, 2024

   PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v. X.C. ("the Student")

   HEARING DATE:

   November 10, 2023, via Zoom

   PANEL MEMBERS:

   Cheryl Woodin, Chair
   Professor Paul Kingston, Faculty Panel Member
   David Lio, Student Panel Member

   APPEARANCES:
   William Webb, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg
   Rothstein LLP
   Jia Wang, Counsel for the Student, Steinburg Law

   IN ATTENDANCE:

   The Student

   HEARING SECRETARY:

   Christopher Lang, Director, Office of Appeals, Discipline and Faculty
   Grievances

   The Student was charged with two counts under section B.i.1(d) of the
   Code, for knowingly representing as their own idea an idea or
   expression of an idea of work of another in connection with an
   assignment and preliminary research paper in a course. In addition, the
   Student was charged under B.i.1(f) of the Code for submitting work
   knowing that it contained references to sources that had been
   concocted. In the alternative to each of the charges, the Student was
   charged with knowingly engaging in a form of cheating, academic
   dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or misrepresentation not otherwise
   described in the Code, contrary to section B.i.3(b) of the Code .

   The hearing proceeded on the basis of an Agreement Statement of Facts
   (‚ASF‚). The ASF detailed how the Student, as part of the course, was
   required to write several assignments and papers. The Student was
   required to submit an assignment and preliminary research paper worth
   10% and 15% of their final grade, respectively. With respect to the
   first assignment, the Professor of the course found that the Student
   had copied ideas and text in their answer near verbatim from an online
   source. The Professor subsequently reviewed the Student‚s preliminary
   research paper submission and found that the Student copied ideas and
   the expression of ideas from several sources without attribution and
   had identified sources for passages in their work that were, in fact,
   taken from other sources that were not cited. The Student admitted to
   each of the charges laid by the Provost.

   Based on the evidence provided in the ASF, the Panel was not able to
   conclude that the Student had concocted sources. The Panel noted that
   while the Student‚s work contained passages that were improperly
   attributed to different sources from which they were taken, the sources
   in the paper were not concocted but rather misrepresented. Accordingly,
   the Panel determined that the alternative charge under section B.i.3(b)
   would be more appropriate than the charge for concoction under s.
   B.i.1(f). The evidence satisfied the Tribunal that each of the charges,
   except for the charge under s. B.i.1(f) had been made out.

   In determining the appropriate sanction, the Panel considered the
   Student‚s prior academic offences as well as a Joint Submission on
   Penalty (‚JSP‚) submitted by the Student and the University. The
   Student had committed two prior academic offences in different courses,
   namely, plagiarism and unauthorized assistance. The Panel further noted
   that the Student had committed the offences at issue in this case very
   shortly after acknowledging commission of the previous offences. The
   Panel heard submissions from the Student‚s counsel regarding mitigating
   factors, including the fact that the Student had experienced a severe
   form of isolation and estrangement from society during the COVID-19
   pandemic which had a significant impact on their ability to perform as
   a student. The Panel considered the Student‚s circumstances to be a
   mitigating factor on sanction. The Panel proceeded to consider several
   sanctioning factors. With respect to character, the Panel noted that
   the Student had admitted the offences and cooperated with the
   University. With respect to the nature of the offence, the need for
   deterrence, and detriment caused to the University, the Panel reviewed
   a similar past Tribunal decision, University of Toronto and M.T . (Case
   No. 1391, December 16, 2022), for the proposition that plagiarism
   corrodes academic integrity at the University and undermines the
   relationship of trust between the University and its students. Finally,
   the Panel reviewed the penalties imposed by the Tribunal in previous
   cases involving similar facts, and concluded that the JSP, in light of
   all of the mitigating circumstances, was appropriate.

   The Panel imposed the following sanction: a final grade of zero in the
   course; a four-year suspension from the University; a five-year
   notation on the Student‚s academic record and transcript; and a report
   to the Provost for publication.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/31690
