Case #660

   DATE: February 6, 2012
   PARTIES: University of Toronto v. K.P.
   Hearing Date(s): June 27, 2011
   Panel Members:
   Mr. Andrew Pinto, Chair
   Dr. Annette Sanger, Faculty Member
   Ms. Alice Kim, Student Member
   Appearances:
   Mr. Robert Centa, Assistant Discipline Counsel for the University
   In Attendance:
   Prof. Eleanor Irwin, Dean's Designate
   Ms. Natalie Ramtahal, Coordinator, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty
   Grievances

   Trial Division â s. B.i.1(d) of Code â plagiarism â submitted
   plagiarized essays in two courses â hearing not attended â Consent to
   proceed in absence â Agreed Statement of Facts - guilty plea â finding
   of guiltÂ  â Joint Submission on Penalty â committed plagirism on three
   different occasions â Panel would have considered a more serious
   penalty âÂ  no compelling circumstances to depart from the joint
   submission - grade assignment of zero for courses; four-year
   suspension; four-year notation on transcript; report to Provost

   Student charged under s. B.i.1(d) of the Code. The charges related to
   allegations that the Student submitted plagiarized essays in two
   courses, one in the summer term and the other in the winter term of the
   same year. The Student did not attend the hearing but submitted a
   Consent to the hearing proceeding in her absence. The parties submitted
   an Agreed Statement of Facts, and the Student pleaded guilty to the
   charges. On the basis of the Agreed Statement of Facts, the panel found
   the Student guilty under s. B.i.1(d).Â  The parties also submitted a
   Joint Submission on Penalty. Although the Panel accepted the joint
   submission, it stated that the serious nature of the Student's
   misconduct and the fact that the Student had committed plagiarism on
   three different occasions could have warranted a more severe penalty
   including a recommendation for expulsion. However, the Panel did not
   find any compelling circumstances to depart from the joint submission.
   The Panel imposed a grade assignment of zero in each course, a
   four-year suspension; a four-year notation; and a report be issued to
   the Provost.

   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/13018
