UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
GOVERNING COUNCIL
Report # 408 of the Academic Appeals Committee
December 16, 2019
To the Academic Board
University of Toronto
Your Committee reports that it held a hearing on Thursday, December 12, 2019, at which the
following members were present:
Professor Stephen Waddams, Chair
Professor Paul Kingston, Faculty Governor
Mr. Laurent-Philippe Veilleux, Student Governor
Hearing Secretary:
Ms. Krista Kennedy, Administrative Clerk and Hearing Secretary, Appeals, Discipline
and Faculty Grievances
Appearances:
For the Student Appellant:
Ms. J.P. (the “Student”), by Skype
For the University of Toronto Mississauga (“UTM”)
Professor Andreas Bendlin, Acting-Dean, Academic Experience, UTM
Ms. Michelle Kraus, Assistant Registrar, Academic Standards and Petitions, UTM

This is an expedited appeal from a decision of the Academic Appeals Subcommittee of the
University of Toronto, Mississauga, dated Sept 26, 2019, dismissing an appeal from a decision of
the Committee on Standing, which refused to grant the Student’s petition for the lifting of a oneyear suspension imposed for failing to maintain a required cumulative grade point average.
The Student relied on her having made an error in selecting one of her courses which required
greater mathematical and scientific knowledge than she possessed (Solar System Astronomy), on
her parents having filed for a divorce, on her father having suffered financial reverses in 2018, and
on her mother having had cancer a few years previously. The petition was refused by the two
committees of University of Toronto, Mississauga on the basis that the Student had not established

2
special circumstances sufficient to justify an exception from the suspension, and that the petition
was not supported by documentary evidence.
The Student’s error in selecting the Astronomy course is not, standing alone, a sufficient ground
for your committee to allow this appeal. Errors in selecting courses are governed by the University
rules relating to “drop dates” which establish a date at which a student may withdraw from a course
without academic penalty. Normally this will give sufficient protection to a student who has made
an error in course selection. In exceptional cases there may be ground for permitting late
withdrawal without academic penalty, but this should be claimed directly, and normally requires
proof of compelling circumstances arising after the drop date applicable to the particular course.
Permission for late withdrawal without penalty was not, so far as we know, sought in this case.
The jurisdiction of your Committee is to “hear and consider appeals … in the application of
academic regulations and requirements …” (Terms of Reference, 2.1). Previous decisions of this
Committee have established that the Committee does not consider the merits of the underlying
University rule, but does consider whether its application has been shown to be unfair,
unreasonable, or inconsistent (see Report #368, October 15, 2013, pp 4 and 5, and Report #376,
October 14, 2014, p 4).
In this case we have to consider the application not only of the written rules governing suspensions
(exhibit B to Professor Bendlin’s submission; Academic Calendar Archive 2018-2019 University
of Toronto, Mississauga) but also the unwritten principle, found in various places in the
University, that an exception to a University rule may be justified where compelling circumstances
show that strict application of the rule would result in undue hardship. This is (in our opinion) a
very desirable principle, but it necessarily contains elements of uncertainty: judgment is required
by a University officer as to whether the circumstances put forward are sufficient to justify an
exception from the underlying rule, whether sufficient proof has been made of the circumstances,
and whether a link has been established between the circumstances and the student’s academic
performance.
These are not matters on which absolute rules can be laid down, and opinions will necessarily
differ on their application to particular cases. Such differences do not establish, in themselves,
that a particular decision has been made unfairly, unreasonably, or inconsistently. A University
decision-maker can properly take account of administrative considerations, and of fairness to other
students who may have conformed to the underlying rule. It is neither possible nor desirable to
lay down precise rules to govern the infinite variety of special circumstances that may be in issue.
While we would hesitate to lay down an absolute rule that documentary evidence is always
essential, we would accept that it is not unreasonable for a University officer, in considering
whether to make an exception to a regulation, to expect a substantial degree of precision both in
establishing the existence of special circumstances, and in establishing a link between the special
circumstances and the student’s failure to meet the requirements of the underlying regulation,
supported by such evidence as the nature of the particular case allows.

3
In this case we cannot conclude that the decisions made by the Committee on Standing, and by the
Academic Appeals Subcommittee, were unfair, unreasonable, or inconsistent. Accordingly, the
appeal is dismissed.

