Report 408

DATE:

   December 16, 2019

PARTIES:

   J.P. (the âStudentâ) v. UTM

HEARING DATE:

   December 12, 2019

Committee Members:

   Professor Stephen Waddams, Chair
   Professor Paul Kingston, Faculty Governor
   Mr. Laurent-Philippe Veilleux, Student Governor

Appearances:

For the Student Appellant:

   Ms. J.P. (the âStudentâ), by Skype

For UTM:

   Professor Andreas Bendin, Acting-Dean, Academic Experience, UTM
   Ms. Michelle Kraus, Assistant Registrar, Academic Standards and
   Petitions, UTM

   StudentÂ expeditedÂ appeal fromÂ aÂ decision of theÂ Academic Appeals
   Subcommittee of theÂ University of Toronto, Mississauga, dismissing an
   appeal from a decision ofÂ the Committee on Standing, which refused to
   grant the Studentâs petition for the lifting of a one-year suspension
   imposed for failing to maintain a required cumulative grade point
   average.Â The committeesÂ hadÂ refused the Studentâs
   petitionÂ becauseÂ sheÂ had notÂ established special circumstances
   sufficient to justify an exception from the suspension, and that the
   petition was not supported by documentaryÂ evidence.

   In dismissing the appeal, theÂ Academic
   AppealsÂ CommitteeÂ (AAC)Â considered the applicationÂ of the written
   rules governing suspensions but also the unwritten principle that an
   exception to a University rule may be justified where compelling
   circumstances show that strict application of the rule would result in
   undue hardship.Â ItÂ acceptedÂ thatÂ it is neither possible nor
   desirable to lay down precise rules to govern the variousÂ special
   circumstances that may be in issue.Â It furtherÂ commentedÂ it is not
   unreasonableÂ for a University officer to expect a substantial degree
   of precision bothÂ in establishing the existence of special
   circumstances and in establishing a link between the special
   circumstances and the studentâs failure to meet the requirements of the
   underlying regulations supported by such evidence as theÂ nature of the
   particular case allows.

   According to theÂ AAC, theÂ committeesâÂ decisions could not be said to
   be unfair, unreasonable or inconsistent.Â Appeal dismissed.
   [1]View Report

References

   1. file:///media/28846
