Case 913

DATE:

   January 15, 2018

PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v. A.P. (âthe Studentâ)

Hearing Date(s):

   October 16, 2017

Panel Members:

   Mr. Paul Michell, Chair
   Professor Dionne Aleman, Faculty Panel Member
   Mr. Ramz Aziz, Student Panel Member

Appearances:

   Ms. Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel for the University,
   Paliare Roland Barristers
   Dr. Kristi Gourlay, Manager and Academic Integrity Officer, Office of
   Student Academic Integrity, University of Toronto
   Mr. Jackson Foreman, Law Student, Downtown Legal Services, for the
   Student

In Attendance:

   The Student
   Ms. Tracey Gameiro, Associate Director, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty
   Grievances
   Mr. Sean Lourim, Technology Assistant, Office of the Governing Council
   The Student was charged with two counts of forging or falsifying an
   academic record contrary to s. B.i.3(a) of the Code ; and one count of
   engaging in academic dishonesty not otherwise described contrary to s.
   B.i.3(b) of the Code . The charges related to the Student claiming that
   she had graduated with an Honours Bachelor of Science from the
   University in an application that she submitted to a prospective
   employer, a false degree certificate she had submitted to a prospective
   employer, and in maintaining a public LinkedIn Profile in which she
   claimed to have a Doctor of Philosophy degree and an Honours Bachelor
   of Science degree granted by the University. The matter proceeded by an
   Agreed Statement of Facts (ASF) in which the Student pled guilty to the
   first two charges.Â  Upon the Panelâs acceptance of the Studentâs
   guilty pleas, the University withdrew the third charge of academic
   dishonesty not otherwise described contrary to s. B.i.3(b) of the Code
   .
   The Panel considered the Studentâs argument that the penalty of
   expulsion should be reserved for cases where there is a combination of
   a serious offence and a failure to cooperate with the discipline
   process because to do otherwise would remove the incentive for students
   to cooperate. The Panel rejected this argument and held that the
   Studentâs willingness to cooperate with the Provost, admit guilt,
   attend the hearing, agree to a statement of facts, or give evidence of
   mitigating circumstances do count for something: but they must be
   weighed and evaluated in the context of the other factors to determine
   the appropriate sanction. The effect they will have necessarily varies
   with the circumstances, as a Studentâs cooperation is just one of Mr.
   C. [Case No. 1976/77-3; Nov. 5, 1976] factors to consider. The Panel
   noted that the penalty of expulsion has been imposed in a number of
   cases where students had cooperated with the process and shown remorse
   (e.g. M.K . [Case No. 491, November 5, 2008] where the mitigating
   circumstances were insufficient to outweigh the other Mr. C. factors;
   and A.L. [Case No. 590; August 10, 2010] at para. 18 where the penalty
   of expulsion was seen as consistent with other forgery cases). Where a
   penalty other than expulsion has been handed down in forgery cases, it
   has been where there has been a Joint Submission on Penalty or where a
   student has already received a degree (e.g. S.D. [Case 13 No. 406; May
   1, 2007]).
   The Panel then applied the Mr. C. factors to the Studentâs
   circumstances: (1) The offences committed in this case were serious,
   and that the forgery of a degree, in particular, is a most serious
   offence; (2) The offences were deliberate, which generally justify
   expulsion ( C.A. [Case No. 828; April 11, 2016] at para. 19); (3) the
   offences show the most serious lack of academic and personal integrity,
   and forgery in particular is often difficult to detect, which make
   general deterrence a factor to weigh heavily in favour of expulsion;
   (4) The offences cause harm to the reputation of the University and
   undermine the trust the employers have in the University, and other
   students who obtain legitimate degrees who must compete with those who
   falsely claim to hold degrees, which adds further weight in favour of
   expulsion; (5) Though the Student had admitted guilt, she tended to
   deflect responsibility for her actions during cross examination as well
   her letter to the prospective employer in which she admitted to lying
   about her qualifications failed to mention the forged degree
   certificate, so the mitigating weight is limited; (6) for specific
   deterrence, or the likelihood of reoffending, though these were the
   Studentâs first offence, they were calculated; (7) the Panel found that
   the extenuating circumstances of supporting her family of four siblings
   after her father had a heart attack, the long commute, and the
   Studentâs remorse to be extenuating circumstances but were given little
   weight given that it was apparent that the Student had not fully
   appreciated the extent of her misconduct through her actions in the
   hearing.Â  After weighing all of these factors, the majority of the
   Panel conceded that if there had only been one offence, a lesser
   penalty may have been appropriate but given the seriousness of the
   conduct here, the first three factors outweighed the mitigating factors
   and a penalty of expulsion was appropriate.Â  The Panel ordered: (a)a
   recommendation that the Student be expelled from the University; (b) a
   suspension from the University for up to five years from the date of
   the order, and that a corresponding notation be placed on her
   transcript; and (c) that that case be reported to the Provost for
   publication.
   Dissent: The Student Panel Member dissented on the decision as to
   penalty and would have awarded a five-year suspension instead of an
   expulsion. The Student Panel Member reached this outcome because he
   accorded a different weight to the mitigating factors in the majorityâs
   Mr. C. analysis. In particular, he found that a five-year suspension
   carried with it sufficient stigma to achieve general deterrence while
   at the same time, it would incentivize other students to cooperate with
   the discipline process. The Student Panel Member found that the
   Studentâs circumstances were at the extreme end of extenuating
   circumstances a student can experience: a family tragedy, the
   disruption of her education, unexpected financial responsibility, and a
   misrepresentation to fulfill said responsibility - notably one that she
   could not easily rectify without harm to her loved ones. With more
   weight is allotted to the extenuating circumstances, the dissenting
   member of the Panel ordered a five-year suspension.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12963
