Case #554

   DATE: October 7, 2009
   PARTIES: University of Toronto v. D.S.
   Hearing Date(s): August 25, 2009
   Panel Members:
   Ms. Lisa Brownstone, Chair
   Prof. Nick Cheng, Faculty Member
   Ms. Elena Kuzmin, Student Member
   Appearances:
   Mr. Robert Centa, Assistant Discipline Counsel for the University
   Ms. Betty-Ann Campbell, Law Clerk, Palaire Roland
   Dr. Tamara Jones, Academic Integrity Officer

   Not in Attendance:
   The Student

   Trial Division ‚ s. B.i.1(d) of Code ‚ plagiarism ‚ course work ‚
   hearing not attended ‚ reasonable notice of hearing ‚ see Policy on
   Official Correspondence with Students and Statutory Powers Procedure
   Act ‚ paper plagiarized from internet ‚ ‚How Not To Plagiarize‚ rules
   violated ‚ finding of guilt ‚ previous academic offence ‚
   non-cooperation ‚ high likelihood of repetition of offence ‚ see case
   of Mr. S.B. and case of Mr. M.H.H. ‚ grade assignment of zero for
   course; three-year suspension; four-year notation; and report to
   Provost

   Student charged under s. B.i.1(d) , and alternatively, under s.
   B.i.3(b) of the Code . The charges related to allegations that the
   Student submitted an essay plagiarized from internet and other sources.
   The Student did not attend the Hearing and did not respond to the
   charges. The Panel considered the University‚s attempts to contact the
   Student, the University‚s Policy on Official Correspondence with
   Students , and the relevant provisions of the Statutory Powers
   Procedure Act and found that the University had provided reasonable
   notice to the Student, and that the Student had chosen not to respond
   to or the charges. The Hearing proceeded in the Student‚s absence. The
   Panel considered the evidence of the course Professor and a review of
   the research paper against the alleged internet source of the
   plagiarism. The Panel found that the volume and order of unattributed
   ideas presented in the Student‚s paper demonstrated that the Student
   had plagiarized ideas from a website. The Panel considered the handout
   ‚How Not To Plagiarize‚ which accompanied the assignment and found that
   the Student had violated these rules contained therein. The Panel found
   the Student guilty of the offence under s. B.i.1(d) of the Code . The
   Panel considered the Student‚s previous academic offence and found that
   the likelihood of repetition was fairly high, in that the second
   offence had occurred within 6 months of the first sanction. The Panel
   found that there was no evidence of any mitigating circumstances, given
   that the student had chosen not to participate in the process. The
   Panel considered the cases of Mr. S.B. and Mr. M.H.H. and found that a
   three-year suspension was warranted. The Panel imposed a mark of zero
   in the course; a three-year suspension; a four-year notation on the
   Student‚s academic record and transcript; and that a report be issued
   to the Provost.

   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12997
