UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
GOVERNING COUNCIL
Report # 394 of the Academic Appeals Committee
February 12, 2018
To the Academic Board
University of Toronto.
Your Committee reports that it held a hearing on Monday, January 15, 2018, at which the
following members were present:
Professor Andrew Green (Chair)
Professor Nicholas Terpstra, Faculty Governor
Mr. Twesh Upadhyaya, Student Governor
Hearing Secretary:
Mr. Chris Lang, Director, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances
Appearances:
For the Student Appellant:
Mr. Y.L. (the “Student”)
For The Leslie Dan Faculty of Pharmacy:
Mr. Robert A. Centa, Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenbert Rothstein LLP
Ms. Emily Home, Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenbert Rothstein LLP
Ms. Brenda Thrush, Registrar, The Leslie Dan Faculty of Pharmacy
Professor Jamie Kellar, The Leslie Dan Faculty of Pharmacy
The Appeal
The Student appeals a decision of the Committee of Appeals of the Leslie Dan Faculty of
Pharmacy (the “Committee of Appeals”) dated September 26, 2017 (the “Decision”). In the
Decision, the Committee of Appeals dismissed an appeal by the Student from a decision to deny
his petition to write a make-up supplemental examination in PHM206H1 Medication Therapy
Management 3 (the “Course”). The Student had based his appeal to the Committee of Appeals
on the grounds that his exam had not been assessed fairly and that he had had health issues. He
did not pursue the health grounds in his appeal to this Committee.
As the Student required an expedited response in order to re-take PHM206 if he lost this appeal,
we issued a decision shortly following the hearing stating that the appeal was dismissed with
reasons to follow. This decision provides those reasons.

2

The Facts
In Winter 2017, the Student was in his second year of the Doctor of Pharmacy program (the
“Program’) and was enrolled in the Course. Second year students are required to pass PHM206,
among other courses, in order to proceed to third year. PHM206 is part of a series of courses
designed to provide students with the skills necessary to deal with real-life situations
encountered by pharmacists. PHM206 involves labs in which students are faced with a
“standardized patient” (an “SP”) who portrays someone with a particular set of concerns and
symptoms. The SPs are provided generalized training as patients as well as training prior to their
roles in particular labs. The Course involved labs during the term as well as four labs on the
final exam.
The Student failed the Course along with two other courses in Winter 2017. Students must
obtain an annual grade point average of at least 1.70 (C-) and at least 60% in each course in order
to advance to the next year. However, if a student receives a grade of D or F but has an annual
grade point average of at least 1.70, they are offered the opportunity to write a supplemental
exam for that course on a pass/fail basis. The student must pass the supplemental exam to
proceed to the next year. The Student had the requisite grade point average and therefore was
offered the opportunity to write supplemental exams for all three courses.
The Student wrote the three supplemental exams in the summer of 2017. He passed two of the
supplemental exams (Pharmacotherapy 4 and Medication Therapy Management 2) but failed the
supplemental exam for the Course. To pass the supplemental exam for the Course, the Student
had to pass three of four lab stations. He passed two stations but failed two stations: the best
possible medical history documentation and a diabetic foot infection patient encounter. For the
patient encounter, which forms the basis for the Student’s appeal, the Student needed 61 points
out of 100 to pass. The points come from two equally weighted assessments of the encounter.
The Student obtained 3 out of 5 on the Global Assessment (or 30 out of 50) but only 13 out of 24
on the Clinical Checklist (or 27 out of 50). The notes of the assessor for the Clinical Checklist
indicates that the Student, among other things, failed to gather recent hospital medical history
and the prescription and non-prescription medical history, to confirm the duration of the
antibiotic therapy the patient received in hospital, to review the home medications and to consult
on non-pharmaceutical interventions. As a result, the Student failed the supplemental exam as he
obtained only 57 points out of 100.
The Faculty informed the Student in August 2017 that as a result of the failure of the
supplemental exam in the Course, he was required to repeat PHM206H in Winter 2018 before he
could proceed to the third year of the Program. The Student petitioned the failure to the subcommittee of the Committee on Academic Standing and requested the opportunity to write a
make-up supplemental exam. When that petition was denied, the Student appealed the denial to
the Committee of Appeals.
As mentioned, the Student had two grounds before the Committee of Appeals– one medical that
he subsequently dropped and one on supplemental exam process/evaluation. The Student argued

3

that the supplemental exam process was unfair for two reasons. First, the SP did not provide the
Student with the prescription at the start of the patient encounter. The Student argued the SP
should have provided the prescription at the outset of the encounters and that SPs had done so
routinely in all previous labs and exams in the Course. Second, the Student asserted that the
assessor unfairly deducted points for missing a particular set of questions even though the
Student states he clearly verbalized these questions. He argued that the process was unfair
because the evaluation was unrecorded and therefore there was no way for him to prove such a
mistake occurred.
The Faculty in its written response to these concerns prior to the Decision argued that the SP
made the opening statement: “Hi, I just came from the hospital and I have to get this antibiotic
filled as soon as possible.” The Faculty argued that “Based on what students were taught
throughout the course, Mr. L should have known to ask the SP for the prescription if she did
not offer it to him at the start of the counselling session.” Further, the Faculty argued that while
these patient encounter exams are not recorded, “the Clinical Instructors who were responsible
for assessing students’ performance on the supplemental exam were made aware this was a “high
stakes” examination and were instructed to ensure that they accurately documented the
counselling sessions.”

•

Following a hearing, the Committee of Appeals issued the Decision dismissing the Student’s
appeal. It noted “We carefully reviewed and considered the information you provided and we
are sympathetic to your circumstances; however, we strongly believe that it is important for you
to build a stronger base in this foundational Year 2 course before proceeding to Year 3 of the
program.” The Committee of Appeals therefore informed the Student that he would not be
permitted to proceed to his third year until he had successfully completed PHM206.
The Student appeals this Decision to your Committee.
Decision
The Committee’s task is to decide whether the Decision denying the Student’s petition to write a
make-up supplemental examination is reasonable.
The Student argued that these patient encounters always follow the same pattern. The student
introduces himself or herself and then the SP makes an opening statement and provides the
prescription if there is one. The Student argued that the failure by the SP to provide him with a
prescription at the beginning of the exam led the Student to be confused and therefore to fail the
exam. He was not asking for a re-grade of the exam as that would only relate to errors in adding
up the total score. Instead, because of the SP’s error, he was seeking a make-up supplemental
exam. It should be noted at the outset that both sides agree that the SP did not provide the
prescription immediately to the Student at the beginning of the supplemental exam and that the
Student did not ask for the prescription at the beginning of the exam. Instead the Student only
asked for the name of the medication in the opening encounter and when he did ask for the
prescription later in the exam, the SP immediately handed it over. The point in dispute is whether
the SP erred in not handing over the prescription immediately at the start of the encounter,
thereby making the exam process and result unfair.

4

Your Committee finds that the Decision denying the Student’s petition for a make-up
supplemental exam was reasonable. According to the course description and the Faculty, the
Course was designed to teach students how to deal with real-life situations through “simulated
practice-based interactions to enhance their patient-care skills”. To this end, SPs are given
explicit instructions for some parts of the interaction (such as their opening line) but for the rest
of the interaction are to react to the situation as it develops. In this case, the SP’s background
material for the supplemental exam contained considerable information about the patient the SP
was to portray including the opening line “Hi, I just came from the hospital and I have to get this
antibiotic filled as soon as possible.” The background material did not provide the SP with any
instructions about handing over the prescription, either to hand it over immediately or to hold it
back. The SP could react to whatever happened in the interaction and the Student needed to
assess the situation and react to the SP.
Further, assessors for such exams are instructed to note if the SP fails to do something that she is
supposed to do during the exam. In the case of the Student’s exam, for example, the assessor
noted that the SP failed to mention blood sugar levels as she was supposed to do according to the
background material. The assessor made no comment on the SP not providing the prescription
immediately, although she did note that the Student “asked what is the name of the antibiotics
instead of asking for Rx.” Given the SP’s instructions and the notes of the assessor, it seems
reasonable to conclude that the SP was not directly instructed to provide the Student with the
prescription nor was it out of the ordinary for the SP not to hand it over immediately without
being asked.
In addition, following the supplemental exam, the Student emailed Professor Jamie Kellar, who
had taught the Course. The Student asked whether the SP had been instructed not to provide the
prescription at the beginning of the lab. Professor Kellar replied that the supplemental exam was
a “clinical simulation” which “will play out differently with each student based on the questions
posed and comments made. The SP’s will interact with the student in a way consistent with how
the student asks the questions. The SPs do work off of a script that outlines the key information.
In this case, the SPs were not instructed to withhold the prescription, nor were they instructed to
give it voluntarily – they react based on the interview itself i.e. the questions asked by the
student.” This email response is consistent with the other evidence relating to the SP provided
by the Faculty.
To support his argument that the SP should have provided the prescription as soon as she made
her opening statement, the Student provided an email exchange relating to this issue. The
Student emailed Professor Marie Rocchi at the Faculty asking if an SP makes an opening
statement about needing to get ““this antibiotic filled as soon as possible” but fails to voluntarily
provide a prescription to a student in the beginning of the interaction until asked but does so for
other students” would it be an error by the SP. Professor Rocchi replied she would “consider this
an error IF the SP was asked to provide the Rx.” She copied Greg Morris who manages the SP
service for the University, who replied stating “I agree with Marie. In cases where the SP enters
with a prescription, they immediately hand it to the pharmacist when they say their opening line.
I am not aware of an example where the SP would not immediately hand over the Rx (however,

5

that’s not to say such a case doesn’t exist). If the written case instructs the SP to not immediately
hand over the Rx, the SP would follow these instructions.” This email exchange is at best
equivocal but seems more in support of the Faculty’s position.
Further in his reply submissions for this appeal, the Student provided an anonymous note on
plain paper stating that given the SP referred to “this antibiotic” in her opening statement, he or
she would “assume that they would then hand me a prescription, a prescription bottle or a piece
of paper with the name of the antibiotic written on it. Otherwise the wording of the opening line
doesn’t make sense. In my two years of being an assessor, I have not seen an example where the
SP did not immediately hand over the prescription to the student.” The note was signed
“Pharmacist mock OSCE assessor for PharmAchieve“. The Student stated at the hearing that the
note was not from someone connected with the Course but from someone who had been
involved in assessing Pharmacy licensing exams. As the note is anonymous and in any event by
someone not connected to the Course, the Committee gave this note no weight.
In terms of the recording of the supplemental exam, the Faculty does not record these patient
encounter exams. Instead they have trained assessors who provide a written assessment of the
interactions including any anomalies. Your Committee finds that there was no unfairness to the
Student in how this policy choice was applied in his circumstances.
As a result, your Committee finds that the Decision was reasonable in the circumstances. As
noted by counsel, the Committee of Appeals’ reasons could have been more fulsome. However,
there is ample evidence in the record that the Student would have known the arguments on which
the Decision was based.
The appeal is dismissed.

