Report #394

   DATE: February 12, 2018
   PARTIES: Y.L. (âthe Studentâ) v. the Leslie Dan Faculty of Pharmacy
   (the âFacultyâ)
   Hearing Date(s):Â  January 15, 2018
   Committee Members:
   Professor Andrew Green (Chair)
   Professor Nicholas Terpstra, Faculty Governor
   Mr. Twesh Upadhyaya, Student Governor
   Secretary:
   Mr. Christopher Lang, Director, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty
   Grievances
   Appearances:
   For the Student Appellant:
   Y.L. (the Student)
   For the Leslie Dan Faculty of Pharmacy:
   Mr. Robert A. Centa, Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenbert Rothstein LLP
   Ms. Emily Home, Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenbert Rothstein LLP
   Ms. Brenda Thrush, Registrar, The Leslie Dan Faculty of Pharmacy
   Professor Jamie Kellar, The Leslie Dan Faculty of Pharmacy
   UT â Leslie Dan Faculty of Pharmacy â petition to re-write a
   supplemental exam â fair assessment of exam â appeal dismissed
   Student appeal from a decision of the Committee of Appeals of the
   Faculty which dismissed his petition to write a second supplemental
   examination in PHM 206 (the âCourseâ). The Student had failed the
   Course, and was provided with the opportunity to write a supplemental
   exam. The Student failed this supplemental exam, and was told that he
   would be required to take the Course again before he could advance to
   the next year in his doctoral program.Â  The Student appealed this
   decision and petitioned the Committee of Appeals for the opportunity to
   write another supplemental exam on the basis that his first
   supplemental exam process was unfair. The Committee of Appeals denied
   this petition.
   In his appeal, the Student argued that the supplemental exam process
   was unfair because the mock-patient had not provided the Student with a
   prescription at the start of the encounter, the way past examinations
   had proceeded. The Student also argued that the assessor unfairly
   deducted points for missing a particular set of questions even though
   the Student believed that he had asked those questions and since the
   interview was not recorded, he was deprived of the opportunity to prove
   this alleged mistake. The Committee found that the decision to deny the
   second supplemental exam was reasonable because the Course was designed
   to teach students real life patient skills, so the Student should have
   been prepared to react to any deviation from past mock-interviews.
   Second, the patient had not been instructed by the Course instructor to
   hand over a prescription without being asked for it, so she had not
   failed to do anything that she was supposed to do. Third, supplemental
   exams involve clinical situations that are meant to be varied. The
   Facultyâs policy not to record the exams was not considered to be
   unfair, and their decision to deny the Student the opportunity to write
   yet another supplemental exam was reasonable in the circumstances.
   Appeal dismissed.
   [1]View Report

References

   1. file:///media/12639
