Report #400

   DATE: November 15, 2018
   PARTIES: Mr. S.T. (the âStudentâ) v. Faculty of Arts and Science
   Hearing Date(s):Â  Â October 24, 2018
   Committee Members:
   Professor Hamish Stewart, Senior Chair
   Professor Andrea Sass-Kortsak, Faculty Governor
   Ms. Susan Froom, Student Governor
   Hearing Secretary:
   Christopher Lang, Director, Office of the Appeals, Discipline Faculty
   Grievances
   Appearances:
   For the Student:
   The Student
   For the Faculty of Arts and Sciences:
   Professor Melanie Woodin, Associate Dean, Undergraduate Issues and
   Academic Planning
   Mr. Thomas MacKay, Director, Faculty Governance & Curriculum Services
   The Student appeals a decision of the Academic Appeals Board of the
   Faculty of Arts and Science which held that the Student was not
   entitled to a late withdrawal without academic penalty in a course in
   the winter of 2017. The Student was performing well in the course.
   However, mid-way through the term he had an operation and his recovery
   took an unexpected turn for the worse by the time he had to write his
   final exam.Â  The Student wrote the exam and ultimately failed the
   course, later petitioning the Faculty for permission for late
   withdrawal without academic penalty due to his unexpected deterioration
   in his medical condition.Â  Though the Faculty dismissed the Studentâs
   petition and appeals, the Committee found that when a student becomes
   unexpectedly ill after the âdrop dateâ or before or during an
   examination they should work out an appropriate accommodation with the
   Registrar. At that point, a number of options can be explored â such as
   the opportunity to rewrite the examination or a timely petition for
   late withdrawal without academic penalty.Â  In this case, the Committee
   found that the Studentâs unexpected deterioration of his medical
   condition may have impaired his abilities to make proper decisions
   about his situation, which justifies the extraordinary remedy of
   allowing for late withdrawal without academic penalty.Â  Appeal
   allowed.
   [1]View Report

References

   1. file:///media/12695
