1
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
THE GOVERNING COUNCIL
Report #400 of the Academic Appeals Committee
November 15, 2018
To the Academic Board
University of Toronto.
Your Committee reports that it held a hearing on Wednesday, October 24, 2018 at which the
following members were present:
Professor Hamish Stewart, Senior Chair
Professor Andrea Sass-Kortsak, Faculty Governor
Ms. Susan Froom, Student Governor
Hearing Secretary:
Mr. Christopher Lang, Director, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances
Appearances:
For the Student Appellant:
Mr. S.T. (“the Student”)
For the Faculty of Arts and Science:
Professor Melanie Woodin, Associate Dean, Undergraduate Issues and Academic Planning
Mr. Thomas MacKay, Director, Faculty Governance & Curriculum Services
The Appeal
The Student appeals from a decision of the Academic Appeals Board of the Faculty of Arts and Science,
dismissing his appeal from a decision of the Committee on Standing, dismissing his appeal from a
decision of the Faculty which dismissed his petition for late withdrawal without academic penalty
from CSC108, Winter 2017.
The appeal is allowed and the Student is granted late withdrawal without academic penalty.

Procedural Rulings
The Student requested a closed hearing on the basis that an open hearing might reveal certain
personal financial details which he did not wish to become public. Your Chair dismissed this request.
The financial details in question, though not very specific, do help to explain some aspects of the
Student’s situation during the Winter 2017 term. But they are for the most part irrelevant to your
Committee’s decision and are not revealed in this decision. Your Chair was in any event not satisfied

2
that the danger that these details might be revealed would rebut the presumption in favour of an
open hearing.
The Student offered a piece of new evidence at the hearing. As noted below, your Chair received this
evidence with the consent of the Faculty.

Overview of the Facts
The Student graduated from the University with an Honours BSc in 2009. In the Winter 2017 term,
he returned to the University to pursue a second undergraduate degree and enrolled in Introduction
to Computer Programming (CSC108H1S) Early in the term, he was diagnosed with a hernia. He had
surgery to repair the hernia on February 22, 2017, during Reading Week, and resumed attending
classes the following week. The applicable “drop date” for CSC108 was March 13, 2017. In late March
and early April, the Student found that his “post-operative condition changes from manageable to an
increasing discomfort and pain”. He wrote the examination for CSC108 in April 2017. It can be
inferred that the Student performed very poorly on the examination because, despite having done
very well on the term work, the Student failed the course.
In August 2017, the Student petitioned the Faculty for late withdrawal without academic penalty
from CSC108. The petition was dismissed. The Student’s subsequent appeals to the Committee on
Standing and to the Academic Appeals Board were dismissed. In its letter advising the Student of its
decision, the Board stated:
You acknowledge that you received very clear advice from your doctors that you needed at
least six weeks off from school and from work in order to recover from your operation. …
Your medical circumstances did not affect your mental state and decision-making capacities
about your studies. You chose to remain in the course despite the medical advice that you
received.
The letter to the Student states that its decision is “final.” That is true as far as proceedings within the
Faculty were concerned, but the Student did have a further right of appeal to your Committee. The
Policy on Academic Appeals Within Divisions, section 4.i, clearly states:
Divisional processes should require that any student whose appeal has been denied must be
advised of a further right to appeal of the decision of the divisional appeals committee to the
Academic Appeals Committee of the Academic Board of Governing Council. The existence of
this right of appeal should be clearly communicated, in writing to students for whom the
appeal was denied at the divisional level.
Accordingly, the Board’s letter to the Student should have advised him of his right to appeal to your
Committee. Your Committee trusts that this oversight will not be repeated.
The Student appeals to your Committee.

Decision
The Student’s written and oral submissions emphasized the ways in which his post-operative
condition, particularly the unexpected worsening of his condition in late March and early April 2017,

3
affected his performance on the final examination. The Student appeared to be under the impression
that the Faculty did not accept this explanation for his failure. That is not the case. The Faculty has
never contested the fact that the Student’s medical condition affected his performance on the final
examination.
On the other hand, the Faculty appears to have been operating under a misapprehension about the
Student’s condition following the surgery. It is unclear on what basis the Board concluded that the
Student had been advised to take six weeks off following the surgery. There is nothing in the material
received by your Committee to support that conclusion. (There is a retrospective diagnosis from one
of the Student’s family doctors that he was “significantly impaired” between February 2 and April 30,
2017, but your Committee notes that the Student’s surgeon, again retrospectively, diagnoses him as
“severely” impaired from February 22 to March 8, and only “moderately” impaired thereafter. The
surgeon nowhere states that he advised the Student to take six weeks off.) At the hearing, the Student
provided your Committee with a hospital brochure titled “Instructions for Care Following Hernia
Repair” that he was given following the surgery. This brochure should have been introduced into the
proceedings at a much earlier stage; however, as the Faculty did not object, your Chair admitted it.
The brochure does not come close to suggesting that a patient should take six weeks off following
hernia repair; to the contrary, it advises that the patient can “resume light activity” as soon as the day
following the surgery. It advises that the patient “should not lift anything heavier than 5 to 10 pounds
for 4 to 6 weeks” and should return for a follow-up appointment in 6 weeks. The inference your
Committee draws from this brochure is that the Student and his surgeon reasonably expected that
he would he able to resume his studies following Reading Week—as indeed he did. This is not a case
where the Student chose to proceed with course work in the face of medical advice to the contrary;
it is a case where the Student’s medical condition, manageable before the drop date, unexpectedly
worsened after the drop date.
A student who becomes unexpectedly ill after the “drop date” or before or during an examination
should contact his or her college Registrar to work out an accommodation, if possible and
appropriate. So, when the Student’s condition unexpectedly worsened in late March or early April,
he should have contacted the Woodsworth College Registrar. (At the hearing, the Student made a
number of complaints about his Registrar’s office. Your Committee is not in a position to decide
whether those complaints were justified in his case, but observes that, in its experience, the
University’s registrars normally provide efficient, professional, and compassionate services.) At that
point, a number of options could have been explored: for example, a deferred examination, an
opportunity to rewrite the examination, or a timely petition for late withdrawal without academic
penalty. However, your Committee finds that this is one of those rare cases where the Student’s
ability to make decisions about how to handle his situation was impaired by an unexpected
deterioration in his medical condition, such that he was unable to properly consider his options. This
is not one of those cases where the Faculty’s entirely justified concern about a student “rolling the
dice” by choosing to write an examination, believing that they later have an option not seek late
withdrawal, applies. His failure to seek timely advice from his Registrar is understandable and the
remedy he would likely have been granted had he sought it at the time is granted now.

