Case 1223

FILE:

   Case # 1223 (2022-2023)

DATE:

   October 18, 2022

PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v. P.F. (âthe Studentâ)

HEARING DATE(S):

   July 20, 2022, via Zoom

PANEL MEMBERS:

   Simon Clements, Chair

   Professor Gabriele D'Eleuterio, Faculty Panel Member

   Dylan Dingwell, Student Panel Member

APPEARANCES:

   William Webb, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg
   Rothstein LLP

Not in attendance:

   The Student

HEARING SECRETARY:

   Christopher Lang, Director, Office of Appeals, Discipline and Faculty
   Grievances

   The Student was charged with three counts of misconduct under section
   B.i.1(b) of the Code for knowingly obtaining unauthorized assistance in
   connection with two final exams and one assignment.Â  Alternatively,
   they were charged with three counts of misconduct under section
   B.i.1(d) of the Code forÂ knowingly representing as their own an idea
   or expression of an idea or work of another in the final exams and an
   assignment. In the further alternative, they were charged under section
   B.i.3(b) of the Code with three counts of knowingly engaging in a form
   of cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or
   misrepresentation not otherwise described in the Code to obtain
   academic credit or other academic advantage in connection with the
   exams and assignment.

   The Student did not attend the hearing, nor were they represented. The
   University established that numerous attempts were made to provide the
   Student with notice. The Â Panel concluded that the Student was given
   reasonable notice of the hearing in compliance with the requirements of
   sections 6 and 7 of the Statutory Powers Procedure Act , rules 9 and 17
   of the University Tribunalâs Rules of Practice and Procedure , as well
   as the Universityâs Policy on Official Correspondence with Students .
   The Panel proceeded to hear the case on its merits in the absence of
   the Student.

   The Panel found the Student guilty of committing both offences under
   section B.i.1(b) of the Code in relation to the exams and the offence
   under section B.i.1(d)Â of the Code regarding the assignment. Regarding
   the exams, the Panel considered evidence establishing that the Student
   had used Chegg.com and that several questions and answers had been
   posted on Chegg.com during the exam. The University requested that
   Chegg conduct an investigation, which revealed similarities between the
   Studentâs answers and the Chegg.com answers. The Panel commented that
   inference could be drawn from the Chegg data that during one of the
   exams the Student had obtained unauthorized assistance from posts made
   on Chegg.com. The Panel was also persuaded that the Student had
   obtained unauthorized assistance from an answer on Chegg.com to
   complete the exam, given the Studentâs admission to the Dean that they
   had posted the questions and viewed answers on Chegg.com. As for the
   assignment, the University established that a software program called
   Measure of Software Similarity (âMossâ) had detected substantial
   similarities between the Student's code and the code submitted by
   another studentÂ who had taken the course the previous year. According
   to the reviewing professor, it was highly unlikely that the
   similarities between the assignments were coincidental. The Student had
   also signed an admission form in which they admitted they were guilty
   of plagiarism. The Panel found the Student guilty of plagiarism based
   on this admission.

   Regarding sanction, the Panel noted that there was a serious risk that
   the Student would offend again; that the Student had committed a prior
   academic offence; and that the Studentâs conduct following the meeting
   with the Deanâs Designate after their first academic offence
   demonstrated an escalation of the dishonesty that the Student was
   prepared to engage in. Further, the Panel observed that two of the
   offences were committed in the early months of the pandemic, which was
   an extenuating circumstance, and that the Student had exploited unique
   circumstances brought about by the pandemic to gain an advantage. The
   Panel also noted that in todayâs online world, it is easy for students
   to find new ways to access unauthorized assistance, and so any sanction
   must denounce cheating on tests and deter others in order to protect
   the academic integrity of the University. It also commented that
   Students must understand that this kind of misconduct will have serious
   repercussions so that they will be dissuaded from the temptation to
   consider cheating.

   The Panel imposed the following sanctions: a grade of zero in the
   courses; a four-year suspension; a notation on the Student's transcript
   until their graduation; and a report to the Provost for publication .
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/30725
