Case 540

DATE:

   May 4, 2009

PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v. A. A-A.

Hearing Date(s):

   April 14, 2009

Panel Members:

   Ms. Roslyn M. Tsao, Chair
   Professor Louis Florence, Faculty Panel Member
   Ms. Elena Kuzmin, Student Panel Member

Appearances:

   Mr. R. Centa, Assistant Discipline Counsel, for the University
   No one appearing for the Student

In Attendance:

   Ms. Lucy Gaspini, Academic Affairs Office, UTM

   Student charged under s. B.i.1(a), and alternatively, s. B.i.3(b) of
   the Code. The charges related to allegations that the Student submitted
   a forged Letter of Permission for a Visiting Student Admission
   Application. The Student did not attend the Hearing and did not respond
   to the charges. The Panel considered whether reasonable notice of the
   Hearing had been provided pursuant to the Code and the Statutory Powers
   Procedure Act, particularly s.6(3)(b). The Panel considered the fact
   that none of the emails sent to the Student were returned to the sender
   and that his step-sister confirmed his email address. The Panel found
   that the Student had received or ought to have received reasonable
   notice of the charges and Notice of the Hearing. The failure of the
   Student to have reviewed his emails or check his ROSI mailing address
   did not negate the Universityâs efforts to effect proper service. The
   Hearing proceeded without the Student. According to the evidence
   submitted by the University, the Student, when confronted with the
   allegations, claimed that he did not have time to get the required
   letter from his home university so he made up the letter and forged a
   signature. The University tendered an affidavit sworn by the Professor
   at the Studentâs home university, whose name and purported signature
   appeared on the letter. The Panel accepted the evidence, noting that
   there was no prejudice to the Student because he was not in attendance
   at the Hearing and therefore did not require the opportunity to
   cross-examine the Professor. The Professor confirmed that she did not
   write or sign the letter that contained her allegedly forged signature.
   Based on the evidence submitted by the University, the Panel found that
   the Student was guilty of the charges. The Panel noted that the Student
   had been previously found guilty of forgery by the University and
   served a one year suspension; that the Student had had modest success
   at the University; and that the Student had not responded to the
   charges nor appeared at the Hearing. The Panel found that the Student
   may have caused a diversion of resources and could have denied other
   worthy candidates from being accepted. The Panel recommended to the
   President, further to s. C.ii.(b)(i) of the Code, that the Student be
   expelled from the University; and that a permanent notation be placed
   on the Studentâs academic record indicating that he had been expelled
   for academic misconduct.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12735
