Case #04-05-07

   Decision written in letter format (LF)
   DATE: May 16, 2005
   PARTIES: University of Toronto v. Mr. A. F. (the Student)
   Hearing Date(s): May 12, 2005
   Panel Members:
   information not available
   Appearances:
   information not available
   Trial Division - s. B.i.3(a) of Code â forged academic records â forged
   transcript misrepresenting marks and GPA â Agreed Statement of Facts â
   guilty plea â repetition of offence unlikely due to period of anguish
   between commission of offence and hearing â no premeditation â scope of
   offence contained - extenuating circumstances influenced severity of
   sanction - University submission on penalty accepted - five-year
   suspension; five-year notation; and report to Provost
   Student charged with one offence under s. B.i.3(a), and alternatively,
   with two offences under s. B.i.3(b) of the Code. The charges related to
   allegations that the Student submitted a document purporting to be a
   transcript, which altered marks received from the University and
   misrepresented his grade point averages. The Panel submitted an Agreed
   Statement of Facts. The Student pleaded guilty to the charge under s.
   B.i.3(a) of the Code. The Panel accepted the guilty plea. The Panel
   found that despite the Studentâs fine qualities and valued membership
   in his family, his dishonest conduct did not speak well of him and that
   the factor of character was not highly significant in the case. The
   Panel found that the two years between the commission of the offence
   and the hearing had caused enough anguish to the Student and that he
   was unlikely to repeat the offence. The Panel observed that the nature
   of the offence was serious but that it was done without premeditation
   or careful and deliberate planning, and was relatively contained in its
   scope. The Panel found that the Universityâs recommended Sanction met
   the purpose of deterring others from similar conduct. The Panel found
   that the evidence of extenuating circumstances did not excuse the
   Studentâs dishonesty but that they did have some bearing on the
   severity of the sanction. The Panel accepted the Universityâs
   submission on sanction and imposed a five-year suspension; a five-year
   notation; and that a report be issued to the Provost.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12722
