THE UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
IN THE MATTER OF charges of academic dishonesty filed on July 8, 2015,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters, 1995,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Act, 1971, S.O. 1971, c. 56 as amended S.O. 1978,
C. 88

BETWEEN:
UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO

- and -

REASONS FOR DECISION

Hearing Date: November 26, 2015
Members of the Panel:
Ms. Johanna Braden, Barrister and Solicitor, Chair
Professor Michael Evans, Faculty Panel Member
Ms. Jenna Jacobson, Student Panel Member
Appearances:
Mr. Robert Centa, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland, Barristers
Ms. Lauren Pearce, Student-at-law, Paliare Roland, Barristers
Professor John Britton, Professor Emeritus, Dean's Designate, Office of Student
Academic Integrity, Faculty of Arts and Science
Ms. Kasha Visutskie, Academic Integrity Officer, Office of Student Academic Integrity,
Faculty of Arts and Science
In Attendance:
Mr. Christopher Lang, Director, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances, Office of
the Governing Council
Ms. Krista Osbourne, Administrative Assistant, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty
Grievances, Office of the Governing Council
Not In Attendance:
Mr.
~ S. , Student

Of

2

1.

The Trial Division of the University Tribunal was convened on November 26, 2015,
to consider charges brought by the University of Toronto ("the University") against
Mr.

Ol5111 SIii ("the Student") under the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour

on Academic Matters, 1995 ("the Code").

Preliminary Issue: Proceeding in the Absence of the Student

2.

The hearing was scheduled to begin at 9:45 a.m. The Tribunal waited until 10 a.m.
to commence the hearing. Neither the Student, nor a representative of the Student,
appeared.

3.

Pursuant to sections 6 and 7 of the Statutory Powers Procedure Act ("the Act"),
and Rule 17 of the University Tribunal Rules of Practice and Procedure ("the
Rules"), where reasonable notice of an oral hearing has been given to a party in
accordance with the Act and the party does not attend at the hearing, the Tribunal
may proceed in the absence of the party and the party is not entitled to any further
notice in the proceeding. The University requested that the Tribunal proceed with
this hearing

4.

Pursuant to Rule 9, a notice of hearing may be served on a student by various
means, including by:
(a)

sending a copy of the document by courier to the student's mailing address
contained in ROSI (the Repository of Student Information); or

(b)

emailing a copy of the document to the student's email address contained in
ROSI.

5.

The University's Policy on Official Correspondence with Students expressly states
that students are responsible for maintaining on ROSI a current and valid postal

3

address and a University-issued email account. Students are expected to monitor
and retrieve their mail, including electronic messaging accounts issued to them by
the University, on a frequent and consistent basis.
6.

The onus of proof is on the University under the Act and the Rules to establish that
it provided the Student with reasonable notice of the hearing in accordance with
these provisions.

7.

The University filed affidavit evidence showing that the Student had been sent the
Notice of Hearing dated October 15, 2015 by way of email to the Student at the
email address he had provided on ROSI, and by courier to the mailing address the
Student had provided on ROSI.

8.

The University also filed affidavit evidence showing that the Student had been
served with the charges by way of email to the Student at the email address he
had provided on ROSI.

9.

The Tribunal reviewed the evidence and the submissions of counsel for the
University and concluded that the Student was given reasonable notice of the
hearing in compliance with the notice requirements of the Act and the Rules.

10. The University has proven that it provided reasonable notice of the time, date,
place and nature of the hearing to the Student. The Tribunal therefore determined
that it would proceed to hear the case on its merits in the absence of the Student.
The hearing proceeded on the basis that the Student was deemed to deny all
Charges made against him.
The Charges and Particulars

11 .

The Charges and Particulars alleged against the Student are as follows:

4

1.

On or about December 2, 2014, you knowingly represented the ideas of
another, or the expressions of the ideas of another as your own work in an
untitled essay (the "Essay") that you submitted in particular completion of the
course requirements in EAS103H1 F (the "Course"), contrary to section B.1.1 (d)
of the Code.

2.

On or about December 2, 2014, you knowingly obtained unauthorized
assistance in connection with the Essay, which you submitted for academic
credit in the Course, contrary to section 8.1.1 (b) of the Code.

3.

In the alternative, on or about December 2, 2014, by submitting the Essay, you
knowingly engaged in a form of cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct,
fraud or misrepresentation not otherwise described in the Code to obtain
academic credit or other academic advantage of any kind, contrary to section
B.l.3(b) of the Code.
The particulars for the charges are as follows:

1.

At all material times you were a student registered at the University of Toronto.

2.

In Session 20149, you enrolled in the Course, which was titled Premodern East
Asia and which was taught by Prof. Linda Rui Feng.

3.

The Course requirements included an essay assignment, which was worth 30%
of the final grade in the Course.

4.

On or about December 2, 2014, you submitted the Essay, which was a revised
version of an essay you submitted on November 3, 2014, in partial completion of
the Course requirements and to obtain academic credit.

5.

You knowingly represented the work of another as your own work in the Essay.
You knowingly included in the Essay ideas and expressions that were not your
own, but were the ideas and expressions of others, which you did not
acknowledge in the Essay.

5

6.

You knowingly received unauthorized assistance from "Sonia", or someone at
"Ace My Term Papers" or other persons unknown, or you did not write the Essay
and purchased the Essay from "Sonia", or "Ace My Term Papers" or persons
unknown.

7.

You submitted the Essay knowing and intending that when your instructor
evaluated the Essay she would conclude that the Essay contained your own
ideas that you had expressed in your own words.

8.

For the purposes of obtaining academic credit and/or other academic advantage,
you knowingly committed a form of cheating,

academic dishonesty or

misconduct.

12.

As to Charges 1 and 2, counsel for the University advised that the University was
seeking a finding with respect to only one of them. He further advised that if the
Tribunal were to find the Student guilty of either Charge 1 or Charge 2, the
University would withdraw Charge 3.

The Evidence

13.

The Tribunal heard evidence from two witnesses: Kasha Visutskie and Professor
John Britton.

14.

Ms. Visutskie is an Academic Integrity Officer at the University's Faculty of Arts
and Science Office of Student Academic Integrity.

Part of her job is to

investigate allegations of academic misconduct.
15.

Ms. Visutskie became involved in this matter when the Department of East Asian
Studies reported a concern about the academic integrity of a paper that the
Student had submitted in course EAS 103HIF (the "Course").

She identified for

the Tribunal various documents that she had reviewed as part of her
investigation, and testified as follows.

6

(a)

The course syllabus for the Course included information under the
heading "Academic Integrity" that defined academic offences and provided
links to resources for defining plagiarism and offering tips on how to avoid
it.

(b)

The course syllabus for the Course set out that 30% of a student's grade
would be determined by a 2,000 word essay. If a student received a mark
of less than 80% on the essay, the essay would have to be revised. If a
student received a mark of 80% or higher on the essay, revision would be
optional.

(c)

The Student's original Course essay was submitted November 3, 2014.
The Student submitted a revised Course essay on December 2, 2014. The
document properties for the revised essay identified the author of the
revised essay as "AMTP", and identified that the document had last been
modified and saved by "sonia".

(d)

Based on her experience, Ms. Visutskie believed that "AMTP" is a
company called "Ace My Term Paper".

She understood Ace My Term

Paper to be a company that provides fee-for-service editing services and
customized essay services. It is not affiliated with the University, is not
authorized by the University, and is not one of the recognized writing
centres at the University. It advertises to students at the University.
(e)

Ms. Visutskie performed an Internet search for "Ace My Term Paper"
which turned up a webpage at www.acemytermpaper.com. She was able
to access sample term papers through the www.acemytermpaper.com
website, and the term papers she accessed through that website showed
that the document properties for those sample papers identified that they
were last saved by "AMTP".

7

(f)

In addition to the original essay and the revised essay, the Student had
also completed two in-class examinations for the Course: a mid-term
exam and a final exam. The Student did poorly on both exams.

16.

The second witness for the University was Professor John Britton, Professor
Emeritus and Dean's Designate in the Office of Student Academic Integrity for
the Faculty of Arts and Science.

He acts as the Dean's Designate for the

purpose of holding interviews with students in the Faculty of Arts and Science
when there are allegations of academic misconduct.
(a)

Professor Britton reviewed the two exams and the two essays written by
the Student for the Course. He also reviewed Ms. Visutskie's analysis and
met with her. He then met with the Student.

(b)

He started the meeting with the Student by trying to verify whether the
Student had read the Code. He reviewed pertinent provisions of the Code
with the Student, including the warning to students required by subsection
C.(i)(a)6.

(c)

Professor Britton asked the Student whether he had written the revised
essay, and the Student said he had. The Student said he'd written all of it,
and that it was completely his own work.

(d)

Professor Britton asked the Student to paraphrase the ideas in the revised
essay. The Student was unable to do so.

(e)

Professor Britton asked the Student to define some of the words he'd used
in the revised essay, such as "xenophobic" and "assuage". The Student
was unable to do so.

(f)

Professor Britton discussed the document properties for the revised essay
with the Student. The Student claimed not to know who or what "AMTP"

8

was, even though "AMTP" was identified as the author of the document.
The Student claimed that "sonia", identified on the document properties as
the last person to modify and save the revised essay, was his girlfriend.
The Student continued to insist that he was the sole author of the revised
essay.
(g)

Professor Britton did not believe the Student. He compared the revised
essay to the original essay and the Student's two in-class exams. Based
on the phraseology, grammar, vocabulary and ideas, Professor Britton
concluded that someone other than the Student had written significant
portions of the revised essay.

Decision of the Tribunal on the Charges

17.

The onus is on the University to establish on the balance of probabilities, using
clear and convincing evidence, that one or more of the academic offences
charged has been committed by the Student.

18.

Having considered all the evidence in this hearing, the Tribunal found that
significant portions of the revised essay were not written by the Student.
(a)

The document properties of the revised essay reveal the author to be
"AMTP", which the Tribunal accepts as standing for "Ace My Term Paper."
At his meeting with Professor Britton, the Student was unable to offer any
explanation for the "AMTP" initials appearing on the document properties
for the revised essay.

Other papers clearly authored by Ace My Term

Paper show those same initials in their document properties.

Ace My

Term Paper is a for-profit enterprise that offers essay customization and
editing services to University students.

In light of all the evidence, the

Tribunal finds it is more likely than not that someone employed by Ace My
Term Paper assisted the Student with his revised essay.

9

(b)

As to whether the assistance the Student received fell within the range of
permitted editing assistance, or went too far and became academic
misconduct, the Tribunal finds the revised essay contains phrases and
sentences that were not written by the Student and not attributed to any
other author. This conclusion is based on the Tribunal's own comparison
of the revised essay with the Student's previous written work, particularly
the

Student's two

essays.

The Tribunal

realizes that in-class

examinations are not the best test of a student's writing and language
abilities.

However, the differences between the Student's writing in his

two exams and the Student's writing in his revised essay are stark. The
two exams are written by someone struggling with basic rules of English
grammar and confined to a limited and simplistic English language
vocabulary. The vocabulary, grammar, and sentence structure are
sufficiently distinct in the revised essay to persuade the Tribunal that the
Student was not the author of significant components of the revised essay.
(c)

This conclusion is reinforced by the evidence of Professor Britton
regarding the Student's inability to paraphrase the ideas of his revised
essay, or explain language used in the revised essay. While the Tribunal
recognizes that some three months had passed between submitting the
revised essay and meeting with Professor Britton, the Student's inability to
give any answers to Professor Britton's questions is further evidence that
the Student did not author parts of that revised essay.

19.

As to the precise finding of misconduct, the University had charged the Student
with both plagiarism (under Charge 1) and with obtaining unauthorized academic
assistance (under Charge 2).

Counsel for the University submitted that if the

Tribunal was satisfied that some of the language in the revised essay had not
been written by the Student, it was up to the Tribunal to determine whether the
misconduct was more appropriately described as "plagiarism" or "unauthorized
assistance". The submission of the University was that the misconduct in this

10

case was best described as "plagiarism", as it was the University's view that the
evidence showed that substantial portions of the revised essay were not written
by the student and were not attributed to their actual author.
20.

The Tribunal is of the view that the Student knowingly represented the work of
another as his own, and as such committed plagiarism as defined in subsection
B.i.3(b) of the Code.

Whether and under what circumstances it would be

permissible for a student to obtain editing assistance that fell short of plagiarism
is not something the Tribunal needed to decide on the facts of this case.
21 .

In light of the Tribunal's finding, Charges 2 and 3 were withdrawn by the
University.

Decision of the Tribunal on Penalty

22.

The University sought the following sanctions:
(a)

a final grade of zero in the course EAS 103H1 F;

(b)

a suspension from the University for a period of three years from the date
of the Tribunal's Order;

(c)

that the sanction be recorded on his academic record and transcript for 4
years from the date of the Tribunal's Order; and

(d)

that this case shall be reported to the Provost for publication of a notice of
the decision of the Tribunal and the sanctions imposed, with the name of
the student withheld.

23.

The University did not lead any additional evidence with respect to the
sanction .

24.

The Tribunal has considered the principles and factors relevant to sanction set
out by this Tribunal in University of Toronto and Mr. C (Case No. 1976/77-3,
November 5, 1976). While the determination of an appropriate penalty in every

11

case by the Tribunal will depend on an individual assessment of these principles
and factors, it is important to have general consistency in the Tribunal's approach
to sanction so that students are treated fairly and equitably.
25.

At this Tribunal, sanctions for plagiarism invariably involve a final grade of zero
for the affected course.

However, there is a spectrum when it comes to the

length of suspension.

Broadly speaking, a two-year suspension from the

S-

University is frequently ordered for first-time offenders who commit a single act of
plagiarism (see, for example, University of Toronto and
November 14, 2007)).

~ (Case 488,

However, when the plagiarism in question involves a

purchased essay, the typical sanction is a five-year suspension or a
recommendation of expulsion (see, for example, University of Toronto and

S-. ca, J\1111 RI,... and /\,ti , _ f<IIII (Case 596, 597, 598 - Appeal,

Discipline Appeals Board, November 23, 2011); University of Toronto and Mr.
S.B.P. (Case 601, March 8, 2011 ); and University of Toronto and A. T. (Case 645,

May 20, 2011 )).

The rationale for the higher sanction in purchased essay

courses is explained in A. T., supra, at paragraph 30 as follows.
"It is clear that plagirarism, particularly plagiarism connected to the
Internet and purchasing essays from commercial enterprises operating on
the Internet, is at the highest end of the scale in terms of seriousness. It
is very hard to detect purchased essays . . . Purchased essays provide a
convenient way for students to short-circuit their expected workload. This
is an industry that is based on deceit. This threatens the fabric of the
university grading system. It creates an uneven playing field and creates
unfairness to the students who play by the rules and do not have the
means to purchase their way to a degree.

It also encourages the

proliferation of this kind of commercial enterprise. The University is very
vulnerable to this kind of commercial activity."
26.

The University submitted that the facts of this case fall somewhere between the
two ends of the plagiarism spectrum. On the one hand, the Student is a first-time

12

offender who has been caught plagiarizing parts of an essay submitted for one
course.

On the other hand, while the entire essay may not have been

purchased, the evidence establishes that the Student did engage the writing
services of a commercial essay-writing company.

Accordingly, the University

submitted that a three-year suspension would reflect the degree of seriousness
of this particular offence.
27.

The Tribunal considered the University's submissions in light of its findings and
the factors from Mr. C., supra.
(a)

The character of the Student: there was no evidence before the Tribunal
regarding the Student's character other than the facts of the offence as
found by the Tribunal.

(b)

The likelihood of a repetition of the offence: there was no evidence led
that would lead the Tribunal to conclude one way or another on this
factor.

(c)

The nature of the offence committed: the Tribunal accepts that this case
is more serious than plagiarism cases where there is no commercial
element.

The Student's decision to obtain and pay for essay-writing

services demonstrates a calculated and deliberate attempt to deceive the
University and purchase a grade he did not earn.
(d)

Any extenuating circumstances surrounding the commission of the
offence: the Student did not participate in this hearing, and there is
accordingly no evidence before us of mitigating or extenuating
circumstances, other than the fact that this was the Student's first offence.
There was no evidence of any remorse or insight.

(e)

The detriment to the University occasioned by the offence: fortunately, the
Student's misconduct was detected quickly.

However, because the

13

Student presumably paid "Ace My Term Paper" for its services, he
provided support to an organization that has the potential to undermine
academic integrity at the University.
(f)

The need to deter others from committing a similar offence: this is a key
factor in any plagiarism case.

Plagiarism is a constant threat to the

University. Students who are tempted to pay someone to write parts of
their essays for them must be shown that very serious consequences will
befall them if they are caught.
28.

In all of the circumstances, and with regard to the factors identified in the C.
case, the Tribunal is satisfied that the following Order is appropriate.
1.

THAT Mr. s■ is guilty of the academic offence of plagiarism, contrary to

section 8.1.1 (d) of the Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters;
2.

THAT the following sanctions shall be imposed on Mr . •

(a)

he shall receive a final grade of zero in the course EAS103H1F;

(b)

he be suspended from the University for 3 years from the date of this

1:

Order; and
(c)

the sanction be recorded on his academic record and transcript for 4 years
from the date of this Order;

3.

THAT this case shall be reported to the Provost for publication of a notice

of the decision of the Tribunal and the sanctions imposed, with the name
of the student withheld.

14

Dated at Toronto this "2,fv~day of

Ms. Joha na Braden, Chair

' J ~ 2016

