Case 809

DATE:

   January 29, 2016

PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v Q.S.S.

Hearing Date(s):

   November 26, 2015

Panel Members:

   Johanna Braden, Chair
   Michael Evans, Faculty Member
   Jenna Jacobson, Student Member

Appearances:

   Robert Centa, Assistant Discipline Counsel
   Lauren Pearce, Student-at-Law, Paliare Roland
   John Britton, Professor Emeritus, Deanâs Designate, Office of Student
   Academic Integrity, Faculty of Arts and Science
   Kasha Visutskie, Academic Integrity Officer, Office of Student Academic
   Integrity, Faculty of Arts and Science

In Attendance:

   Christopher Lang, Director, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances
   Krista Osbourne, Administrative Assistant, Appeals Discipline and
   Faculty Grievances
   Student charged under s. B.i.1(d) , s. B.i.1(b) and, in the
   alternative, s. B.i.3(b) of the Code . The charges related to
   allegations that the Student submitted plagiarized coursework which he
   had purchased from a commercial provider of academic essays. The
   Student was not present at the hearing. The Panel concluded that the
   efforts made to contact the Student by email and courier were
   reasonable as per the Statutory Powers Procedure Act and the University
   Tribunal Rules of Practice and Procedure. The Panel ordered that the
   hearing proceed in the Studentâs absence.
   Student was found guilty with respect to the plagiarism charge. The
   University then withdrew the unauthorized aid and academic dishonesty
   not otherwise described charges. The Panel took into account the fact
   that the Essayâs document properties listed the initials of a
   commercial provider of essays as the author, that the writing style was
   inconsistent with the Studentâs previously submitted version and
   in-class examinations for the Course, and that the Student could not
   paraphrase the ideas or define words used in the revised Essay at a
   meeting with the Course Instructor as evidence that significant
   portions of the Essay were not written by the Student. The Panel noted
   that though plagiarism involving purchasing essays from commercial
   enterprises is at the highest end of the plagiarism spectrum in terms
   of seriousness, this case fell somewhere between the two ends of the
   spectrum given that the Student had no prior academic offences and that
   the entire essay may not have been purchased. The Panel imposed a grade
   assignment of zero in the Course; a 3-year suspension; a 4-year
   notation on the Studentâs academic record and transcript; and that the
   case be reported to the Provost for publication.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12891
