Case #852

Case #852

   [1]FILE: Case #852 (2016-2017)
   DATE: July 19, 2016
   PARTIES: University of Toronto v A.A.R.
   Hearing Date(s): June 1, 2016 and June 29, 2016
   Panel Members:
   Jeffrey S. Leon, Chair
   Andrea Litvack, Faculty Member
   David Kleinman, Student Member
   Appearances:
   Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg
   Rothstein LLP
   Mr. A.A.R, the Student
   Alex Redinger, Downtown Legal Services
   In Attendance:
   Emma Thacker, Associate Director, Graduate Affairs, School of Graduate
   Studies
   Tracey Gameiro, Associate Director, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty
   Grievances
   Krista Osbourne, Administrative Assistant, Appeals, Discipline and
   Faculty Grievances
   Trial Division â s. B.i.1(d) of the Code â plagiarism â passages copied
   from internet and textbook sources without attribution or citation â
   Agreed Statement of Facts â guilty plea â finding on Agreed Statement
   of Facts â finding on guilty plea â Joint Submission on Penalty
   accepted â grade assignment of zero in the Course; 4-year suspension;
   notation on the Studentâs academic record and transcript for one year
   following the date on which he graduates from the University or
   withdraws or is terminated from his program; case reported to Provost
   for publication
   Student charged under s. B.i.1(d) and, in the alternative, s. B.i.3(b)
   of the Code . The charges related to allegations that the Student
   extensively copied passages from internet and textbook sources with
   some wording changes but without any citations or attribution
   whatsoever. The parties submitted an Agreed Statement of Facts, in
   which the Student admitted that he committed plagiarism. The Panel
   accepted the Agreed Statement of Facts and found the Student guilty of
   the plagiarism charge. The hearing adjourned prior to the finding on
   sanction to allow the Student to obtain counsel and to adduce all
   proper evidence. The Student and the University presented a Joint
   Submission on Penalty when the hearing reconvened, which reflected the
   same penalty sought by the University at the original hearing. The
   Panel took into account the Studentâs stressful family circumstances at
   the time the paper was submitted and his remorse for the offence, but
   also noted that this was the Studentâs second plagiarism offence, that
   he had been warned that he would receive a more severe punishment if he
   were to commit another offence, and that he submitted the paper at
   issue in the month immediately following this warning. The Panel also
   noted the high threshold for rejecting joint submissions. The Panel
   accepted the Joint Submission on Penalty and imposed a grade assignment
   of zero in the Course; a 4-year suspension; a notation on the Studentâs
   academic record and transcript for one year following the date on which
   he graduates from the University or withdraws or is terminated from his
   program; and that the case be reported to the Provost for publication.
   [2]View Case

References

   1. file:///Assets/ADFG+Digital+Assets/ADFG/ADFG+Digital+Assets/Academic+Discipline/Tribunal+Cases/Case+$!23852.pdf
   2. file:///media/13030
