Case #899

   DATE: August 21, 2017
   PARTIES: University of Toronto v. K.N. ("the Student")
   Hearing Date(s): May 17, 2017

   Panel Members:
   Mr. Michael Hines, Barrister and Solicitor, Chair
   Dr. Joel Kirsh, Faculty Panel Member
   Mr. David Kleinman, Student Panel Member

   Appearances:
   Ms. Tina Lie, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Barristers
   Professor Eleanor Irwin, Dean's Designate, University of Toronto
   Scarborough
   Dr. Curtis Cole, Registrar and Assistant Dean, Enrolment Management,
   University of Toronto Scarborough

   In Attendance:
   Mr. Christopher Lang, Director, Office of Appeals, Discipline and
   Faculty Grievances
   Mr. Sean Lourim, Technology Assistant, Office of the Governing Council
   Mr. Clara Ryu, Law Student, Downtown Legal Services (Observer)
   Mr. Robert Sniderman, Law Student, Downtown Legal Services (Observer)

   Not in Attendance:
   The Student

   Trial Division - s. B.i.3(a) of Code - forgery of academic record -
   student forged transcript for application to graduate programme at
   another university - student not in attendance - all reasonable efforts
   had been made to notify Student of hearing - finding of guilt -
   expulsion, five year suspension, five year notation, publication of the
   decision with the name of the Student withheld

   The Student was charged with forgery of an academic record under s.
   B.i.3(a) of the Code, and alternatively, academic dishonesty under s.
   B.i.3(b) of the Code. The charges related to an application to a
   graduate programme at another university for which the Student
   falsified their University of Toronto transcript.

   The Student did not attend the hearing. The Tribunal determined that
   the University had made all reasonable efforts to notify the Student of
   the hearing; finding that because there had been previous e-mail
   communications with the Student, the Student was in fact aware of the
   allegations. The Tribunal therefore ordered that the hearing proceed in
   the Student's absence.

   The Student was found guilty of both charges on the University's
   evidence. In considering the appropriate sentence, the Tribunal found
   that the gravity of this offence weighed strongly against the Student
   as the forging of a transcript threatens the reputation of the
   University and the students who pursue their degrees honestly. The
   Tribunal recommended that the Student be expelled, and ordered that the
   Student be immediately suspended for a period of five years or until
   expulsion with a corresponding notation on the Student's record, and
   publication of the decision with the name of the student withheld.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12952
