Case No.: 899
THE UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
IN THE MATTER OF charges of academic dishonesty made on November 23, 2016.
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters,
1995,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto, Act, 1971, S.O. 1971, c. 56 as amended
S.O. 1978, C. 88.

BETWEEN:
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
- and-

REASONS FOR DECISION
Date of Hearing: May 17, 2017
Members of the Panel:

Mr. Michael Hines, Barrister and Solicitor, Chair
Dr. Joel Kirsh, Faculty Panel Member
Mr. David Kleinman, Student Panel Member
Appearances:
Ms. Tina Lie, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Barristers
Professor Eleanor Irwin, Dean's Designate, University of Toronto Scarborough
Dr. Curtis Cole, Registrar and Assistant Dean, Enrolment Management, University of
Toronto Scarborough

In Attendance:
Mr. Christopher Lang, Director, Office of Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances
Mr. Sean Lourim, Technology Assistant, Office of the Governing Council
Mr. Clara Ryu, Law Student, Downtown Legal Services (Observer)
Mr. Robert Sniderman, Law Student, Downtown Legal Services (Observer)

Not in Attendance:
M s . ~ ~ (the "Student")

-2-

Charges and Hearing

This panel of the University Tribunal held a hearing on May 17, 2017 to consider the
charges brought by the University of Toronto (the "University") against ~
("the Student") under the Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters, 1995,

r--.-i

Procedural Issues

1.

The Student was charged with the Offences set out in Appendix A, attached.
Essentially, they relate to the alleged falsification of academic transcripts and
other academic credentials purportedly issued by the University concerning the
Student. These were allegedly used by the Student in an attempt to gain
admission to an educational institution in another country.

2.

The Student did not appear at the hearing. The University requested an Order
that the Hearing proceed in her ab~ence, relying on the Affidavits of Janice
Patterson, a legal assistant employed by the law firm of Paliare Roland
Rosenberg Rothstein LLP, and Krista Osbourne, Administrative Clerk and
Hearing Secretary, Appeals Discipline and Faculty Grievances, employed in the
Office of the University's Governing Council. These Affidavits satisfied the Panel
that all reasonable efforts had been made to locate the Student and bring to her
attention the fact that she was facing prosecution in this Hearing.

3.

Indeed, over a period extending from July 14 through July 24, 2016, the Student
exchanged emails with the Office of Academic Integrity (the "Office") with a view
to arranging a meeting with the Dean's Designate to discuss the allegations that
had been raised against her. Thereafter, and despite the further considerable·
efforts of the Office, the Office of the University's Governing Council and
Assistant Discipline Counsel to reach the Student through the same means, she
inexplicably failed to respond. The correspondence of July, 2016 demonstrates
that, at a minimum, the Student was aware that serious allegations were being
raised against her. Accordingly, the Tribunal granted the requested Order. That
Order is hereby confirmed.

Evidence and Findings.

4.

The University then led its evidence through the testimony of Dr. Curtis Cole,
Registrar and Assistant Dean, Enrolment Management, at University of Toronto
Scarborough. The following facts were established to the Tribunal's satisfaction:
(a)

The Student was a registered student at the University of Toronto
Scarborough ("UTSC") and was enrolled in courses at UTSC from Winter
2006 to Summer 2008.

-3-

(b)

By the end of Summer 2008, she had accumulated 14.0 credits. She did
not obtain any credits from the University of Toronto after Summer 2008.
She had not graduated from the University of Toronto.

(c)

In or around May 2016, the Student submitted an academic history
purportedly from the University of Toronto to a university in a foreign
country in support of her application for admission to that university's
graduate school (the "Purported Transcript").

(d)

The Purported Transcript was forged, altered or falsified. It falsely
represented the Student's academic record at the University of Toronto,
including by indicating that:
(i)

she had graduated from the University of Toronto with a Bachelor
of Arts - Specialist in Political Science and Economics for
Management Studies degree in June 2009;

(ii)

she had enrolled in the following courses and obtained the following
credits and grades in Fall 2008:

2008 Fall - Bachelor of Arts

Sessional GP A 3.67 Cumulative GP A 3.48
.

Crs
Code

Title

Wgt

Mrk

Ord

CrsAvg

ECM Economics of the Public
C31H Sector: Taxation
3

0.5

82

A-

C+

ECM Economic Development
C66H
3

0.5

85

A

8-

POL Public Policy Making
C66H
3

0.5

78

B+

C+

PSY
A
02H3

0.5

81

A-

C+

Introductory Psychology: Part
II

Credits Earned: 2.00

-4-

(iii)

she had enrolled in the following courses and obtained the following
credits and grades in Winter 2009:

2009 Winter - Bachelor of Arts

Sessional GP A 3 .60 Annual GPA 3.62 Cumulative GPA 3.50
Crs Code

Title

Wgt

Mrk

Ord

CrsAvg

ECMC32H

Economics of the Public Sector:
Expenditures

0.5

88

A

C

Classics in the History of
Economic Thought

0.5

80

A-

B-

3
POLC67H3

Public Policy in Canada

0.5

76

B

C-

PSYB30H3

Personality

0.5

80

A-

B-

3
ECMC27H

Credits Earned: 2.00

5.

(e)

She submitted the Purported Transcript to the foreign university knowing
that it contained false information, and that it had been forged, altered or
falsified.

(f)

She submitted the Purported Transcript to the university to support her
application for graduate studies and to obtain an academic advantage.

Based upon these findings, the Tribunal entered a finding of guilty on Counts 1
and 2 of the Charges as set out in Appendix A.

Penalty

6.

The University sought a penalty that would include a recommendation from the
Tribunal that the Student be expelled from the University.

7.

Discipline Counsel reviewed with the panel the considerations that have been
consistently taken into account by Panels over the past forty years (see Mr. C v.
University of Toronto, Case No.: 1976fi7-3, November 5, 1976). Counsel also
made the following observations regarding those considerations, with which we
agree:
(a)

The character of the student- The Student did not testify in our case. The
only material evidence we have is that she was capable of the offences of
which she has been found guilty. This factor does not weigh i·n her favour.

-5-

8.

(b)

The likelihood of repetition of the offence - Having demonstrated the
capability of committing these offences on one occasion, the Student
bears the onus of satisfying the Tribunal that she would not re-offend.
This is particularly so in this case, where the offence (submitting falsified
records to another institution) is so unlikely to be detected by the
University. While the Student has no prior disciplinary convictions, she did
not testify before us. It is therefore impossible to form a meaningful
assessment of the impact this episode has had upon her. She has not
demonstrated contrition. She has not participated in the disciplinary
process and/or acknowledged her wrongdoing despite having received
notice of the allegations against her. This factor does not weigh in her
favour.

(c)

The nature of the offence(s) committed - The offences as proven
demonstrate the most serious lack of academic and personal integrity.
This factor weighs strongly against the Student.

(d)

The existence of extenuating circumstances - None have been
established. This factor does not weigh in the Student's favour.

(e)

The detriment to the University caused by the offence(s) committed - The
forgery and falsification of records of academic achievement and their
submission to other institutions of higher learning threaten the reputation
of the University and the students who pursue their degrees honestly and
diligently. This factor weighs strongly against the student.

(f)

The need for general deterrence - The recent, very similar case of Z. L.
(Case No.: 867, January 24, 2017) concerning the submission of falsified
academic records supports the view that the behaviour of the Student is
not unique to her, and therefore requires the strongest possible deterrent
response.

As in Z.L., supra, the Tribunal is in full agreement with the University in terms of
the gravity of the offences and the need to impose the most severe penalty
,
available to it. Accordingly, at the conclusion of the hearing, the Panel issued the
following Order, which is hereby confirmed:

(a)

The Student shall be immediately suspended from the University for a
period of up to 5 years from May 17, 2017 or until Governing Council
makes its decision on expulsion, whichever comes first, and that a
corresponding notation be placed on her academic record and transcript;
and

(b)

the Tribunal recommends to the President of the University that he
recommend to the Governing Council that the Student be expelled from
the University; and

-6-

(c)

That this case shall be reported to the Provost for publication of a notice of
the decision of the Tribunal and the sanctions imposed, with the name of
the student withheld.

Dated at Toronto this Vst day of August, 2017.

Michael Hines, Chair

