UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
GOVERNING COUNCIL
REPORT NUMBER 281 OF THE ACADEMIC APPEALS COMMITTEE
June 12, 2003
To the Academic Board,
University of Toronto
Your Committee reports that it held a hearing on June 12, 2003, at which the following
were present:
Assistant Dean Jane Kidner, Acting Chairperson
Professor Phil Byer
Professor John Furedy
Professor Ellen Hodnett
Ms. Durré Hannif
Secretary: Mr. Paul Holmes, Judicial Affairs Officer
The following were in attendance:
For the Appellant:
Ms. M., the Appellant (“the Student”)
Ms. Erica Toews, DLS Student Counsel for the Appellant
Mr. Usman Sheikh, DLS student observer
For the University of Toronto at Scarborough:
Professor Ian McDonald
This is an appeal from the decision of the Sub-Committee on Academic Appeals of the
University of Toronto at Scarborough (“UTSC”) dated November 12, 2002, which denied
the Student’s request for retroactive late withdrawal from STAB22H, GGR314H, and
SOC304H, taken in the first half of the summer term 2002, and further denied the
Student’s request for deferral of her three-year suspension. That decision was an appeal
from the Student’s petition to the Academic Committee dated August 26, 2002 for
retroactive withdrawal from GGR314H, SOC304H, and STAB22H and for deferral of the
three-year suspension, all of which were denied by letters dated September 20, 2002 and
October 8, 2002 from Professor Ian McDonald, Associate Dean for the Academic
Committee; and from the Student’s earlier petition to the Academic Committee dated
July 19, 2002 for retroactive withdrawal from STAB22H, which was denied by letter
dated August 7, 2002 from Professor Ian McDonald.

Report 281 of the Academic Appeals Committee
The Student seeks the following remedies on medical and compassionate grounds:
1.

retroactive late withdrawal from STAB22H, GGR314H, and SOC304H
without academic penalty; and

2.

deferral of the three-year suspension.

The Facts:
The Student grew up in Toronto and was raised by her mother. Her father left her and her
mother when she was a small child and she has not maintained any contact with him
since that time. The Student’s grandfather lived in the West Indies until he passed away
on June 20, 2002. The Student testified that she visited her grandfather for several weeks
every two years and thought of him as a father.
The Student enrolled at UTSC in September 1997. During her first year of studies, the
Student testified that she was harassed on a regular basis by four female students. The
harassment included name-calling, mocking, and gossiping. The Student testified that as
a result of the harassment she suffered physical and mental symptoms including inability
to concentrate, depression, nausea, and twitching in her eyes. She was ultimately
diagnosed with severe depressive disorder for which she sought psychiatric help. At the
end of the school year, the Student petitioned for late withdrawal from all of her courses
without academic penalty and for a transfer to St. George Campus on the grounds that she
was suffering from “a deep mental depression”. The request for late withdrawal without
academic penalty was granted. The request for a transfer to the St. George campus was
denied on the grounds that the committee lacked the jurisdiction to make such an order.
The Student was told to make the request to the Registrar. The Student subsequently
wrote to the Registrar to request the transfer and was denied. No documentation was
provided to indicate the reasons for the refusal.
The Student returned to her studies at UTSC in the fall of 1998. The Student testified that
the harassment continued. The Student’s grades continued to suffer. At the end of the
fall/winter 1998/99 school year the Student was placed on academic probation for failure
to achieve the required sessional or cumulative Grade Point Average (GPA) of 1.60.
The Student took one course in the summer of 1999 and received a passing grade of C+.
The Student testified that her improved performance was attributable to the fact that she
was not being harassed during that time. However, her GPA continued to be well below
the required 1.60 level, and as such she was placed on academic probation.
The Student’s academic performance fell again in the fall/winter 1999/2000 academic
term. The Student testified this was the result of the continued harassment. The Student’s
probationary status led to a one-year suspension at the end of the 2000 winter session.

Page 2 of 6

Report 281 of the Academic Appeals Committee
The Student resumed her studies in the summer 2001 term. The Student’s marks
improved with the absence of the previous harassment according to the Student’s
testimony, and her sessional GPA rose to 2.52. However the Student’s cumulative GPA
remained below the required 1.60 and as a result she was placed on academic probation.
Her probationary status continued to the end of the fall/winter 2001/2002 term at which
point she had a sessional GPA of 2.06 and a cumulative GPA of 1.59.
At the beginning of the summer 2002 session, the Student needed only one half-credit in
a statistics course to graduate and as well needed to achieve a sessional GPA of 1.60 and
increase her cumulative GPA to 1.60 from 1.59. Despite the fact that she needed only
one half-credit to complete her degree requirements, on May 15, 2002 the Student
enrolled in three half-courses for the first half of the summer 2002 session – STAB22H,
GGR314H, and SOC304H – as well as two half-courses for the second half of the
summer 2002 session. The last date for dropping the first three courses without academic
penalty was June 9, 2002.
By letter dated June 6, 2002 (three days prior to the course drop date) from Don
MacMillan of the Office of the Registrar for UTSC, the Student was informed that she
had been placed on academic probation because her cumulative GPA was below the
required 1.60, and she was strongly advised to speak to an Academic Advisor. The letter
also advised her that if she registered in the summer 2002 session she would have to
achieve a sessional GPA of 1.60 or better, and that failure to achieve 1.60 would
immediately trigger a three-year suspension from the university. The Student testified
that she did not seek academic counseling as recommended in the letter, nor did she
attempt to drop any of her courses.
On June 20, 2002, the last day of classes for the first summer session, the Student’s
grandfather who lived in the West Indies died. The Student testified that as a result of her
grandfather’s unexpected death she suffered a depression. The Student did not inform
anyone at the university of her grandfather’s death. She continued in her courses and
wrote the final examinations, which took place on June 25 and June 27. The Student
received final grades of F in GGR314H, F in STAB22H3, and D- in SOC304H. As a
result, the Student’s sessional GPA fell to 0.90 and her cumulative GPA fell to 1.48, and
the Student was placed on a three-year suspension.
The Student testified that the poor marks she received in these three courses were the
result of the death of her grandfather on June 20, approximately a week before the final
exams. In support of her claim, the Student submitted new medical evidence at the
hearing – an undated letter from Dr. Harold Pushie of the Danforth Medical Centre
stating that the Student was a patient of his for 6 years, and that she suffered “severe
emotional problems as a result of the death of her grandfather in June 2002.” The letter
further stated that because of this, the Student “had trouble concentrating and focusing on
her academic subjects.” Although the letter was undated, the Student testified that it was
written on June 3, 2003, nearly one year after the examinations. This letter was not
presented at any previous appeals in this matter.

Page 3 of 6

Report 281 of the Academic Appeals Committee
In response to the Student’s assertion that her final marks in the three courses were the
result of her grandfather’s death, Professor McDonald for UTSC testified that prior to
June 20th, the Student was doing very poorly on her term work for all three courses.
Specifically, the Student was achieving the following results in her term work for the
three courses in question:
STAB22H:

62.65% for quizzes worth 15% of her final mark, and 20% for a
mid term test worth 35% of her final mark.

GGR314H:

21% for the 1st term test and 47% for the 2nd term test. In this class
the professor also reported that “the student did not come to class
once between the first and second term test”.

SOC304H:

0% on an assignment worth 15% of the final grade, 90% on web
forum worth 10% of her final mark, and 40% on a project worth
40% of the final grade.

The Student was unable to provide a reason for her poor performance or her failure to
attend many classes prior to the death of her grandfather other than that she was
overwhelmed and anxious to graduate. She did not seek counseling at any point during
the summer session prior the final examinations despite being aware of the university’s
counseling services.
Decision:
Retroactive late withdrawal without academic penalty is an extraordinary remedy that
should only be granted in the most exceptional circumstances. In reaching its decision the
committee carefully considered all of the evidence presented at the hearing, including all
medical documentation and the complete past history of the student including her
evidence of past harassment. Although the committee was sympathetic to the fact that
the Student’s academic performance in the three courses at issue may have been affected
by the death of her grandfather, the committee was also persuaded by the evidence
presented by Professor McDonald that the Student was performing very poorly in all
three courses during the term prior to her grandfather’s death, and that the Student was
well aware of her precarious academic situation and the counseling services offered by
the university and chose not to avail herself of them.
The committee also agreed with the written reasons of the UTSC Sub Committee on
Academic Appeals that there were more appropriate remedies available to the Student
that she ought to have pursued including requesting a rewrite of her final exams. The
committee agreed with the written reasons of the Sub Committee on Academic Appeals
that:
“the committee found it unfathomable why [the Student] had taken 2.5 FCE
against standard warnings and the explicit advice of academic counselors when

Page 4 of 6

Report 281 of the Academic Appeals Committee
all she needed to graduate was 0.5 FCE. There were remedies available to her
that made more sense than after-the-fact withdrawal from multiple courses, and
she had not considered these, just as she had not considered dropping the courses
before the exams. She had essentially gone ahead with a very ill-advised course of
action, and suffered the consequence.”
The committee also considered all of the evidence presented by the Student about her
past harassment and concluded based on the Student’s own evidence that the harassment
was not taking place during the summer 2002 session, that it was not a factor in her poor
performance for the three courses in question.
Nevertheless, the committee was persuaded by the fact that the Student needs only one
half-credit in order to graduate, and by the fact that the death of her grandfather just prior
to her final exams may have had a negative impact on her performance in those courses.
The committee was also persuaded by Professor McDonald’s testimony that had the
Student based her earlier appeals on a request to rewrite her final exams she would have
been granted this relief.
Relief granted:
The Student’s request for retroactive late withdrawal from STAB22H, GGR314H and
SOC304H is denied. The student’s request for a deferral of her three-year suspension is
denied. At her election, the Student will be permitted the opportunity to rewrite the final
examinations in any or all three courses subject to the following conditions:
1.

Within 30 (thirty) working days of the date of release of this decision, the Student
shall notify Associate Dean McDonald, or if he is not available, the UTSC officer
empowered to act in his place, as to whether she wishes to elect to rewrite the
final examinations in STAB22H, GGR314H and SOC304H. The Student’s
existing term marks will remain in effect and will continue to factor into her final
marks for each of the three courses according to the requirements of each of the
courses. In default of timely notification, the Student shall be deemed to have
elected not to pursue this remedy.

2.

If the Student elects to rewrite the final examination in STAB22H, the rewrite will
take place according to the schedule for deferred examinations at the UTSC
campus. If the Student elects to rewrite the final examination in GGR314H
and/or SOC304H, the examination will take place according to the deferred
examination schedule of the Faculty of Arts and Science, St. George campus. If
reasonably feasible, the examinations should be set and marked by the instructor
who offered the course in 2002, based on the course content as it then existed.
The decision of Associate Dean McDonald, or if he is unable to act, of the UTSC
official carrying out his duties, as to the feasibility of carrying out these
instructions in whole or in part shall be conclusive and not appealable. If the
Associate Dean or his substitute decides that it is not feasible to carry out these

Page 5 of 6

Report 281 of the Academic Appeals Committee
instructions in full, the Student shall be notified as to what form of examination is
feasible. The Student may within a further one week from such notification
advise Associate Dean McDonald or his substitute whether she wishes to proceed
with such examinations as can be arranged, or to let her final grades as they
presently appear remain on her transcript unaltered. In default of timely
notification, the Student shall be deemed to have elected to let the present grades
stand.
3.

If the Student elects to rewrite all or any of the final examinations, her standing
shall be reassessed according to the final grades that she receives and the
academic regulations of the University.

RELEASED:

JULY 25, 2003

Paul Holmes
Secretary

Jane Kidner
Chair

Docs Open: 27326 v2 - Public

Page 6 of 6

