THE UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO

IN THE MATTER OF charges of academic dishonesty made on May 25, 2011;
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic

Mallers, 1995;
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University a/Toronto Act, 1971, S.O. 1971, c. 56 as amended
S,0, J978, C. 88

IJETWEEN:
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO

- and y

K

Date of Hearing: October 27, 2011
Members of the Panel:

Ms Lisa Brownstone, Barrister and Solicitor, Chair
Professor Bruno Magliocchetti, Faculty Panel Member
Mr. Shakir Rahim, Stt1dent Panel Member
Appearances:

Ms Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Barristers
Mr. Kenneth Raddatz, Law Student, Downtown Legal Services
In Attcnclancc:
Ms Y K
Student
Dr. Kristi Gourlay, Academic Integrity Officer, Faculty of Arts and Science
Ms Natalie Ramtahal, Coordinator, Appeals, Discipline and Facility Grievances

-I-

Preliminary

(I]

The Trial Division of the University Tribunal was convened on October 27, 2011 to
consider charges under the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour 011 Academic
Mallers, 1995 (the "Code") laid against the student by letter dated May 25, 2011 from
Professor Edith Hillan, Vice-Provost, Faculty & Academic Life.

Hearing on the llacts

[2]

The charges focing the student were the following:
(I) On or about March I, 2011, you knowingly represented as your own an idea or
expression of an idea, and/or work of another in connection with a form of academic
work, namely, Long Assignment l that you submitted to fulfill the course
requirements of LJN305H I, contrary to Section B.I.l(d) of the Code of Behavior on
Academic Matters, 1995 ("Code"),

(2) In or about March l, 2011, you knowingly used or possessed an unauthorized aid
and obtained unauthorized assistance in com1ection with a form of academic work,
namely, Long Assignment I that you submitted to fulfill the course requirements of
LIN305Hl, contrary to Section BJ, I (b) of the Code,
(3) In the alternative, on or about March I, 2011, you knowingly engaged in a form of
cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or misrepresentation in order to
obtain academic credit or other academic advantage of any kind in Long
Assignment 1 that you submitted to fulfill course requirements in LIN305H I,
contrary to Section B.l.3(b) of the Code,
(4) On or about February 16, 2011, you knowingly represented as your own an idea or
expression of an idea, and/or work of another in connection with a form of academic
work, namely, an assignment titled "Korean Relative Clauses Construction:
Headness and Gapping" that you submitted to fulfill the course requirements of
LIN306HI, contrary to Section B.1.1 (d) of the Code.
(5) In the alternative, on or about February 16, 2011, you knowingly engaged in a form
of cheating, academic dishonesty 01· misconduct, fraud or misrepresentation in order
to obtain academic credit or other academic advantage of any kind in an assignment
titled "Korean Relative Clauses Construction: Headness and Gapping" submitted to
fulfill comse requirements in LIN306H l, contrary to Section B.I.3(b) of the Code.

"2"

[3]

Particulars of the charges were as follows:
(I) At all material times you were a student in LIN305Hl taught by Professor Daphna
Heller, and in LIN306H I taught by Professor Alana Johns, during the winter of
2011.
(2) You did not write portions of Long Assignment I submitted in yo\ll' name on or
about March I, 2011 to fulfill the course requirements of LIN305Hl, but rather
copied significant portions of Long Assignment 1 from another student, Katie
Kerckaert.
(3) For the purposes of obtaining academic credit and/or other academic advantage, you
knowingly obtained unauthorized assistance and committed plagiarism in
connection with Long Assignment I.
(4) You did not write pm1ions of an assignment titled "Korean Relative Clauses
Construction: Headness and Gapping" that you submitted in your name to fulfill the
course requirements of LIN306H I, but rather copied significant portions of this
assignment from various websites.
(5) For the purposes of obtaining academic credit and/or other academic advantage, you
knowingly committed plagiarism in connection with your assignment titled "Korean
Relative Clauses Construction: Headness and Gapping".

[4]

The Revised Notice of Hearing, dated October 19, 2011 was entered into evidence as
Exhibit I. Discipline Counsel for the University, Ms Hanner, introduced an Agreed
Statement of Facts which was entered on consent as Exhibit 2. A Joint Book of
Documents, which contains the charging documents and other documents referred to in
the Agreed Statement of Facts, was entered as Exhibit 3. The agreed upon facts are
reproduced in substantial part below:
(I) At all material times, lvls. K
Toronto.

was a registered student at the University of

LIN305
(2)

In the 2011 Winter term, Ms. K
enrolled in LIN305Hl - Quantitative Methods,
which was taught by Prof. Daplma Heller ("LIN305"). Ms. K
admits that she
received a copy of the LIN305 Syllabus.

-3-

(3)

The LIN305 Syllabus stated, in part, as follows:
University Policies:
You are subject to the Code of Student Conduct
(http://www.governingcouncil.utoronlo.ca/policies,sludcntc.hlm) and the Code of
Behaviour on Academic Mattel's
(http://www.governingcouncil.utoronto.ca/policies/behaveac.httn), Violations such
as plagiarism and other cheating will be handled in accordance with regulations.

(4)

The academic requirements for LIN305 included three long homework assignments
worth 30% of the course mark, Long Homework# 1 was due March l, 2011

(5)

Ms. K
submitted her Long Assignment I in partial completion of the Course
requirements ("Assignment").

(6)

Professor Heller graded the Assignment and noted that it was virtually identical to
an assignment submitted by another student K.K.

(7)

In particular, Professor Heller noted that it was highly unusual for two students to
report the exact same measures or to use the same text to explain the results, as the
assignment was worded very generally and did not tell the students which
measurement to use or which graph to draw.

(8)

Ms. K

(9)

admits that with respect to the Assignment she knowingly:

(a)

copied the work of K,K, without authorization or attribution, and in doing so
represented the ideas of another person, the expression of the ideas of another
person, and the work of another person as her own;

(b)

committed plagiarism contrary to section B.I.l(d) of the Code; and

(c)

engaged in a form of cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or
misrepresentation in order to obtain academic credit, contrary to section
B.l.3(b) of the Code.

She admits that she did so for the plllpose of obtaining an academic advantage in
LIN305.

-4-

LIN306

( I 0) In the 2011 Winter term, Ms. K
was also enrolled in LIN306H I -Language
Diversity and Linguistic Universals, which was taught by Prof. Almm Johns
("UN306"). Ms. K
admits that she received a copy of the LIN306 Syllabus.
( 11) The academic requirements for LIN306 included three assignments. The second of

these assignments was due February 16, 201 l, and was worth 20% of the comse
mark. The Professor distributed a description of this assignment to the class. It
stated, in part: "Your assignment will be marked based on clarity, level of
discussion, use of examples to support your discussion, quality of sources and
proper citation,,,"
( 12) Ms. K
submitted Assignment 2 in partial completion of the Course requirements
("Assignment 2"),
(13) The teaching assistant assigned to mark Assignment 2 reported to Professor Johns
that almost all of the sentences in Assignment 2 were taken directly from the three
websites listed as references at the end of Assignment 2. No quotation marks or
other identifying marks were used to indicate that the work was copied virtually
verbatim from these sources.
(14) lvls. K

admits that with respect to Assignment 2 she knowingly:

(a)

copied the internet sources without authorization or attribution, and in doing
so represented the ideas of another person, the expression of the ideas of
another person, and the work of another person as her own;

(b)

committed plagiarism contrary to section I3.I.l (d) of the Code; and

(c)

engaged in a form of cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or
misrepresentation in order to obtain academic credit, contrary to section
B.l.3(b) of the Code.

(15) She admits that she did so for the purpose of obtaining an academic advantage in
LIN306,
Admission

[5]

Ms. K
acknowledges and admits that the conduct described constitutes academic
misconduct as described in the Charges, and in particular that her conduct is contrary to
section B.1.1 (d) of the Code as described in Charges I and 4.

-5-

Decision of the Tl'ihunal
[61

On the basis of the Agreed Statement of Facts and the Joint Book of Documents, the
Tribunal accepted the plea and found a contravention of the Code as set out in the
Charges 1 and 4. At this time, the Provost indicated its intention not to proceed with
Charges 2, 3 and 5 and these were withdrawn.

Sanction Phase

[7]

[8]

The parties entered an Agreed Statement of Facts on Sanction, which was marked as
Exhibit 4, and which included the following facts:
(a)

In June 2008 Ms. K
was found to be in possession of an unauthorized aid in
the form of notes relevant to the course inside a pencil case on her desk during a
final exam in UN203H 1. The notes were written in very small lct1crs.

(b)

Ms. K
met with the Dean's Designate in August, 2008, at which time she
claimed not to know that she couldn't have the aid in the pencil case on her desk.
After discussion, she admitted that she had the notes in her possession and thereby
committed an academic offence.

(c)

The Dean's Designate imposed a sanction of a zero for the exam and a notation
on her transcript that she had committed an academic offence.

(d)

The Dean's Designate also stated in a letter to Ms. K
in which he informed her
of the sanction that: "Academic offences constitute unacceptable behaviour in the
University. This letter is to serve as a warning to you that any foture academic
work must be conducted in accordance with the rules and regulations of the
University ... , While I hope you have learned from this experience, I must warn
you that any further offence will be treated more severely,"

(e)

Ms. K
is cunently serving an academic suspension of 1 year which
commenced at the end of the Winter 2011 term and will end al the end of the
Winter 2012 term.

(J)

Ms. K
acknowledges that she needs to take steps to address her limited writing
experience and skills, and additionally to be fully aware of her obligations as a
student of the University.

The parties also provided to the Tribunal an unde11aking executed by Ms K
was marked as Exhibit 5, The Undertaking provides in material part as follows:

. 6.

, which

(a)

Ms. K
undertakes to complete the workshops described below through the
University of Toronto St. George Camp11s College Writing Centres Academic
Skills Workshops ("Undertaking").

(b)

Ms. K
will fulfill the Undei-taking by taking the following 6 workshops, which
amount to 6 homs of instruction:
l.
2
3.
4.
5.
6.

Understanding the Assignment
Library Research
Thesis Statements
Organizing an Essay
Using Sources
Revising the Essay

( c)

Ms. K
agrees to complete the workshops in the term in which she is next
registered for a course at the University.

( d)

In the event that these workshops are not available at the time Ms. K
attempts
to complete them, the University will, acting reasonably, propose an alternate and
equivalent program that Ms. K
shall complete to fulfill the Undertaking.

(e)

Ms. K
acknowledges that the Provost of the University of Toronto intends to
seek a sanction which includes a 3 year suspension and a 4 year notation before
the University Tribunal. Ms. K
fm1her acknowledges that the Provost takes
this position, in part, in reliance on Ms. K
's Unde11aking, and, without it, the
Provost would not seek a sanction before the University Tribunal that included a
suspension of only 3 years and a notation of only 4 years.

(f)

Ms. K
agrees and accepts that she will not be eligible to graduate from the
University until she fulfills the Undertaking and the University may rely on this
Undertaking to deny her the ability to graduate until it is fulfilled.

[9]

In addition, Ms K
actions.

[10]

The pat1ies submitted a Joint Submission on Penalty, in which the following sanctions
were jointly proposed:
(a)

made a statement to the Tribunal that she was very sorry for her

a final grade of zero in each of the following courses:

. 7.

(b)

(i)

LIN 305; and

(ii)

LIN 306.

a suspension from the University to commence May I, 2012, and to end April 30,
2015;

(c)

a notation of the sanction on her academic record and transcript from the date of
the Order until the earlier of her graduation from the University or April 30, 20 l 6,

[ 11]

The parties also proposed that the Panel order that this case be reported to the Provost for
publication of a notice of the decision of the Tribunal and the sanctions imposed in the
University newspapers, with the name of the student withheld.

[12]

The parties agreed that the suspension would be consecutive to the student's current
academic suspension, and therefore, as indicated in the joint submission, would
commence on May I, 2012,

[13]

The Panel was provided with a number of cases in support of the joint submission. Two
of these cases included undertakings as an element of the sanction, a relatively new and
infrequently used tool in these cases,

[ 14]

Discipline Counsel reminded the Panel that there is a high threshold for refusing to accept
a joint submission, and that the Panel would have to be of the view that the
administration of justice was brought into disrepute by the acceptance of that joint
submission in order to depart from it.

Sanction

[15]

In the circumstances, the Panel is of the view that the joint submission is within the
appropriate range of penalty in this case, and accepts the submission,

(16]

The Panel would, however, like to stress that while an undertaking can be a very useful
tool in penalty and rehabilitation, and the parties are to be commended for working
together toward rehabilitation and remediation, the use and contents of the undertaking
should not be viewed as an excuse for the behaviour set out in the Agreed Statement of
Facts, If students do not have the requisite knowledge and skill to comply with basic
requirements of academic life at the University, it is preferable that these deficiencies be
addressed before, and not as a result 01: repeated academic offences, Nonetheless, as
stated, the Panel accepts and agrees that the student's willingness to work with the
University toward rehabilitation and remediation is a mitigating factor in considering the
appropriate sanction.

[ 17]

Therefore, the Panel orders:

-8-

I) that ivls. K
is guilty of guilty of two charges of the academic offence of plagiarism
contrary to section B.l(l)(d) of the Code o/13ehavio11r 011 Ac11de111ic Mallers;
2) that 1vls. K

received a linal grade oi'zero in the course L1N3051-l1;

3) that /vis K

receive a final grade of zero in the course L1N306I-J 1;

4) that Ms K
be suspended from the University !'or three years, to commence on May
I, 2012, and to end April 30, 2015;
5) that the sanction shall be rccorclec! on her academic record and transcript from the
date of the Order until April 30, 2016, or the date of her graduation from the
University, whichever is earlier; and
6) that this case shall be reported to the Provost for publication of a notice of the
decision of the Tribunal and the sanctions imposed, with the name of the student
withheld.
-1 <:'llr
Dated this la• J clay of November, 2011

1a
(

-9-

Browi,-tone, Co-Chair

