Case 631

DATE:

   November 25, 2011

PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v. Y.K.

Hearing Date(s):

   October 27, 2011

Panel Members:

   Lisa Brownstone, Chair
   Prof. Bruno Magliocchetti, Faculty Member
   Mr. Shakir Rahim, Student Member

Appearances:

   Ms. Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel for the University
   Mr. Kenneth Raddatz, DLS for the Student

In Attendance:

   Ms. Y.K., the Student
   Dr. Kristi Gourlay, Academic Integrity Officer
   Ms. Natalie Ramtahal, Coordinator, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty
   Grievances

   Student charged under s. B.i.1(d), s. B.i.1(b), and alternatively,
   under s. B.i.3(b) of the Code . The charges related to allegations that
   the Student copied a significant portions of a course assignment from
   another student and that the Student copied significant portions of a
   course assignment for a different course from various websites. The
   parties agreed on the facts relating to the offences. The Student
   admitted to having committed the offences as set out in s. B.i.1(d) and
   s. B.i.3(b) of the Code and pleaded guilty to the charges. The Panel
   found the Student guilty of the offences under s. B.i.1(d) of the Code
   and accepted the withdrawal of the charge under s. B.i.1(b) and s.
   B.i.3(b) . The parties submitted an Agreed Statement of Facts on
   Sanction which indicated that the Student was currently serving a
   one-year suspension for an academic offence and that the Student
   acknowledged she needed to take steps to address her limited writing
   ability and be fully aware of her obligations as a student. The parties
   also submitted an undertaking executed by the Student which required
   her to complete workshops at the University of Toronto Writing Centre.
   The Student acknowledged on the Undertaking that the sanction sought by
   the University is in reliance of her Undertaking. The parties submitted
   a Joint Submission on Penalty. The Panel found that the joint
   submission is within the appropriate range of penalty and accepted the
   submission. However, the Panel stated its concern that while an
   undertaking can be a useful tool in penalty and rehabilitation, its use
   should not be viewed as an excuse for the misbehaviour. Nonetheless,
   the Panel found that the Studentâs willingness to work with the
   University toward rehabilitation and remediation is a mitigating factor
   in considering appropriate sanction. The Panel imposed a grade of zero
   in each of the two courses; a three-year suspension, a four-year
   notation on the Studentâs academic record and transcript (or until
   graduation, whichever was to occur first); and that a report be issued
   to the Provost.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/13013
