Case 494

DATE:

   information not available

PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v. Ms. R.K.

Hearing Date(s):

   information not available (charges laid on February 14, 2006)

Panel Members:

   Ms. Julie Hannaford, Chair
   Prof. Sarah King, Faculty Panel Member
   Ms. Candace Ikeda-Douglas, Student Panel Member

Appearances:

   Mr. Rob Centa, Counsel for the University
   Ms. R. K., the Student

In Attendance:

   Prof. Roger Beck
   Ms. Lucy Gaspini
   the Studentâs parents

   Student charged under s. B.i.1(a) of the Code. The charges related to
   allegations that the Student altered and submitted two term tests for
   remarking, and that she forged and submitted an anonymous letter which
   purported to be authored by another Student and which described the
   Student as being the victim of racial discrimination. The Student
   pleaded guilty to the charges. The Student had previously been expelled
   from an American university for violating the universityâs mid-term
   examination honor code, authoring a similarly racially discriminatory
   anonymous note, and for committing perjury. The Panel found the Student
   guilty of three offences under s. B.i.1(a) of the Code. The Student
   claimed that she was chastened by the events and she apologized for
   committing the offences, and argued that she was entitled to a âsecond
   chance.â The Panel considered the principles that applied to
   considerations of when a âsecond chanceâ should be considered in
   relation to penalties to be imposed. The Panel observed that the
   concept of âsecond chanceâ related to the principle that an individual
   who displays flawed behaviour is entitled to reflect upon the error of
   their ways, integrate the error, and be given an opportunity to
   demonstrate that their views and their character is reformed. The Panel
   found that the Studentâs evidence did not demonstrate that she had
   reflected on the error of her ways. The Panel considered the evidence
   of the Studentâs witness and found that he unaware of the full nature
   of the case and the background and complete facts related to the
   situation. The Panel found that the Studentâs misconduct constituted a
   case of premeditated, calculating, deliberate and intentional acts,
   designed to obtain an advantage by the promotion of racial hatred,
   racial stereotyping, and the insertion of the Student into the
   situation, cast as a victim of racial hatred. The Panel found that the
   Studentâs fabrication depended on the stirring up of racial hatred, and
   that all racial antagonism must be sanctioned. The Panel imposed a
   recommendation to the President that the Student be expelled, further
   to s. C.ii.(b)(i) of the Code; a permanent notation on the Studentâs
   academic record and transcript; and that a report be issued to the
   Provost.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12711
