THE UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
IN THE MATTER OF charges of academic dishonesty made on
September 23, 2013,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on

Academic Matters, 1995,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Act, 1971, S.O.
1971 , c. 56 am.

BETWEEN:
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
- and -

REASONS FOR DECISION

Hearing Date: Tuesday, November 26, 2013
Panel Members:
Ms. Dena Varah, Barrister and Solicitor, Chair
Dr. Maria Rozakis-Adcock, Laboratory Medicine and Pathobiology, Faculty
Member
Ms. Lucy Chau, Student Member
Appearances:
Ms.
The Student
Mr. Robert A. Genta, Assistant Discipline Counsel

vtlllll NIii ~

.

In Attendance
Ms. Lucy Gaspini, Manager, Academic Integrity and Affairs, University of Toronto
Mississauga
Ms. Sinead Cutt, Administrative Assistant, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty
Grievances, Office of the Governing Council

2
REASONS FOR DECISION
1.

8-

The Trial Division of the University of Toronto Tribunal was convened on
August 19, 2013 to consider charges advanced by the University of
Toronto (the "University") against~ ~
(the "Student")
under the Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters (the "Code").

The Charges

2.

The Student is charged with six offences under the Code:
(a)

On or about November 28, 2011, you knowingly represented as
your own an idea or expression of an idea, and/or the work of
another in a laboratory report that you submitted for academic
credit in CHM211H5F (the "Course"), contrary to section B.l.1(d) of
the Code.

(b)

On or about November 28, 2011, you knowingly obtained
unauthorized assistance in connection with a laboratory report that
you submitted for academic credit in the Course, contrary to section
B.l.1(b) of the Code.

(c)

In the alternative, on or about November 28, 2011, you knowingly
engaged in a form of cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct,
fraud or misrepresentation not otherwise described in the Code in
order to obtain academic credit or other academic advantage of any
kind in connection with a laboratory report that you submitted for
academic credit in the Course, contrary to section B.l.3(b) of the
Code.

(d)

In Fall 2012, you were a party to the offence of knowingly using or
possessing unauthorized aids or obtaining unauthorized assistance
in connection with a form of academic work submitted in the
Course, contrary to section B.1.1 (b) of the Code.

(e)

In Fall 2012, you were a party the offence of knowingly committing
plagiarism in connection with academic work submitted for credit in
the Course, contrary to section B.1.1 (d) of the Code.

(f)

In the alternative, in September 2012, you were a party to the
offence of knowingly engaging in a form of cheating, academic
dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or misrepresentation not othetwise
described in the Code in order to obtain academic credit or other
academic advantage of any kind in connection with academic work
submitted for credit in the Course, contrary to section B.l.3(b) of the
Code.

3
Agreed Statement of Facts and Plea
3.

At the outset of the hearing, Discipline Counsel advised that the University
and the Student had entered into an Agreed Statement of Facts. The
Agreed Statement of Facts is attached hereto as Appendix "A".

4.

Pursuant to the Agreed Statement of Facts, the Student pied guilty to
charges (1 )-(3) listed above. Discipline Counsel advised that if the
Tribunal accepted the plea on either of the first two charges then the
University withdrew charge (3).

5.

The Student admitted that she knowingly provided unauthorized
assistance to the students to whom she sold the course materials. As
explained below, the panel convicted the Student on charge (4) but did not
believe that the agreed facts supported a conviction on charge (5).
Discipline Counsel advised that if the Tribunal convicted on either charge
(4) or charge (5) then the University withdrew charge (6).

6.

The Student was in attendance and confirmed that she pied guilty to the
charges as provided for in the Agreed Statement of Facts.

7.

The details of the charges are set out in the Agreed Statement of Facts
and are supported by the documents contained in the Joint Book of
Documents. The charges relate to the purchase by the Student of a
package of material relating to CHM211 H5F including a lab report for
Experiment #5, from which the Student plagiarized. The Student sold the
package of materials for the Course, which included lab reports for
Experiment #5. The essential elements of the charges are set out below.

The Facts underlying Charges 1-3
8.

The Student was enrolled in CHM211 H5F - Fundamentals in Analytical
Chemistry (the "Course") in Fall 2011. The syllabus for the Course, which
the Student admits she received, in part, as follows:
Individual Work: Laboratory Work and Problem Sets
All laboratory work and problem sets are to be submitted individually as
independent items of course work. While I encourage you to discuss the general
approach to solving problems with your fellow students, note that the actual term
work submitted should be done by yourself and yourself alone. If in doubt, I
recommend that, following a discussion session with your peers, a one-hour
break be taken prior to working on your course work alone. Note that it is an
academic offence to receive or give unauthorised aid toward the completion
of independent course work. That is, providing your peers with access to your
work (e.g. letting your peers see your problem set solutions) is as much of an
academic offence as copying your peer's answers and submitting those as your
own. Please review the Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters (Section 13.2)
of your Academic Calendar for more details.[emphasis in original]

4
9.

The academic requirements for the Course included five lab reports, which
were worth a total of 35% of the final grade in the Course.

10. During the Course, the Student purchased a package of materials from a
student who was previously enrolled in the Course. The material she
purchased included a copy of that student's Laboratory Report #5 (the
"Purchased Report").
11. On November 28, 2011, the Student submitted Laboratory Report #5 in
partial completion of the Course requirements (the "Submitted Report").
The Student admits she copied the answers to questions 11, 16, and 17
from the Purchased Report.
The Facts underlying Charges 4-6

12. In September 2012, the Student posted a note on the website
www.tusbe.com, which indicated that her Course materials were for sale.
The Student admits that she then sold her course materials separately to
two students who were enrolled at the University of Toronto and who were
both registered in the course in the Fall of 2012. The Course materials she
sold contained assignments, laboratory reports, term tests, and both the
Purchased Report and the Submitted Report.
13. One of the two students to whom the Student sold the materials ("Buyer
1") used the material she purchased, including the Purchased Report, to
complete Laboratory Report #5. Buyer 1 subsequently plead guilty to
academic misconduct.
14. The second student to whom the Student sold the materials ("Buyer 2")
shared the material she purchased with two other students. Buyer 2 and
those students then collaborated in the preparation of their answers to
Experiment #5. Material from the Purchased Report and the Submitted
Report appeared in the Laboratory reports submitted by these three
students all of whom subsequently admitted to having received
unauthorized assistance in their academic work.
Decision on Charges

15. The Tribunal reviewed the Agreed Statement of Facts, the documents in
support thereof and considered the submissions of Discipline Counsel.
After deliberations, the Tribunal determined that the evidence proved
charges 1 and 2 and accepted the guilty plea entered into by the Student.
16. As a result, the University withdrew charge 3. The Tribunal makes no
findings or determinations with respect to this charge.

5
17. With respect to Charges 4 to 6, the Tribunal determined that the facts
proved Charge 4. The Tribunal noted that the Student had explicitly plead
guilty to Charge 4 but not to Charge 5. The only fact to support Charge 5,
aiding and abetting plagiarism, was that it was foreseeable to the Student
that the Buyers would copy the lab reports because she herself had done
so. Discipline Counsel was not aware whether the Buyers and the two
other implicated students had plead to plagiarism or whether it had been
established that they plagiarised any of the course materials purchased
from the student. The Agreed Statement of Facts only states that they
plead guilty to use of unauthorized materials. The Tribunal therefore did
not convict the Student on Charge 5.
18.

As a result of the conviction on Charge 4, the University withdrew charge
6. The Tribunal makes no findings or determinations with respect to this
charge.

Penalty
19. Penalty was contested.

Evidence on Penalty
20. The University and the Student submitted an Agreed Statement of Facts
on Penalty, which detailed a prior offence of the Student. In Fall 2011, the
Student was enrolled in BIO204H5F - Introduction to Physiology. On
November 25, 2011, the Student submitted Lab Report #5 in partial
completion of the requirement of that course.
21. On December 13, 2011, the Student met with the course professor, who
expressed concern that the Student's lab report was similar to the lab
report submitted by another student in the Course.
22. . Almost a year later, on November 16, 2012, the Student met with
Professor Scott Graham, the Dean's Designate for Academic Integrity at
the University of Toronto Mississauga. The Student admitted at that
meeting that she had received unauthorized assistance from another
student in violation of the Code.
23. The Student submitted a letter dated July 31, 2012 from Marie Mathai,
Community Safety Case Work at the University. The letter recounted a
meeting Ms. Mathai had with the Student and her sister in which they
detailed domestic violence directed against their mother and towards
them. Their mother had separated from their father five years earlier, but
their mother subjected them to verbal berating, emotional abuse and
threats. They were kicked out of the home in July 2012 and accessed
interim housing at the University. The Student and her sister indicated

6
that they did not have the financial ability to move out of the home.
24. . The Student testified on her family situation, indicating that her mother
had taken her laptop away around the time the lab report was due. She
also testified that she sold the course materials in September because she
needed money for tuition. On the previous offence, she noted that it was
not resolved until December, and that she had learned her lesson from
that sanction.
25.

With respect to her intention in purchasing the material, the Student
testified that she purchased course materials primarily to prepare for the
midterm by reviewing the previous year's examination. She stated that the
Physical & Chemical Society, a student organization on campus sold prior
examinations, and that she did not believe it was improper. She said her
intention was not to copy from the Purchased lab report at the time she
purchased the material.

26. 30. On cross-examination, she admitted that the Physical & Chemical
Society did not sell completed labs from previous years.

Submissions on Penalty
27. Discipline Counsel submitted that the appropriate penalty in this case is a
final grade of "O" in the Course, a suspension of 5 years to come into
effect immediately and a recommendation to the Governing Council that
the Student be expelled.
28. The Student submitted that the penalty was inappropriate, but she did not
propose an alternative penalty.
29. Discipline Counsel outlined the factors the Tribunal should consider in
determining the appropriate penalty:
(a)

the character of the person charged;

(b)

the likelihood on repetition of the offence;

(c)

the nature of the offence committed;

(d)

any extenuating circumstances surrounding the commission of the
offence;

(e)

the detriment to the University occasioned by the offence; and

(f)

the need to deter others from committing a similar offence.

7
(In the Matter of the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour and an Appeal by
Mr. C., [Case No. 1976/77-3; November 5, 1976])
30. On factors (a) and (b), Discipline Counsel noted that the Student sold her
course materials after meeting with her professor to discuss the concern
about her lab. He did fairly admit, however, that there was minimal
evidence before the Panel to determine the Student's character or the
likelihood of repetition of the offence.
31. Discipline Counsel focussed primarily on the nature of the offence, the
detriment to the University occasioned by the offence and the need for
general deterrence. He argued that the Student's offences of purchasing
the Course Materials and subsequently plagiarizing from the Purchased
lab report are indistinguishable from the offence in the purchased essay
cases, of which he included four in the Book of Authorities.
32. Discipline Counsel relied heavily on the University of Toronto and C.H.K
(Case Nos. 596/597/598; November 23, 2011), in which the Discipline
Appeals Board concluded that purchasing essays are amongst the most
egregious offences a student can commit in a university setting. The
Appeals Board outlined the elements of intention, deliberation and
knowing deception that characterize the offense as well as the introduction
of a commercial element into the relationship of a student with the
University. The Appeals Board in that case concluded that expulsion
should be considered likely in cases of students purchasing and
submitting purchased essays as their own work for academic credit.
33. According to Discipline Counsel, the Student in this case compounded the
offence by subsequently selling the materials. He noted that none of the
cases involved one Student who both bought and sold academic
materials. As either offence can (and likely will) result in a
recommendation of expulsion, the two together should inevitably lead to
this result.

Decision of Penalty
34. The Panel carefully considered the facts of this case, the factors in
deciding penalty and the precedents put before it. It is aware, as noted by
Discipline Counsel, that the prior Panel decisions are not binding. These
decisions do offer guidance for the Panel on the penalties imposed on
other students in similar circumstances. It has determined that the proper
penalty in this case is a final grade of zero in the Course, a five-year
suspension and a recommendation to the Governing Council that the
Student be expelled.

8
35.

The Panel agreed with Discipline Counsel that the most important factors
in this case are the nature of the offences, the detriment to the University
occasioned by the offences and the need for general deterrence.

36. The Panel did not agree that the Student's prior offence is an aggravating
factor in this case. The penalty for the prior offence was not imposed until
after the Student committed the offences at issue in this hearing. The fact
that she had notice that her Professor was investigating her does not rise
to the level of a prior offence for the purposes of sentencing in this case.
There can be no conclusion that the Student did not learn from that
offence or that there is a strong likelihood of recidivism.
37. Similarly, the Panel was not satisfied that the Student's family situation
was a mitigating factor in this case. Although the Tribunal is sympathetic
to the Student's difficult family circumstances, the letter submitted as
evidence was several months after the first offences and months before
the second. The Panel is well aware that domestic difficulties can span
months and years, but it did not have any evidence before it to make a
conclusion in this regard. In fact, as Discipline Counsel noted, the Student
performed extremely well in her courses in the first semester of 2011.
Even if the Panel did have the necessary evidence before it, it would not
rise to the level to excuse the offences at issue or to affect the ultimate
penalty.
38. The Panel also does not accept that this case is exactly analogous to the
purchased essay cases. The Appeals Board in C.H.K. emphasized the
"intention, deliberation and knowing deception" that characterized the
offences of purchasing an essay for submission in a course. The Appeals
Board also noted that in these cases, "the student buys an original work,
tailored to the specific subject and which will not be found through the
increasing sophisticated antennae of professors and their electronic
helpers." The Appeals Board referred to the Provost's Guidelines for
Sanction, which recommends expulsion as an appropriate penalty for
submitting purchased work.
39. In this case, the Student testified that she did not purchase the material
with the intention to cheat and was instead primarily seeking prior
examinations to prepare for her midterm; there was no suggestion that
purchasing examinations (as opposed to graded assignments) was
improper. The Panel accepts that the Student did not purchase the
materials with the "intention, deliberation and knowing deception" as
characterize the students in the purchased essay cases. Rather, it
appears that Student succumbed to the temptation of plagiarizing Lab
Report #5 when it became clear that the questions had been repeated.
This in itself is a serious offence - plagiarism has long been described as
one of the most serious offences in a University setting - but alone would

9
likely lead to a suspension rather than an expulsion.
40. The reason the Panel recommends expulsion rather than the lesser
penalty of a suspension is the Student's subsequent sale of the materials.
Although the Student's purchase of the material was without deliberation
and knowing deception, the same cannot be said of the sale of her
materials. She sold the materials with the knowledge that the lab reports
had a selection of questions that were repeated. She included in her
package of materials both the Purchased Lab Report and the Submitted
Lab Report thereby providing the students to whom she sold the materials,
a greater opportunity to benefit from unauthorized assistance.
41. The Student took the time and made the effort of advertising the materials,
copying them and selling them to the two Buyers .. It does not appear that
the Student did give much thought to her actions, but for the fact that she
needed money, a fact to which she testified. Her failure to consider the
consequences of her sale of the materials does not diminish the
knowledge she had that the Buyers would have an unfair advantage over
their peers. It is precisely this unfair advantage that the Professor
referenced in the Course Syllabus. This Student clearly saw the
opportunity for monetary profit and did so with little or no regard to the
detriment to her fellow students or to the University.
42. There was no evidence on how often these types of informal transactions
between students occur; most of the precedents submitted by Discipline
Counsel involved more organized and professional essay and assignment
preparation services 1 . Whether these types of transactions are rare or very
common (and the Student was unlucky enough to be caught), the harm to
the University and the need for general deterrence is significant. The fact
that students post on a website and recycle course work already
completed is particularly concerning. Without significant sanctions, there
is little to deter students from this easy money making venture. This
increases the need for general deterrence.
43. We do note that we are not particularly concerned with the financial aspect
of these exchanges but for the fact that it provides extra incentive to
students. Several precedents warn of the danger of introducing
commercialism into the academic process and treat it as an aggravating
factor. We consider this somewhat idealistic. It is not the financial
transaction in a university setting per se that is the problem but the
provision of unauthorized assistance that is not permissible. It must be

1 See for example The University of Toronto and Y. L. (Case No. 686; December

6, 2012), in which the student posted on a website that solicited bids to complete
assignments for students. The panel recommended expulsion.

10
clear to students that providing unauthorized assistance to other students
- for a quick dollar or for friendship - is cheating and will not be tolerated.
Order

44. Accordingly, the Panel imposes the following penalty:
(a)

the Student receive a final grade of "O" in the Course;

(b)

The Student be suspended from the University for a period of 5
years effective immediately;

(c)

A recommendation be made to the Governing Council that the
Student be expelled from the University; and

(d)

this case be reported to the Provost, with the Student's name
withheld, for publication of a notice of the Decision of the Tribunal
and sanction imposed.

D~naVarah, Co-Chair

APPENDIX A

THE UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO

IN THE MATTER OF charges of academic_dishonesty filed on September 23, 2013,

AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic
Matters, 1995,

AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Act, 1971, S.O. 1971, c. 56 as amended
S.0. 1978, C. 88.

s1~(NEiNJ
THE Ul\HVERSijTV TRrJUf.V:ll :f.HE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
UNIVEBSITV O!r 'f(?it~JMTC.1
:.lc

..

-ANDI

the ............
this

I

I

I

Ir

Y,(.\~~'Qt~y. ...........:W- ~

·'dh day of ~.Q,n\'.JQ) , 20. Li. ..

......\J.}.~.~.LutlAGREED
... STATEMENT OF FACTS
1.

These hearings arise out of charges of academic misconduct filed by the Provost

of the University of Toronto (the "Provost") under the Code of Behaviour on Academic
Matters ("Code") on September 23, 2013. For the purposes of the hearing, the Provost
and ~ ~ have prepared this Agreed Statement of Facts ("ASF") and a joint
book of documents ("JBD"). The Provost and Ms.

'=-

agree that:

2
(a)

each document contained in the JBD may be admitted into evidence
before the Tribunal for all purposes, including for the truth of the
document's contents, without further need to prove the document; and

(b)

if a document indicates that it was sent or received by someone, that is
prima facie proof that the document was sent and received as indicated.

A.

Notice of hearing and consent to having cases heard at the same time

2.

Ms. 8 - admits that she received a notice of hearing for November 27, ~013,

and that she received reasonable notice of the hearing. The notice of hearing is
included in the JBD at Tab 1.
B.

Charges and guilty pleas

3.

Ms. ~ admits that she received a copy of the charges filed by the Provost.

The charges are included in the JBD at Tab 2. M s . ~ waives the reading of the
charges filed against her, and hereby pleads guilty to charges #1 to #6.
4.

5.

The Provost agrees that if the Tribunal convicts on:
(a)

either charge #1 or #2, the Provost will withdraw charge #3;

(b)

either charge #4 or #5, the Provost will withdraw charge #6.

At all material times, Ms. ~ was a registered student at the University of

Toronto Mississauga. A copy of Ms. ~ s academic record is included in the JBD at

Tab 3.

3

1=- Lab Report

C.

The

6.

In Fall 2011, Ms. ~ . enrolled in· CHM211H5F 2011(9) - Fundamentals of

Analytical Chemistry, which was taught by Prof. Paul Piunno ("Course"). A copy of the
syllabus for the Course for Fall 2012 is included in the JBD at Tab 4. Ms. ~
admits that she received a copy of the 2011 version of the syllabus, which was identical
in all material respects to the syllabus used in 2012.
7.

The syllabus stated, in part, as follows:
Individual Work: Laboratory Work and Problem Sets

All laboratory work and problem sets are to be submitted individually as independent
items of course work. While I encourage you to discuss the general approach to solving
problems with your fellow students, note that the actual term work submitted· should be
done by yourself and yourself alone. If in doubt, I recommend that, following a discussion
session with your peers, a one-hour break be taken prior to working on your course work
alone. Note that it is an academic offence to receive or give unauthorised aid toward
the completion of independent course work. That is, providing your peers with access to
your work (e.g. letting your peers see your problem set solutions) is as much of an
academic offence as copying your peer's answers and submitting those as your own.
Please review the Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters (Section 13.2) of your
Academic Calendar for more details.[emphasis in original]

8.

The academic requirements for the Course included 5 lab reports, which were

worth a total of 35% of the final grade in the Course.
9.

On November 28, 2011 , Ms. ~ submitted Laboratory Report #5 in partial

completion of the Course requirements (the " B - Report"). A copy of the graded

B-

version of the ~ Report is included in the JBD at Tab 5.
10.

Ms.

admits that, in Fall 2011, she purchased a package of material

relating to the Course from Shaan Gupta, a student who had previously taken the
Course. The material she purchased included a copy of Ms. Gupta's Laboratory Report
#5 (the "Gupta Report"), a copy of which is included in the JBD at Tab 6.

4
11.

Ms.

from the Gupta Report into the
12.

With -respect to the
(a)

B-

1=- admits that she copied the answers to questions 11, 16, and 17

B-

Report that she submitted.

1=- Report, Ms.

admits that she:

knowingly represented the ideas of Shaan Gupta, the ex·pression of the
ideas of Shaan Gupta, and the work of Shaan Gupta as her own;

(b)

knowingly committed plagiarism contrary to section B.l.1(d) of the Code;

(c)

knowingly received unauthorized assistance from the Gupta Report
contrary to the 8.1.1 (b) of the Code; and

(d)

knew that she was engaged in a form of cheating, academic dishonesty or
misconduct, fraud or misrepresentation in order to obtain academic credit,
contrary to section B.l.3(b) of the Code.

D.

The sale of t h e ~ Report

13.

In September 2012, Ms.

B-

1=- posted a note on the website www.tusbe.com,

which indicated that her Course materials were for sale. Ms.

admits that she

then sold her course materials separately to both Farzana Nushin Rezvi and Fawzia
Yusuf. Ms. Rezvi and Ms. Yusuf were students at the University of Toronto and were
both registered in the course in the Fall of 2012.

1=- admits that the course materials she sold included assignments,
laboratory reports, term tests, and both the 1=- Report and the Gupta Report.
14.

Ms.

5
15.

Ms. Yusuf subsequently used the material she purchased from Ms. ~

including the Gupta Report, in completing her report for Laboratory #5, which she
submitted for academic credit in the Course. Ms. Yusuf admitted that she had
committed academic misconduct.
16.

Ms. Rezvi subsequently made the material she purchased from Ms. ~

available to Sanjid Shahriar. Mr. Shahriar, Ms. Rezvi, and Mr. Mohammed Ahasan then
collaborated in the preparation of their answers to Experiment #5. Material from the
B - Report and· the Gupta Report appeared in the Laboratory reports submitted by
Ms. Rezvi, Mr. Shahriar and Mr. Ahasaon, all of whom subsequently admitted to having
received unauthorized assistance in their academic work.
17.

Ms. B - admits that she knowingly provided unauthorized assistance to Ms.

Rezvi and Ms. Yusuf by selling her course materials to them. Ms. ~ admits that it
was foreseeable that Ms. Rezvi and Ms. Yusuf would copy from the course materials
because Ms. B - herself had done exactly that with the Gupta Report.
E.

Investigation

18.

On December 19, 2012, Omair Noor, the Teaching Assistant in the Course,

notified Prof. Piunno that Ms. Rezvi, Ms. Yusuf, and Mr. Shahriar submitted Laboratory
Reports for experiment 5 that contained identical responses to certain questions. Prof.
Piunno's subsequent investigation of this apparent misconduct revealed Ms. 8 - s
involvement. A copy of Prof. Piunno's investigation report dated February 4, 2013, is
included in the JBD at Tab 7 (without exhibits).

6

19.

On August 1, 2013, Ms. B - met with Prof. Catherine Seguin, the Dean's

Designate for Academic Integrity at the University of Toronto Mississauga. Ms. ~
acknowledges that the Dean's Designate provided her with the warning required during
the Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters. During the meeting with Prof. Seguin, Ms.
B - admitted that she had violated the Code by:
(a)

purchasing the Gupta Report and copying from it when she submitted her
Laboratory Report #5 in 2011; and

(b)
20.

selling her course materials to Ms. Rezvi and Ms. Yusuf.

Ms. ~ acknowledges that:
( a)

the Provost of the University of Toronto has made no representations or
promises as to what sanction the Provost will seek in this case; and

(b)

she is signing this ASF freely and voluntarily, knowing of the potenti~I\ , 1 r,

or h c.w,ilJ 00..1v(ld -(V)y

consequences she faces, and does so with the advice of'6ounsel. 1 ~

Signed on November~. 2013.

Signed on November~. 2013.
Robert A. Genta
Assistant Discipline Counsel .·
University of Toronto
Doc 989197 v1

1-D
' '3 .(.

received unauthorized assistance in their academic work .

17.

Ms. ealllll admits that she knowingly provided unauthorized assista11ce to Ms.

(a)

promises as to what sancli~n the Provost will seek in this Clise_; and

Rezvi and Ms. Yusuf by selling her course m aterials lo them. Ms. ~ admits that it
was foreseeable that Ms. Rezvi 81'\d Ms. Yusuf would copy from the course materials
because Ms.

(b)

8111111 herself had done exactly that with the Gup1a Report.

E.

Jnvot:tlgation.

18.

On December 19, 2012. Omair Noor, the Teaching Assistant in the Course,

the Provost of the University of T oronto has made no representations or

she is signing this ASF lreely and volun tarily, ~nowing o( the potenlial

consequences she races, and does so with the advice of counsel.

Signed on November .:'.252013.

notified Prof. Plunno that Ms. Rezvi, Ms. Yusuf, and Mr. Shahriar submitted Laboratory
Reports for experiment 5 that con tained idemical responsl!ts co certain questions. Prof.
Piunno's subsequent investigation of this apparent misconduct revealed Ms. ~ s

Signed on November_, 2013,

Involvement. A copy of Prof. Piunno's invesligation report dated ·February 4, ~013, is

Rober1 A. Cen1a
Assistan t Discipline Counsel
Universlty of Toronto

Included In the JBD at Tab 7 (without exhibits).
Doo~107S1

