Case #481

   DATE: October 12, 2007
   PARTIES: University of Toronto v. the Student
   Hearing Date(s): August 13, 2007
   Panel Members:
   Mr. Michael Hines, Co-Chair
   Prof. Stephane Mechoulan, Faculty Panel Member
   Ms. Candace Ikeda-Douglas, Student Panel Member
   Appearances:
   Ms. Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel for the University
   Mr. Stephen Frankel, Council for the Student
   In attendance:
   Prof. Scott Graham, Deanâs Designate
   The Student
   Trial Division - B.i.1(d) and B.i.1(f) of Code â plagiarism and
   concoction â course work plagiarized from work submitted by past
   students, from online sources and from published works and sources for
   course work concocted â guilty plea â Agreed Statement of Facts â Joint
   Submission on Penalty - decanal sanction for prior plagiarism offence â
   character reference letters - respect for pre-hearing discussion and
   negotiation â five-year suspension; grade assignment of zero for five
   courses; seven-year notation on the Studentâs transcript or until
   graduation; and report to Provost
   The Student was charged with five offences under s. B.i.1(d), one
   offence under s. B.i.1(f) and alternatively, five offences under s.
   B.i.3(b) of the Code. The charges related to allegations that the
   Studentâs segment of a group project for one course was plagiarized
   from a paper that was written and submitted by another student who had
   taken the course in a previous year; that he submitted a plagiarized
   research essay in a second course that was written and submitted in the
   course by another student who had taken the course in a previous year;
   that he submitted a plagiarized essay in a third course which contained
   text copied from published works that were not referenced or
   acknowledged; that he submitted a plagiarized midterm paper in a fourth
   course which contained unattributed text from online sources and in
   which some of the sources cited were concocted; and that he submitted a
   plagiarized essay proposal in a fifth course which contained text
   copied from online and other sources. The Student pleaded guilty to the
   charges under s. B.i.1(d) and s. B.i.1(f) of the Code. The hearing
   proceeded on an Agreed Statement of Facts. Based on the Agreed
   Statement of Fact and the Studentâs guilty pleas, the Tribunal found
   him guilty of six offences. The parties submitted a Joint Submission on
   Penalty. The Student had previously been sanction at the decanal level
   for a prior plagiarism offence. The Student submitted two character
   reference letters. The Panel considered precedent cases attesting to
   the reasonable of the proposed sanction. The Panel observed that the
   Student had been treated leniently with regard to his past academic
   misconduct and that he did not learn from his previous sanction. The
   Panel stated that it was out of respect for the importance of the
   pre-hearing discussion and negotiation that it accepted the Joint
   Submission on Penalty. If not for the guilty plea and proposed
   sanction, the Panel stated that it would have recommended expulsion.
   The Panel imposed a five-year suspension; a grade assignment of zero in
   the five courses; a notation of the Studentâs transcript for seven
   years (or until graduation, wherever was to occur first); and that a
   report be issued to the Provost.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12985
