THE UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
TRIAL DIVISION

IN THE MATTER OF charges of academic dishonesty made on December 5, 2013,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic
Matters, 1995,

AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Act, 1971, S.O. 1971, c. 56 as
amended S.O. 1978, c. 88

BETWEEN:

THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO

-AND-

Hearing Date: February 4, 2014
Panel:
Mr. William McDowell, Barrister and Solicitor, Chair
Professor Kathi Wilson, Department of Geography, Faculty Panel Member
Mr. Michael Dick, Student Panel Member
Appearances:
Mr. Robert Centa, Assistant Discipline Counsel for the University, Paliare Roland
Barristers
Dr. Camille Begin, Professor of HISC1443: Edible History: History of Global Foodways

In Attendance:
Ms. Sinead Cutt, Administrative Assistant, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances
Professor Wayne Dowler, Dean's Designate, University of Toronto Scarborough

Not in Attendance:
Mr. •
the Student

HI ~.

-2-

Introduction

1.

On February 4, 2014 the Tribunal convened in order to consider charges which
~ -

alleged that Mr. •

ca had committed the academic offences,

particularized as follows:

2.

1.

On or about November 23, 2012, you knowingly represented the ideas of
another, or the expressions of the ideas of another as your own work in
the essay tilled "The History and Cultural Significance of Sushi" ("Essay"),
which you submitted in partial completion of the course requirements in
HISC1443 ("Course"), contrary to section B.1.1 ( d) of the Code.

2.

In the alternative, by submitting the Essay, you knowingly engaged in a
form of cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or
misrepresentation not otherwise described in the Code in order to obtain
academic credit or other academic advantage of any kind, contrary to
section B.l.3(b) of the Code.

Mr.

ca did not appear at the specified time of 9:45 a.m. The Tribunal recessed

until 10:00 a.m. We were satisfied that we had jurisdiction to proceed and that we
should do so, having regard to the Affidavit of Service of Ms. Sinead Cutt which
demonstrated that proper service by email to the student's registered University of
Toronto email (ROSI) account had been made.
3.

We found that Mr.

ca had committed the offence in Count 1, that is that he

had knowingly represented the ideas of another in relation to the Essay submitted to
fulfill the requirements in the course HISC1443, contrary to s. B.l.1(d) of the Code of
Academic Offences.
withdrew Count 2.

Upon being informed of the Tribunal's finding, the University

-3Discussion

4.

We heard the evidence of Dr. Camille Begin, who taught HISC1443, entitled

Edible History: History of Global Foodways (the "Course").

As part of the Course

requirements, Mr. ~ and the other students were to complete a research paper ("the
Essay") which was due November 22, 2012. The Essay was described in the Course
requirements. It was to "centre on one dish and explore how the recipe of this dish
relates to the topics explored in the course". Students were required to "use at least
three secondary sources (two books and one peer-review journal article"). Significantly,
Dr. Begin required that both the paper be turned in hard copy in lecture and on
Turnitin.com, a widely used online service as an initial screen to detect academic
dishonesty, on the same day.
5.

Mr. ~ submitted a paper entitled The History and Cultural Significance of

Sushi. When Dr. Begin received the "Turnitin Originality Report" she noted that the
report disclosed

a 17% match related to an April 22,

http:\\leda.law.harvard.edu/leda/data/766/feng06html.

2009

article

from

The article indicated a "global

similarity index" of 31%. Dr. Begin then searched and found the article, "Detail of Sushi:
History and Regulations" by Cindy Hsin-I Feng.

Ms. Feng was at the time of the

article's acceptance in November 2011 at the Graduate School of Applied Professional
Psychology at Rutgers University in New Jersey.
6.

Counsel for the University very helpfully provided us with a highlighted version of

the Essay which made plain the extent to which Mr. ~ had appropriated not only the
Feng article, but also Ms. Feng's synopsis of other works, including the work of a

-4-

Harvard anthropologist Theodore Bestor.

We have included a part of the Essay

containing the appropriated Feng passages as highlighted by counsel:
In ... Tsukiji: The Fish Market at the Centre of the World ...
icon of Japanese culture and . .. icon of Globalization. A
Bluefin caught off the coast of Massachusetts, flown to .. .
Japan, then resold to a chef in Brookline Boston. The tuna
trade is a .. . example of globalization of a regional industry
that is facing . .. challenges such as international .. . ,
environmental

... , shifting markets, and diffusion and

redefinition of culinary culture as tastes for sushi proliferate
worldwide. Tsukiji is the largest seafood market in the world,
buying and selling Tokyo's supply of seafood .. . New York to
Los Angeles ... will always ... Tokyo. At the Tsukiji market
in Tokyo .. . same batch of fine fish will likely to be purchased
by exporters ... will supply seafood to premier sushi chefs at
... of the world.

Evidently, Mr.~ plagiarized the Feng passages extensively and dishonestly.

7.

Counsel carefully led Dr. Begin through an examination of other parts of the

Essay which contained other instances of appropriation from the Feng article.
Focussing on this evidence and the highlighted passage included above, we were
satisfied, particularly in the absence of any explanation from Mr. ~ that he had
indeed committed the offence specified in Count 1.

- 5Penalty

8.

During the course of the evidence on the merits, a member of the Panel asked

why this matter had not been dealt with at the departmental level through a meeting
between Mr.

ell and the Dean or his designate. We were advised that Mr. ell had

been invited to such a meeting, but had not appeared. Mr. Centa candidly
acknowledged that had the student had done so, he doubted the matter would have
gone further. In all likelihood (in the absence of any adequate explanation) Mr.

ell

would have faced the penalty of a mark of zero on the course and a transcript notation
for period of time.
9.

Counsel submitted that the proper penalty in this instance required not only a

final grade of zero in the Course, but also a period of suspension from the University for
two years, as well as a notation on his academic record and transcript until the day of
graduation from the University.
10.

We are satisfied that this does amount to a proper sanction. We considered

whether Mr.

ell should receive an increased penalty by reason of his failure to attend

the meeting with the Dean. The University took the position in this case, as it has in
other cases, that it is important for students who have committed academic offences to
demonstrate insight and remorse in order to try to rehabilitate or repair the academic
relationship between the student and the University. Where the student has failed to
appear at any stage, let alone take responsibility, it is difficult for the Tribunal to impose
a more lenient penalty.

-611.

Beyond that, Mr. Centa referred us to the criteria first established by the late

Mr. John Sopinka, Q.C. (later the Honourable Mr. Justice Sopinka) in the matter of the
appeal of Mr. C (November 5, 1976).

Mr. Sopinka held that the Tribunal should

consider the following six criteria when deciding on an appropriate sanction:
1.

The character of the person charged;

2.

The likelihood of a repetition of the offence;

3.

The nature of the offence committed;

4.

Any extenuating circumstances surrounding the commission of the
offence;

12.

5.

The detriment to the University occasioned by the offence;

6.

The need to deter others from committing a similar offence.

We are unable to form any view with respect to criteria (1), (2) and (4). As to the

other factors, we are satisfied in relation to (5), that there is detriment to the University
occasioned by the offence. As to (6), the Tribunal sees a wearying number of
prosecutions similar to the present one coming before it, and in our view it is important
to deter others so inclined. There was simply no evidence in relation to mitigation
before us, except for the University's concession that this was the first offence
committed by Mr.
13.

ca.

We are satisfied that a two-year suspension should form part of the penalty.

Mr. Centa referred us to The University of Toronto and Ms. K (Case 428, June 2006).
In that case, Mr. Slaght wrote of the student that she had,

-7"Failed to respond at all to the notice of the charges and to
the various indications that she could intervene helpfully in
the proceedings at any point along the way if she were only
to engage in the process .. .

We believe that when

considering the appropriateness of the penalty in this case, it
is fair and relevant to take into account that the Student had
chosen not to engage in the disciplinary process and as a
consequence a matter that might have been disposed of at
an earlier stage has come before the Tribunal. "

In that case, the Panel saw fit to impose a suspension of two years.

Disposition
14.

The Tribunal recommends as follows:

1.

that the following sanctions shall be imposed on Mr.

ell:

(a)

he shall receive a final grade of zero in HISC14H3F;

(b)

he shall be suspended from the University from the date of this
order until February 4, 2016; and

2.

a notation shall be placed on his academic record and transcript until the
day he graduates from the University of Toronto;

-8-

3.

that this case shall be reported to the Provost for publication of a notice of
the decision of the Tribunal and the sanctions imposed, with the name of
the student withheld.

Dated at Toronto, this

Z/) <tz._day of March, 2014.

William C. McDowell, Chair

