Case 606 - Appeal

DATE:

   October 10, 2012

PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v. A.L.

Hearing Date(s):

   SeptemberÂ 18, 2012

Panel Members:

   Mr. Ronald G. Slaght, Chair
   Prof. Elizabeth Peter, Faculty Member
   Mr. Graeme Norval, Faculty Panel Member
   Chirag Variawa, Student Member

Appearances:

   Ms. Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel for the University
   Mr. Glenroy Bastien for the Respondent, the Student

In Attendance:

   The Student
   Prof. Eleanor Irwin, Dean's Designate, UTSC
   Ms. Natalie Ramthal, Coordinator, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty
   Grievances

   Appeal by the University from a Tribunal decision in which the Student
   was found guilty of submitting falsified academic records to
   prospective employers on three different occasions, contrary to s.
   B.i.1(a) and s. B.i.3(a) of the Code , and sentenced to a five-year
   suspension. The University asked the Appeals Board to set the penalty
   aside and replace it with a recommendation that the Student be
   expelled. On the issue of deference, the Board stated that it had very
   broad powers which meant that it need grant little deference to the
   Trial Panel decision although it does give deference over credibility
   issues, where they arise in a trial setting and where the Trial Panel
   has the opportunity to observe the witnesses giving evidence. The Board
   stated that in this case, the Board did not have to take deference into
   account because the panel did not have the opportunity to observe the
   Student as he did not testify. Regarding the Panelâs concern that
   anonymity hurt the deterrent effect and there was no proven difference
   between the deterrent effect of a five-year suspension and that of a
   recommendation for expulsion, the Board agreed that anonymity blunted
   the deterrent effect but stated that the most serious penalty, in the
   most serious cases, was a real deterrent and it remained an important
   element in setting penalties in serious cases. The message conveyed
   that falsifying transcripts generally meant expulsion and not just
   suspension accomplished deterrence, a legitimate purpose of sentencing.
   Moreover, the Board found that in this case, there were no extenuating
   circumstances that would justify a lesser sentence and expressed a
   concern that if expulsion was not the result in this case, then it
   would be difficult to justify expulsion in any case. For example, the
   issue of whether the Student committed a prior offence was an element
   that had to be seen in combination with others such as whether he had
   shown remorse for a first offence, the nature and gravity of the
   offence, the circumstances of the first offence, and other extenuating
   circumstances that in combination could lead to a lighter penalty for a
   first offender. In this case, the Board found that there was nothing to
   put context around the first offence in a mitigating sense. The Student
   made no personal expression of remorse nor offered any explanation, and
   the Trial Panel and the Board were left completely in the dark without
   any explanation for his behaviour and conduct on the original actions,
   the subsequent denials, and the future prospects. Regarding the
   Studentâs guilty plea, the Board noted that a guilty plea in its own
   terms was neutral or irrelevant in all respects and did not speak to
   any explanation or remorse for the facts. The Board also found it
   significant that the Student further submitted falsified academic
   records after being warned by a potential employer who spotted
   anomalies and contacted him. As for the Panelâs finding that the
   Studentâs acts should be seen as one continuing offence rather than 10
   offences that he had been charged with, the Board rejected the idea
   that because the act itself is the same on each occasion, they should
   be considered all as one. Thus, it was not a mitigating factor.
   Furthermore, the Board found that it was difficult to place much weight
   on the evidence given by the Studentâs psychiatrist without any direct
   evidence from the Student himself. On the issue that the Student had
   accumulated sufficient credits to graduate, the Board refused to give
   effect to this factor, stating that it would convey the message that it
   would lighten the penalty if a student continues to cover up and deny,
   until sufficient credits are obtained. Finally, the Board
   differentiated this case from A.K.G. (Case 508) on the ground that the
   circumstances were different. Unlike this case, in A.K.G. , the Student
   had already earned a degree and after that, on one occasion, submitted
   a false record to one recipient, and then immediately admitted what he
   had done. In closing, the Board stated that the deterrent effect of the
   penalty and the harm occasioned to the University by the nature of the
   offence were the two most important sentencing principles in a serious
   case such as this. The Board found that there was nothing in this case
   that could blunt or ameliorate the facts of the case or the need for
   consistency and uniformity in sentencing principles, in order not to
   skew future cases. The Board allowed the appeal and imposed a
   recommendation that the Student be expelled.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12790
