Case #926

   DATE: November 30, 2017
   PARTIES: University of Toronto v. M.N. (âthe Studentâ)
   Hearing Date(s):Â  Â October 30, 2017
   Panel Members:
   Mr. F. Paul Morrison, Chair
   Professor Faye Mishna, Faculty Panel Member
   Mr. Harvey Lim, Student Panel Member
   Appearances:
   Ms. Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland
   Barristers
   Mr. Ian M. Shemesh, Paralegal, Representative for the Student, Shemesh
   Paralegal Services
   Ms. Lucy Gaspini, Manager, Academic Success and Integrity, Office of
   the Dean, UTM
   Ms. Alexandra Di Blasio, Academic Integrity Assistant, Office of the
   Dean, UTM
   In Attendance:
   The Student (Via Skype)
   Ms. Krista Osbourne, Administrative Clerk and Hearing Secretary,
   Appeals, Discipline and
   Faculty Grievances
   Ms. Sandra Nishikawa, University Tribunal Co-Chair (Observer)
   Mr. Brian Alexic, IT Support, Office of the Governing Council
   Trial Division - s. B.i.1(b) - unauthorized aids â possession of a cell
   phone during an exam â s. B.i.1(a) â forged data â s. B.i.1.(d) â
   plagiarism â copied portions of another studentâs essay â no prior
   offence â agreed statement of facts â joint book of documents â joint
   submission on penalty â guilty plea â notation longer than suspension
   âÂ  final grade of zero in the affected courses, suspension until a
   specified date, transcript notation until a specified date, and report
   to the provost.
   The Panel accepted the Studentâs guilty pleas to one charge of using a
   forged document contrary to s. B.i.1(a) of the Code , one charge of
   plagiarism contrary to s. B.i.1. (d) of the Code , and one charge of
   using an unauthorized aid contrary to s. B.i.1(b) of the Code .
   Alternative charges of academic dishonesty not otherwise described
   contrary to s. B.i.3(b) were laid in relation to each of these three
   offences.Â  The charges took place in three separate courses and in
   three separate academic terms. The first charge of forgery related to
   falsified data that the Student submitted for course credit as part of
   a lab assignment. The second charge, plagiarism, related to portions of
   an essay that the student submitted that had been copied from another
   studentâs essay verbatim.Â  The third charge of using an unauthorized
   aid was laid when the student was caught with a cell phone in his
   possession during a final exam. The matter proceeded by way of agreed
   statement of facts and a joint book of documents. Upon acceptance of
   the Studentâs guilty pleas by the Panel, the University withdrew the
   alternative charges that had been laid under s. B.i.3(b) of the Code.
   The parties submitted a Joint Submission on Penalty (JSP) proposing:
   (a) a final grade of zero in the affected courses; (b) suspension from
   the University from the date of the Order until October 29, 2020; (c) a
   notation of the sanction on the Studentâs academic record and
   transcript from the date of the Order until October 29, 2021; and (d)
   that the matter be reported to the Provost for publication.Â  The Panel
   stated that a JSP should only be rejected in circumstances where to
   give it effect would be contrary to the public interest or would bring
   the administration of justice into disrepute. The Panel further noted
   that it was its task to determine whether the outcome falls within a
   range of reasonable outcomes, recognizing the institutional value,
   efficiency and importance of outcomes that are achieved through JSPs.
   The Panel noted the Student had no prior offences and had cooperated
   with the discipline process. The Panel accepted the JSP, ordering a
   final grade of zero in the affected courses; suspension from the
   University from the date of the Order until October 29, 2020; a
   notation of the sanction on the Studentâs academic record and
   transcript from the date of the Order until October 29, 2021; and that
   the matter be reported to the Provost for publication.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12960
