Report 392

DATE:

   December 11, 2017

PARTIES:

   L.R. (âthe Studentâ) v. the University of Toronto, Mississauga (UTM)

Hearing Date(s):

   November 1, 2017

Committee Members:

   Mr. John Monahan (Chair)
   Professor Jan Mahrt-Smith, Faculty Governor
   Mr. Aidan Fishman, Student Governor

Secretary:

   Mr. Christopher Lang, Director, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty
   Grievances

Appearances:

For the Student Appellant:

   Mr. L.R. (âthe Studentâ)
   Mr. Robert Sniderman, Law Student, Downtown Legal Services
   Ms. Jennifer Fehr, Staff Lawyer, Downtown Legal Services

For the Faculty of Engineering and Applied Sciences:

   Mr. Rob Centa, Counsel, Paliare Roland
   Ms. Emily Home, Counsel, Paliare Roland
   Professor James Davis, Associate Professor Teaching Stream
   Mr. Don MacMillan, Faculty Registrar

   Student appeal of the manner in which his examination re-reads were
   performed.Â  The Student had successfully been granted an examination
   re-read for two courses by the Academic Appeals Board. The Student
   claimed that that the re-reads were performed in an unfair manner
   because they were not both conducted by external examiners and because
   neither involved the use of clean copies of his exams. The Student
   asked the Committee to grant him the remedy of obtaining re-reads of
   clean copies of both examinations by Faculty professors other than
   those who originally taught him the courses.

   The Committee dismissed the Studentâs appeal because it was not brought
   within the Facultyâs policy which provides that appeals must be filed
   within ninety days of the date of the notification of the Facultyâs
   final decision ( Undergraduate Calendar, Engineering, Part XII.2). The
   Committee found that the 90-day-time limit became effective when the
   Student was aware that both of his exams would be re-marked by the same
   instructors who had marked them in the first place, and that clean
   copies of the exams would not be used.Â  Having started once the
   Student learned that his exams would not be re-marked by external
   examiners using clean copies, the time limit was temporarily suspended
   in a number of circumstances including: (1) when a University staff
   member advised the student to hold off filing an appeal until they
   could meet in person; (2) the period of time between the Studentâs
   initial contact with legal counsel and learning that they could not
   represent him; (3) and for one week after a period where the Student
   experienced serious medical issues and a hospitalization. Even with
   these periods of suspension, the Student still filed his appeal
   well-outside of the required 90-day time limit.

   In deciding whether to exercise its discretionary powers to grant an
   extension of the 90-day time limit in this case, the Committee was
   referred to the Canada (Minister of Human Resources Development) v.
   Gattellaro [2005] F.C.J. No. 1106), which provides that the discretion
   should be exercised by considering four factors : (1) A continuing
   intention to pursue the application or appeal; (2) a reasonable
   explanation for the delay; (3) the matter discloses an arguable case;
   and (4) there is no prejudice to the other party in allowing the
   extension. While the Committee found that there was a minimal amount of
   prejudice in granting the extension and that there was an arguable case
   for the Student (given the divergent practices regarding examination
   re-reads across faculties), there was no evidence that the Student had
   a continuing intention to pursue the application or a reasonable
   explanation for the delay in filing (beyond those causes for which the
   time limit was extended, discussed above).Â  The Committee declined to
   exercise its discretion to extend the time period in this case. The
   Studentâs appeal was dismissed on the grounds of a lack of timeliness.

   The Committee went on to hold that even if the appeal were heard on its
   substantive merit, the appeal would be dismissed.Â  Though other
   Faculties (including the Faculty of Arts and Science and the School of
   Graduate Studies) have their own faculty-specific policies regarding
   examination re-reads, for the Faculty of Applied Science and
   Engineering the University Assessment and Grading Practices Policy is
   silent on the matter of who should perform re-reads and whether or not
   they are given clean copies to review. There was no evidence that the
   relevant policy was applied unfairly, with partiality, or
   inconsistently by the Faculty in this case.Â  Appeal dismissed.
   [1]View Report

References

   1. file:///media/12637
