Case #721

   DATE: October 9, 2014
   PARTIES: University of Toronto v T.W.
   Hearing Date(s): June 18, 2014
   Panel Members:
   Rodica David, Chair
   Kathi Wilson, Faculty Member
   Blake Chapman, Student Member
   Appearances:
   Tina Lie, Assistant Discipline Counsel
   Eleanor Irwin, Deanâs Designate, UTS
   Jayeeta Sharma, Instructor
   Sonja Nikkila, Instructor
   In Attendance:
   Natalie Ramtahal, Coordinator, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty
   Grievances
   Trial Division â plagiarism â two offences in two classes â Student not
   at hearing â finding of guilt â zero in courses; three year suspension;
   four year academic record notation; report to Provost â dissent â issue
   of notice â insufficient attempt by University to notify Student
   The Majority found that the Student received proper notice of the
   proceedings and the hearing proceeded. The first instructor explained
   that she had made the students aware of the necessity for and what
   constitutes academic integrity. Upon examination of three documents
   uploaded to Turnitin.com there is little doubt of plagiarism. The
   second instructor also testified that she explained the importance of
   academic integrity and the Studentâs essay in the course shows
   remarkable similarities to five different websites. The Panel found the
   Student guilty on charges 1 and 3. The Panel considered the penalty
   factors from the Mr. C case, considering the Studentâs lack of
   participation and remorse in the process, the seriousness of the
   offence, need for deterrence, and detriment to the University. The
   Panel stated that had there only been one offence a two-year suspension
   would have been appropriate but as there were two, the penalty was
   elevated to a three-year suspension. The Panel ordered a penalty of a
   zero in both of the courses in question, a suspension of three years
   from the date of the order, a notation be placed on her academic record
   for four years, and that the case be reported to the Provost for
   publication.
   Dissent (on Notice only) - Blake Chapman
   The University had not given the Student sufficient notice of the
   hearing and that the proceedings would continue in her absence. The
   University tried unsuccessfully to deliver a notice by mail twice to
   the Studentâs listed ROSI address (an address listed, not the Studentâs
   current address). The University also sent an email to the Studentâs
   listed ROSI email but received no response or bounce-back email.
   However, the University did not take sufficient steps to notify the
   Student as required by the Code and the Rules of Practice. The onus is
   on the University to contact the Student, not for the Student to keep
   current records and it cannot be that students have a lifelong
   obligation to check their university emails, especially when they have
   not been registered. Further, there were several alternative options
   the University could have pursued in attempting to notify the Student,
   namely a Google or Canada411 search or resending the email and
   requesting read receipts. At a minimum the hearing should have been
   postponed to attempt these additional steps. This dissent was only as
   to the issue of notice.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/13027
