Case 602

DATE:

   May 6, 2011

PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v. K.H.

Hearing Date(s):

   August 18, 2010

Panel Members:

   Mr. Michael Hines, Chair
   Professor Charmaine Williams, Faculty Member
   Ms. Jorge Prieto, Student Member

Appearances:

   Mr. Rob Centa, Assistant Discipline Counsel for the University
   Ms. Camille Labchuk, DLS for the Student

In Attendance:

   Dr. Kristi Gourley, manager, Office of Student Academic Integrity
   Dr. Martha Harris, Academic Integrity Officer, Office of Student
   Academic Integrity
   Mr. Christopher Lang, Director, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty
   Grievances

   Student charged under s. B.i.1(d), s. B.i.1(b), and alternatively,
   under s. B.i.3(b) of the Code . The charges related to allegations that
   the Student submitted an essay purchased from a commercial provider of
   academic essays. The parties agreed on the facts relating to the
   offences. The Student admitted to having committed the offences as set
   out in s. B.i.1(d), s. B.i.1(b), and s. B.i.3(b) of the Code and
   pleaded guilty to the charges. The Panel found the Student guilty of
   the offences under s. B.i.1(d) and s. B.i.1(b) of the Code and accepted
   the withdrawal of the charge under s. B.i.3(b) . As for sanction, the
   Provost sought a recommendation for expulsion coupled with an immediate
   five-year suspension. The Student submitted that he should receive a
   mark of zero for the course and a two to three-year suspension. The
   Student claimed that he was one credit short of receiving his degree,
   he had received notice that he would be required to serve in the South
   Korean military for a period of two years, and that should he fail the
   course, it would be very hard for him to come back after two years only
   for the purpose of obtaining one credit. He claimed that his lack of
   confidence in his ability to pass the course coupled with the
   consequences of failure led him to purchase the essay. The Student had
   never been convicted of an academic offence. The Panel stated that the
   sanction suggested by the Student is wholly inadequate as it would work
   no hardship on him given the fact that he would be serving in the
   military anyway during the proposed period of the suspension. The Panel
   stated that the decision to be made is between expulsion and a
   five-year suspension. The Panel agreed that purchasing and submitting
   an essay prepared by another is one of the most egregious offences but
   also stated the need to balance general deterrence with the objective
   of rehabilitation. In the Panelâs view, absent the most exceptional
   circumstances, a guilty student should only be able to avoid expulsion
   by demonstrating an ability to reform their behaviour with a prompt
   acknowledgement of his or her wrongdoing when confronted, which the
   Student did in this case. Had the Student been a repeat offender, the
   Panel would have imposed a recommendation for expulsion. The Panel
   differentiated this case from CHK in that the Student had no prior
   conviction and also from S.P. that the Student acknowledged his
   wrongdoing promptly. The Panel imposed a grade of zero in the course; a
   five-year suspension; a seven-year notation on the Studentâs
   transcript; and that a report be issued to the Provost.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/13015
