Case 1128

   DATE: April 22, 2021
   PARTIES: University of Toronto v. M.W.

   HEARING DATE: February 10, 2021, via Zoom

   Panel Members:
   Mr. Michael Hines, Chair
   Dr. Pascal van Lieshout, Faculty Panel Member
   Ms. Emily Hawes, Student Panel Member

   Appearances:
   Mr. Robert Centa, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland
   Rosenberg Rothstein LLP

   In Attendance:
   Ms. Krista Kennedy, Administrative Clerk & Hearing Secretary, Appeals,
   Discipline and Faculty Grievances

   Not in Attendance:
   The Student

   The Student was charged underÂ s. B.i.3(a)Â of theâ¯Code of Behaviour
   on Academic Matters, 1995â¯(the âCodeâ) on the basis thatÂ the
   StudentÂ knowinglyÂ forged,Â or in any other way altered,Â or falsified
   a document or evidence required by the University of Toronto, or
   uttered, circulated or made use of such forged, altered or falsified
   document, namely aÂ degree certificate purportedly issued by the
   UniversityÂ in an attempt toÂ obtain employment.

   Neither the Student nor a legal representative of
   theâ¯Studentâ¯appeared at the hearing.â¯The hearing took place based on
   an Agreed Statement of Facts (âASFâ)Â signed by the Student and
   Assistance Discipline Counsel. In the ASF, the Student acknowledged
   that he received a copy of the chargesÂ and pled guilty to the charge.
   The ASF further confirmed that the Student did not wish to participate
   in the proceedingsÂ and requested that the Tribunal proceed in
   hisÂ absence. The Student waived their right to any further notice of
   the proceedings andÂ acknowledged that he understood that the Tribunal
   may find thatÂ heÂ committed an act, or acts, of misconductÂ and may
   impose sanctions in accordance with theÂ Code.

   TheÂ PanelÂ reviewed theÂ facts outlined in theÂ ASFÂ and determined
   that the StudentÂ admitted that,Â as partÂ of an application for
   employment, he represented that he had graduated from the University of
   Toronto when, in fact, he had not returned to his studiesÂ after being
   suspended for poor academic performance.Â Furthermore, the Student
   admitted that he paid $40,000 for the forged degree
   certificate.Â AÂ third-partyÂ verification service attempted to
   confirmÂ that the UniversityÂ awarded the Student a Bachelor of
   Commerce Degree and the University advised that no such degree had been
   granted to the Student.Â The Student, therefore, knowingly circulated a
   forged degree certificateÂ in an attempt toÂ confirm his graduation
   from the University of Toronto. Based on the ASF, the PanelÂ found the
   Student guilty of an offence underÂ s. B.i.3(a) of the Code.

   The University submitted that this offence demonstrates the most
   serious lack of academic and
   personalÂ integrity,Â andÂ itÂ threatensÂ the reputation of the
   UniversityÂ and other studentsÂ who pursue their degrees honestly and
   diligently.Â The University soughtÂ a penalty that would include a
   recommendation that the Student be expelled from the University.Â The
   PanelÂ agreed with theÂ gravityÂ of the offence and the need to
   imposeÂ the most severe penalty.Â The Panel accepted the
   UniversityâsÂ recommendation on sanctionÂ and imposed the following
   sanctions:Â a five-year suspension;Â recommendation to the President
   that the Student be expelled, as per s.Â C.ii(b)(i) of the Code; andÂ a
   report to the Provost for a publication.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/29825
