Case 881

DATE:

   May 30, 2017

PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v. A.K. (âthe Studentâ)

Hearing Date(s):

   March 21, 2017

Panel Members:

   Mr. Michael Hines, Barrister and Solicitor, Chair
   Dr. Joel Kirsh, Faculty Panel Member, Faculty of Medicine Ms. Yusra
   Qazi, Student Panel Member

Appearances:

   Ms. Tina Lie, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Barristers
   Ms. Tina Saban, Law Student for the Student, Downtown Legal Services

In Attendance:

   The Student
   Ms. Lucy Gaspini, Manager Academic Integrity, Office of the Dean,
   University of Toronto Mississauga
   Mr. Tracey Gameiro, Associate Director, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty
   Grievances
   Mr. Sean Lourim, IT Assistant, Office of the Governing Council

   The Panel accepted the Studentâs guilty plea to two charges of academic
   dishonesty contrary to s. B.i.3(b) of the Code . The charges related to
   two separate incidents. First, the Student submitted an assignment that
   contained work from a previous assignment for which he had already
   received course credit. Second, the Student had a cell phone in his
   possession during a final exam.Â  The matter proceeded by way of agreed
   statement of facts and a joint book of documents. Upon acceptance of
   the Studentâs guilty plea by the Panel, the University withdrew the
   alternative charges that had been laid under s. B.i.1(e) and s.
   B.i.3(b) of the Code.

   The parties submitted a Joint Submission on Penalty (JSP) proposing:
   (a) a final grade of zero in the affected courses; (b) suspension from
   the University for three years; (c) a notation of the sanction on the
   Studentâs academic record and transcript for four years; and (d) that
   the matter be reported to the Provost for publication.Â  The Panel
   accepted all of the JSP sanctions without difficulty, except for the
   four-year notation on the Studentâs transcript. The Panel debated its
   sufficiency as compared to the imposition of a notation until
   graduation in light of the need to consider the likelihood of
   recurrence in determining the reasonableness of a sanction. The Student
   had already been disciplined for one instance of unauthorized
   assistance before the incidents giving rise to the charges, so the
   Panelâs concern was that when the notation came off the Studentâs
   record he may re-engage in further academic misconduct. At the same
   time, if the Student chose not to return to the University after his
   suspension then a notation on his transcript would effectively become
   permanent â a sanction that is typically reserved for more egregious
   conduct than the charges in this case. Ultimately, this concern did not
   outweigh the institutional value in accepting JSPs. The Panel accepted
   the JSP, ordering a final grade of zero in the affected courses;
   suspension from the University for three years; a notation of the
   sanction on the Studentâs academic record and transcript for four
   years; and that the matter be reported to the Provost for publication.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12940
