Case 848 - Appeal

   [1]Case 848

DATE:

   October 13, 2017

PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v. D.H. (âthe Studentâ)

Hearing Date(s):

   August 4, 2017

Panel Members:

   Ms. Patricia D.S. Jackson, Chair
   Mr. Sean McGowan, Student Panel Member Professor Elizabeth Peter,
   Faculty Panel Member
   Ms. Alena Zelinka, Student Panel Member

Appearances:

   Mr. Glenroy K. Bastien, Counsel for the Student
   Ms. Tina Lie, Counsel for the Respondent, the University of Toronto

In Attendance:

   The Student
   DAB Decision.
   NOTE: See the [2]Tribunal decision for detailed facts.
   Appeal by the Student from a Tribunal decision in which the Student
   pled guilty to two charges of forging or falsifying an academic record
   contrary to s. B.ii.2 and s. B.i.3(a) of the Code , and sentenced toÂ
   expulsion. The Student asked the Appeals Board to set the penalty aside
   because the Tribunal either overlooked his medical evidence, or failed
   to provide reasons which indicated what weight, if any, was attached to
   that evidence. Finally, the Student alleged that the Tribunal
   arbitrarily attempted to fit this case into the penalties imposed in
   previous cases, without regard to the Studentâs fragile mental
   condition.
   The Board stated that it had very broad powers and that it need not
   show deference to the Tribunal decision except for matters relating to
   credibility, where the Tribunal has the opportunity to observe
   witnesses giving evidence and draw conclusions from this based on their
   first-hand exposure to the demeanour and quality of evidence. The Board
   also stated that it is appropriate for it to vary a sanction which it
   believes to be wrong whether because of an error of law, significant
   errors of fact, or a material inconsistency with the weight of other
   Tribunal and appeal decisions.
   The Board found no such errors in the Tribunal decision. The Board
   found that the Tribunal did not overlook the medical evidence, but
   rather admitted it notwithstanding its late delivery, absence of any
   cross-examinations or testing and over the objection of the University.
   The Tribunal specifically referred to the Student's "fragile mental
   state", and noted as a mitigating factor that the offence occurred when
   the Student was suffering from significant mental distress and at the
   lowest point of his academic career. Finally, the Board did not find
   that the Tribunal was artificially trying to fit this case within the
   confines of previous cases and without regard to the facts and
   circumstances of the Student.Â  The Board found that in cases where a
   Student has forged an academic record, the penalty of expulsion (or
   where the student has completed a degree, the revocation of that
   degree) recognizes both the seriousness of the harm inflicted on the
   institution and the fact that it is difficult to detect.Â  In the rare
   cases where expulsion has not been recommended, the Board stated that
   it was generally on the basis that the student had no prior offences
   and also, usually, because the case proceeded by way of a joint
   submission on penalty.Â  In this case, the Board agreed with the
   Tribunalâs conclusion that given that it was the Studentâs third
   conviction, that forgery is a serious offence, and that it occurred
   immediately after the Student was notified of the penalty for his
   second offence, that a recommendation of expulsion was appropriate.
   The Board accepted the Universityâs request that, due to delay
   associated with the hearing caused by the Student, the Studentâs
   current period of suspension be extended to the later of May 19, 2018
   or the date on which the Governing Council makes its decision on
   expulsion. Appeal dismissed.
   [3]View Case

References

   1. https://live-the-office-of-the-governing-council.pantheonsite.io/media/12957
   2. file:///Assets/ADFG+Digital+Assets/Case$!23+848.pdf
   3. file:///media/13077
