Case #556

   DATE: October 20, 2009
   PARTIES: University of Toronto v. P.D.
   Hearing Date(s): September 28, 2009
   Panel Members:
   Ronald G Slaght, Chair
   Lesley Ann Lavack, Faculty Member
   Sybil Derrible, Student Member
   Appearances:
   Ms. Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel for the University
   Ms. Mariam MacGregor, Clinic Director, Community Legal Aid Services
   Program, for the Student
   Ms. Phanny Im, Legal Case Worker, Community Legal Aid Services Program,
   for the Student
   In Attendance:
   P.D., the Student
   Ms. Lucy Gaspini, Academic Affairs Officer, Office of the Dean,
   University of Toronto Mississauga
   Prof. Scott Graham, Dean's designate for Academic Offences, University
   of Toronto Mississauga

   Trial Division â academic dishonesty and forged documents - medical
   notes â guilty plea â third party implicated â agreed statement of
   facts and joint submission on penalty â guilty plea - finding of guilt
   âdeliberate conduct â accepting joint submission on penalty does not
   bring administration of justice into disrepute â character references -
   joint submission on penalty accepted â two year suspension; three year
   transcript notation; report to the Provost

   Student was charged with several offences involving forged medical
   notes and dishonesty. Student and the University filed and Agreed
   Statement of Facts and Joint Book of Documents to the Tribunal, and the
   Student plead guilty to Charges 1 and 6 set out in the Notice of
   Hearing. The Tribunal found the Student guilty of those offences and
   heard submissions on penalty. The Tribunal noted the serious nature of
   the offences in that the Studentâs conduct was 1) deliberate, 2)
   designed to embroil another student in acts of dishonesty, 3) denied by
   the Student until March 2009. The Tribunal found that accepting the
   joint submission on penalty would not bring the administration of
   justice into disrepute, although it was close to finding so. The
   Tribunal noted the Studentâs character references, apology,
   counselling, and that the guilty plea and agreed statement of facts
   spared the Tribunal a long and difficult hearing. The Tribunal accepted
   the joint submission on penalty and imposed the penalty of: 1) a two
   year suspension, 2) a three year transcript notation, and 3) a report
   to the Provost.

   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12743
