FILE: 2004/05-03
September 21, 2005

UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
TRIAL DIVISION
IN THE MATTER of the University of Toronto Act, 1971, S.O. 1971, c. 56, as
amended;
AND IN THE MATTER of the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic
Matters, 1995;
AND IN THE MATTER of disciplinary charges against The Student.
Members of the Panel:
Jane Pepino, C.M., Q.C., Chair
Daniel Brooks, Faculty Panel Member
Indra Muthu, Student Panel Member
Appearances:
Lily Harmer, for the University of Toronto
The Student, appearing on his own behalf
Witnesses:
Lorraine Bruce, PhD. Student, Teaching Assistant and Tutor, Department of Philosophy
Stephen Lam, Invigilator for Accessibility Services Examination Centre
Don Waterfall, Professor, Department of Philosophy
Ulrich Wortmann, Department of Geology
Advisers to Discipline Counsel:
Gregory Evans, Acting Vice-Dean, Faculty of Applied Science and Engineering
Will Bawden, Faculty of Applied Science and Engineering
BACKGROUND
[1]
The Trial Division of the University Tribunal was convened on March 29, 2005 to
consider charges brought under the Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters, 1995 laid
against The Student by letter dated September 14, 2005 and revised charges by letter
dated January 20, 2005 from the Vice-Provost, Academic, Professor Edith Hillan.

35120v2

Decision
September 21, 2005
Page 2

[2]

The letter of January 20, 2005 contained the following two sets of charges:
1.

On or about February 11, 2004, you did knowingly use or possess an
unauthorized aid or aids or obtain unauthorized assistance in an academic
examination, namely, the term test in PHL291H1S (the “Term Test”),
contrary to Section B.I.1.(b) of the Code of Behaviour on Academic
Matters (the “Code”).

2.

In the alternative, on or about February 11, 2004, you did knowingly
intend to use or possess an unauthorized aid or aids or obtain unauthorized
assistance in the Term Test, contrary to Section B.II.2. of the Code.

3.

In the further alternative, on or about February 11, 2004, you knowingly
engaged in a form of cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud
or misrepresentation in order to obtain academic credit or other academic
advantage of any kind during a Term Test to fulfill course requirements in
PHL291H1S, contrary to Section B.I.3(b) of the Code.

4.

On or about February 12, 2004, you did knowingly submit a forged,
altered or falsified document, namely an answer booklet for the Term
Test, that you submitted to Professor Waterfall, contrary to Sections
B.I.1.(a), B.I.3.(a) and B.I.3(b) of the Code.

5.

In the alternative, on or about February 12, 2004, you knowingly engaged
in a form of cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or
misrepresentation in order to obtain academic credit or other academic
advantage of any kind in a Term Test submitted to fulfill course
requirements in PHL291H1S, contrary to Section B.I.3(b) of the Code.

6.

On or about April 17, 2004, you knowingly represented as your own, an
idea or expression of an idea, and/or work of another in connection with a
form of academic work, namely, “The Challenger Disaster: Who Was
Responsible?”, an essay that you submitted to fulfill the course
requirements of PHL291H1S, contrary to Section B.1.1(d) of the Code.

7.

In the alternative, on or about April 17, 2004, you knowingly engaged in a
form of cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or
misrepresentation in order to obtain academic credit or other academic
advantage of any kind in an essay submitted to fulfill course requirements
in PHL291H1S, contrary to Section B.I.3(b) of the Code.

8.

Pursuant to Section B of the Code, you are deemed to have committed the
offence knowingly if you ought reasonably to have known that:
a. you used or possessed an unauthorized aid or aids or obtained
unauthorized assistance in any academic examination;

35120v2

Decision
September 21, 2005
Page 3

you intended to use or possess an unauthorized aid or aids or
obtain unauthorized assistance in any academic examination;
b. you engaged in any form of cheating, academic dishonesty or
misconduct, fraud or misrepresentation in order to obtain academic
credit; and
c.

you submitted a forged, altered or falsified document; or
you represented as your own, an idea or expression of an idea,
and/or work of another in connection with a form of academic
work.
AND

1.

On or about November 16, 2004, you knowingly represented as your own,
an idea or expression of an idea, and/or work of another in connection
with a form of academic work, namely, a report entitled “16th of October
Excursion to the Niagara Escarpment Field Trip”, that you submitted to
fulfill the course requirements of GLG216H1, contrary to Section B.1.1(d)
of the Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters (the “Code” ).

2.

In the alternative, on or about November 16, 2004, you knowingly
engaged in a form of cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud
or misrepresentation in order to obtain academic credit or other academic
advantage of any kind in a report entitled “16th of October Excursion to
the Niagara Escarpment Field Trip” submitted to fulfill course
requirements in GLG216H1, contrary to Section B.1.3(b) of the Code.

3.

Pursuant to Section B of the Code, you are deemed to have committed the
offence knowingly if you ought reasonably to have known that:
a. you represented as your own, an idea or expression of an idea, and/
or work of another in connection with a form of academic work; or
b. you engaged in any form of cheating, academic dishonesty or
misconduct, fraud or misrepresentation in order to obtain academic
credit.

[3]

The Panel heard that the various charges related to four different incidents:

Incident 1: - Charges 1, 2 and 3 related to the attempt and use of an unauthorized aid on
February 11, 2004, during a time that the student was to write a closed book exam at the
Accessibility Services Department (The Student had registered as having a learning
disability and had sought and been granted accommodation in writing this exam). The
student pleaded not guilty to these charges.

35120v2

Decision
September 21, 2005
Page 4

Incident 2: - Charges 4 and 5 related to the submission, the following day, February 12,
2004, of an examination, alleged to be forged, altered or falsified. The student pleaded
guilty to these charges.
Incident 3: - Charges numbered 6 and 7, related to the submission of an essay on April
17, 2004, which allegedly contained plagiarism. The student pleaded not guilty to these
charges.
Incident 4: - The fourth incident gave rise to charges 1 and 2 in the second set of
charges, and related to the submission, on November 16, 2004, of a field report which
was allegedly copied from the work of others. The student pleaded not guilty to these
charges.
Charge eight (8) in the first set of charges and charge three (3) in the second set of
charges was abandoned by Discipline Counsel.
The parties made their submissions. Witnesses for the University were heard and The
Student was given the opportunity to cross-examine each one, The Student’s testimony
on his own behalf was heard, and summations were given.

EVIDENCE
[4]
First Incident: With respect to incident number 1, giving rise to charges 1, 2, and
3 of the first set of charges, the Panel heard from Professor Waterfall, who testified that
The Student was registered in his course PHL291H-ENGINEERING and ETHICS.
One of the components of the course was the completion of a “classroom essay” on one
of three topics provided in advance of the closed-book examination, on February 11,
2004. Those three topics were set out at Tab 5 of the book of documents marked as
Exhibit 1.
Because The Student had registered as learning disabled, he was permitted to write his
closed-book essay question at Accessibility Services, where the standards were the same:
ie, “closed-book, based on one of the assigned topics”, but accommodation by way of
additional time could be provided.
On February 11, 2004, The Student attended at Accessibility Services and signed the
Accessibility Services Test/Exam Centre Policy (Exhibit 1, Tab 7) and submitted a
TERM Booklet in the form found at Tab 8 of Exhibit 1. Across the front of the TERM
Booklet were The Student’s student number, name, course number and instructor’s name,
together with a handwritten notation of “scrap”.
A review of the contents of the booklet disclosed one page only of poorly organized and
incomplete jottings, which, although related generally to the topic, in no way constituted
an essay or answer to the question assigned.

35120v2

Decision
September 21, 2005
Page 5

The Panel also heard from Steven Lam who was an invidulator at Accessibility Services
and who was on duty and responsible for administering The Student’s examination that
day (see Tab 6).
Tab 9 is Mr. Lam’s “incident sheet”, which corresponded entirely with his oral evidence.
In summary, Mr. Lam testified that upon arrival (late) the student asked if he could use
the washroom, but attempted to take his knapsack with him into the washroom. When
Mr. Lam asked him to leave his bag outside the washroom, The Student shuffled at
length, and slowly, within his bag, raising Mr. Lam’s suspicion.
When The Student emerged from the washroom, he was holding his arm across his
sweatshirt, giving rise to Mr. Lam’s concern that he was holding something underneath
his sweater. Mr. Lam testified that when The Student was asked to sign a document, The
Student’s left hand was holding his sweater instead of steadying the paper he was
signing. He emptied his pockets when asked, but used only one hand to do so. When
Mr. Lam asked The Student if there was anything he shouldn’t be taking into the
examination, and asked him if he had something under his sweater, The Student replied
“I guess I should put it back”, returned to his assigned locker and was observed to put
white papers, folded into a quarter of a page, into the locker. When then asked “do you
have anything else on you”, Mr. Lam testified The Student then pulled up his sweatshirt with both hands. Mr. Lam acknowledged he did not ask The Student to hand over what
he had had under the sweatshirt, having been satisfied it was now stored back in The
Student’s bag or locker.
In cross-examination, The Student asked Mr. Lam whether, when entering the carrel, “did
I have anything on me”, to which Mr. Lam replied “once you showed me you had
nothing under your sweatshirt, no”.
Based on the evidence of Mr. Lam, which was not successfully challenged, and for which
no contrary or satisfactory explanation was provided, the Panel found that The Student
had both intended, and did engage in academic misconduct in order to obtain academic
advantage, and was therefore guilty on charges 2 and 3 of the first set of charges. The
student was found not guilty on charge number 1, since the fact that he had had to leave
the previously prepared pieces of paper which he attempted to secret under his sweatshirt,
outside the room, coupled with the sorry state of the one page document handed in, made
it clear that he had not been able, despite planning, to “obtain unauthorized assistance in
an academic examination”.

[5]
Second incident: The Panel was also provided with a copy of an original Exam
booklet, marked as Exhibit 1.B, which was submitted by The Student to Professor
Waterfall on September 12th, allegedly as the form of essay question intended to satisfy,
or be, the essay question submitted to satisfy course requirements. Because The Student
pleaded guilty to charges 4 and 5, that he “submitted a forged, altered or falsified
document on February 12, 2004”, no evidence was led as to the circumstances
35120v2

Decision
September 21, 2005
Page 6

surrounding why Professor Waterfall was provided with a full version of an Exam
booklet on February 12th, but that a document book labeled “TERM” and bearing the
phrase “scrap” was handed in to Accessibility Services the prior day.

[6]
Third Incident: Turning then to the third incident, it was that on or about April
17th, The Student submitted an essay, worth 20% of his course mark, again to Professor
Waterfall and again, ironically, in the ENGINEERING and ETHICS course.
The Panel heard that Lorraine Bruce, a PhD student in Philosophy, was a teaching
assistant and sometime tutor to the learning disabled. Tab 12 of Exhibit 1 sets out an
exchange of email correspondence which, together with Exhibit 2, a receipt for hours of
service, showed that Ms. Bruce had spent time from the 29th of January through to the 9th
of April assisting The Student with, as she stated, structure, key ideas, organizing
thoughts and working on outlines.
Ms. Bruce testified that on Friday April 16th she advised the student that the final draft
paper he was to have submitted to her had not arrived, and that she had received a blank
document. (Tab 12)
On the 19th, the student wrote back to Ms. Bruce, with an attachment that was an essay
(Tab 13), which she described as being “so blatantly different from what they had worked
on that it seemed off”. Tab 16 sets out the paper as submitted by The Student, on which
marginal notations highlight several passages which are plagiarized directly from an
essay website (Tab 15).
The Student did not cross examine Ms. Bruce, and the only challenge to her belief and
assertion that passages of his paper were plagiarized is found at Tab 17, second page,
where, in an email dated April 20th, he suggests that on April 17th he didn’t submit the
final report, but rather the draft, continuing to state that his submission of the paper was
“by accident, and he would never do such a thing”, while apologizing to Ms. Bruce.
In his oral submissions at the end of the hearing, he submitted that he made a mistake and
submitted his draft noting that because he had two prior offenses, it would make no sense
for him to “do this”. – i.e. – engage in plagiarism.
Given the polished nature of the submitted paper, and the lack of any credible
explanation or proof that it was draft, the Panel accepts that The Student submitted, for
marking as a final version, a paper which included plagiarized materials and therefore
found him guilty of charges 4 and 5.

[7]
Fourth Incident: The Panel heard from Professor Ulrich Wortmann, who taught
an introductory geology course to students. Tab 18 and Professor Wortmann’s oral
evidence, made it clear that the students were warned about plagiarism, and an
explanation of what constituted plagiarism was given to them.
35120v2

Decision
September 21, 2005
Page 7

Tab 19 sets out the field trip report dated November 16, 2004, submitted by The Student:
Tab 21 includes a report prepared by a second student, and Tab 23 contains the report of
a third student, all from the same field trip.
Tabs 20, 22 and 24 respectively were colour-coded analyses undertaken by Counsel for
the University to identify passages and illustrations reproduced by The Student from
reports submitted by two other students, including illustrations. A comparison of the
reports, and the University’s analysis, makes it clear that The Student lifted, holus bolus,
entire sections of the field reports of the other students. In addition, Professor Wortmann
testified that each of the other students had acknowledged that The Student had asked for
a copy of their assignment, variously, “to compare”: one was requested only on the date
(November 16th) upon which field report was due, and was handed over together with an
electronic copy. Professor Wortmann advised that both of those other students had failed
the assignment due to their assistance to The Student.
The Panel was prepared to accept the third party hearsay evidence of Professor
Wortmann in this respect, given that The Student agreed, with Counsel for the University
that the two students involved need not be called to substantiate that evidence. Even
without this hearsay evidence, however, the Panel was satisfied on the documents
themselves that plagiarism had occurred.
The contrary explanation provided by The Student is set out in Tab 25 of Exhibit 1, in
which he responded to a request from Professor Wortmann to discuss the assignment by
saying “I didn’t remember I submit the assignment yet”, going on to say he is “so
offended by your email” and that “two weeks ago we did discuss my first offence and
there is no way on earth I will do it again”. It is to be noted that the report was handed in
on November 16th, less than one week before this email.
In oral testimony, The Student admitted asking the two students, but says he did not
submit the paper. The Student suggested that the report was handed in by a third party,
but declined the offer of the Panel to consider any evidence he might bring that might
establish that as fact.
Based on all the evidence and the lack of any credible explanation on the part of The
Student, the Panel found him guilty of charges 1 and 2 on the second set of charges.

SANCTIONS
Submissions as to sanction were presented by the University and arguments were
[8]
heard from The Student. Following deliberation, the Panel accepted the recommendation of
the University:

35120v2

Decision
September 21, 2005
Page 8

•
•
•
•

that a grade of zero be imposed in the two courses that were the subject of the
appeal, namely PHL291H1S and GLG216H1;
that a recommendation be forwarded to Governing Council for The Student’s
expulsion from the University of Toronto;
that there be publication of the sanctions and decision in the University
newspapers, with The Student’s name withheld.
Further, in the event Governing Council does not accept the recommendation
for expulsion, that The Student be suspended from the University of Toronto
for the maximum period of five years and that this suspension be recorded on
his academic transcript.

These sanctions were given orally in the presence of both parties on March 29, 2005.

REASONS for DECISION and SANCTIONS
(Delivered orally)
[9]
This student’s conduct was systematic, premeditated and constituted a pattern of
conduct which made him unworthy to continue presence within the academic community.
He was seemingly unaware of the nature or seriousness of his actions. Most grievously,
The Student, on at least two occasions, committed one of the most serious academic
offences: he had stolen the thoughts of others. This is the highest type of intellectual
dishonesty, being more than simple cheating wherein some of the student’s own effort is
required. This behaviour is absolutely not acceptable in an environment intended to
model and value academic rigor and integrity.
As a result of his individual actions, and of the pattern they constituted, the Panel
recommends that The Student be expelled from the University of Toronto.

DATED this ___________ day of September, 2005.

___________________________
Date

35120v2

______________________________
Chair

