Case #362

   DATE: September 21, 2005
   PARTIES: University of Toronto v. the Student
   Hearing Date(s): March 29, 2005
   Panel Members:
   Jane Pepino, C.M., Q.C., Chair
   Daniel Brooks, Faculty Panel Member
   Indra Muthu, Student Panel Member
   Appearances:
   Lily Harmer, for the University of Toronto
   The Student, appearing on his own behalf
   Witnesses:
   Lorraine Bruce, PhD. Student, Teaching Assistant and Tutor, Department
   of Philosophy
   Stephen Lam, Invigilator for Accessibility Services Examination Centre
   Don Waterfall, Professor, Department of Philosophy
   Ulrich Wortmann, Department of Geology
   Advisers to Discipline Counsel:
   Gregory Evans, Acting Vice-Dean, Faculty of Applied Science and
   Engineering
   Will Bawden, Faculty of Applied Science and Engineering
   Trial Division - s. B.i.3(b), s. B.i.1(d), s. B.i.1(b), s. B.i.3(a), s.
   B.ii.2 and s. B.i.3(b) of Code â unauthorized aid, forged document and
   plagiarism â four separate incidents â finding of guilt on charges
   under s. B.ii.2 and s. B.i.3(b) of the Code â not guilty under s.
   B.i.1(b) â unable to obtain unauthorized assistance as planned -
   polished nature of submitted paper - no credible proof that it was
   draft paper â plagiarized paper submitted for marking as final version
   -Â  finding of guilt on charges under s. B.i.1(d) and s. B.i.3(b) â
   sections of field reports lifted from other students reports -
   acknowledgement from other students that copy of assignments were
   requested â lack of credible explanation â finding of guilt under s.
   B.i.1(d) and s. B.i.3(b) of the Code - systematic, premeditated pattern
   of conduct - unaware of nature or seriousness of actions - grade
   assignment of zero for two courses; recommendation that the Student be
   expelled as per s. C.ii.(b)(i) of Code; five-year suspension pending
   expulsion decision; and report to Provost
   Student charged with three offences under s. B.i.3(b), two offences
   under s. B.i.1(d), one offence under s. B.i.1(b), one offence under s.
   B.i.1(b), one offence under s. B.i.3(a), and alternatively, four
   offences under s. B.i.3(b) and one offence under s. B.ii.2 of the Code.
   The charges related to four separate incidents. With regard to the
   first incident, the Student was alleged to have attempted, and used, an
   unauthorized aid on a closed book exam at the Accessibility Services
   Department. With regard to the second incident, the Student was alleged
   to have submitted a forged, altered or falsified examination. With
   regard to the third incident, the Student was alleged to have submitted
   an essay that contained plagiarism. With regard to the fourth incident,
   the Student was alleged to have submitted a field report which was
   copied from the work of others. The Student pleaded not guilty to the
   charges related to the first, third and fourth incidents and guilty to
   the charges related to the second incident. The Panel considered the
   submissions of the parties, witnesses from the University and the
   Studentâs testimony on his own behalf. With regard to the first
   incident, the Panel considered the evidence of the exam invidulator and
   found that the Student had both intended, and did engage in academic
   misconduct and was guilty on the charges under s. B.ii.2 and s.
   B.i.3(b) of the Code. The Panel found the Student not guilty on the
   charge under s. B.i.1(b) of the Code because of the fact that he had
   failed to secret his previously prepared pieces of paper into the exam,
   and because of the poor state of the one page document he handed in, it
   was clear that he had not been able, despite planning, to obtain
   unauthorized assistance. With regard to the second incident, the Panel
   reviewed a copy of an original exam booklet, which was submitted by the
   Student to his course professor, and the Studentâs guilty plea to the
   charges related to the incident. The Panel observed that no evidence
   was led as to the circumstances surrounding why the course professor
   was provided with a full version of an exam booklet, but a document
   book labeled âTERMâ and bearing the phrase âscrapâ was handed in to
   Accessibility Services the prior day. With regard to the third
   incident, the Panel considered the evidence of the Studentâs teaching
   assistant, the paper as submitted by the Student, and the Studentâs
   claim that he had made a mistake and submitted his draft instead of the
   final report. The Panel considered the polished nature of the submitted
   paper and the lack of any credible explanation or proof that it was a
   draft and found that the Student submitted, for marking as a final
   version, a plagiarized paper and that he was guilty on the charges
   under s. B.i.1(d) and s. B.i.3(b) of the Code. With regard to the forth
   incident, the Panel considered the field trip report submitted by the
   Student against the reports prepared by two other students, and the
   evidence of the course professor indicating that the other students had
   acknowledged that the Student had asked for a copy of their assignment,
   and found that the Student lifted, holus bolus, entire sections of the
   field reports of the other students. The Panel considered the evidence
   and the lack of a credible explanation on the part of the Student, and
   found him guilty under s. B.i.1(d) and s. B.i.3(b) of the Code. The
   Panel found that the Studentâs conduct was systematic, premeditated and
   constituted a pattern of conduct which made him unworthy to continue
   within the academic community. He was unaware of the nature or
   seriousness of his actions and twice committed one of the most serious
   academic offences: he had stolen the thoughts of others. The Panel
   accepted the Universityâs submission on penalty and imposed a grade of
   zero in the two courses; a recommendation to the President, further to
   s. C.ii.(b)(i) of the Code, that the Student be expelled from the
   University; a suspension of up to five-years pending the expulsion
   decision; and that a report be issued to the Provost.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/13052
