Case 1066

   DATE: July 27, 2020

   PARTIES: University of Toronto v. T.M. (âthe Studentâ)

   HEARING DATE(S): April 27, 2020

   Panel Members:
   Ms. Lori Anne Thomas, Chair
   Professor Pascal Riendeau, Faculty Panel Member
   Mr. Abdul Sidiqi, Student Panel Member

   Appearances:
   Mr. Robert Centa, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland
   Rosenberg Rothstein LLP
   Ms. Meg Cormack, Law Student, Downtown Legal Services

   Not in Attendance:
   The Student

   In Attendance:
   Mr. Christopher Lang, Director, Office of the Appeals, Discipline and
   Faculty Grievances, University of Toronto

   TheÂ StudentÂ was chargedÂ with two counts underÂ s. B.i.1(a)Â of
   theÂ Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters, 1995Â (âCodeâ) on the basis
   thatÂ sheÂ knowingly falsified statements about her purported work
   history in applicationsÂ for work-study positions, or she knowingly
   uttered, circulated, or made use of those falsified statements.Â She
   was alternatively charged under s.Â B.i.3(a)Â of theÂ Code.

   TheÂ parties submitted an ASF.
   TheÂ StudentÂ admittedÂ toÂ allÂ theÂ charges,Â and
   theÂ PanelÂ wasÂ satisfied thatÂ herÂ admissions were voluntary,
   informed and unequivocal.Â ItÂ found her guiltyÂ of two counts of the
   academic offenceÂ under s.Â Â B.i.1(a) of theÂ Code.Â The
   UniversityÂ withdrew the alternative chargesÂ under s.Â B.i.3(a).

   Relying on the JSPÂ andÂ JBA,Â the Panel noted theÂ StudentâsÂ prior
   offenceÂ under s. B.i.1(b) of theÂ CodeÂ andÂ the fact that she was
   represented byÂ a law student from the Downtown Legal Services
   (âDLSâ).Â To determineÂ the sanction,Â the
   PanelÂ referencedÂ theÂ decision from the Discipline Appeals Board
   inÂ The University of Toronto and M. A.Â (Case No. 837, December 22,
   2016),Â whichÂ Â affirmsÂ R. v. Anthony-Cook, 2016 SCC 43, for the
   propositionsÂ thatÂ the Tribunal should impose a penalty jointly
   submitted unless doing so âwould be fundamentally contrary to the
   interests of the University community and objectively unreasonable or
   unconscionable.âÂ In light ofÂ this decision,Â the Panel stressed
   theÂ need for certainty when parties come to an agreement.Â SinceÂ the
   hearingÂ was held at the beginning of the Covid-19
   pandemic,Â itÂ accepted the Universityâs submission thatÂ itÂ makes the
   need for certainty greater than in the ordinary course.

   In imposing the sanctions, the Panel considered
   theÂ StudentâsÂ remorseÂ for her actionsÂ andÂ acknowledgment
   ofÂ herÂ guilt and responsibility. It alsoÂ observed thatÂ the
   likelihood of re-offendingÂ upon graduationÂ was eliminated because
   theÂ StudentÂ had completed her courses, pending her final grades for
   that semester.Â Additionally, the Panel consideredÂ the seriousness
   ofÂ falsifying work historyÂ to enter a program,Â the fact that
   theÂ StudentÂ had made poor choices out of desperation,Â andÂ the need
   to denounceÂ and deterÂ deliberate dishonestyÂ to protect academic
   integrity of the University.

   The Panel imposed the following sanctions:Â three-year
   suspension;Â four-yearÂ notation onÂ theÂ StudentâsÂ academic record
   and transcript;Â report to Provost for publication ofÂ theÂ decision
   and sanctions, with the name of theÂ StudentÂ withheld.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/29391
