Case No: 1492
THE UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
IN THE MATTER OF charges of academic dishonesty filed on February 2, 2023,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic
Matters, 2019,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Act, 1971, S.O. 1971, c. 56 as amended
S.O. 1978, c. 88
B E T W E E N:
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
- AND K

H

REASONS FOR DECISION
Hearing Date: October 19, 2023, via Zoom
Members of the Panel:
Christopher Wirth, Chair
Professor Emily Nacol, Faculty Panel Member
Harvi Karatha, Student Panel Member
Appearances:
William Webb, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg Rothstein LLP
Hearing Secretary:
Samanthe Huang, Quasi-Judicial Coordinator & Hearing Secretary, Office of Appeals,
Discipline and Faulty Grievances
Not in Attendance:
K

H

A Panel of the Trial Division of the University Tribunal was convened on October 19,
2023, by videoconference to consider charges brought by the University of Toronto (the
“University”) against K

H

(the “Student”) under the University’s Code of Behaviour

on Academic Matters, 2019 (the “Code”).
Preliminary Issue: Proceeding in the Absence of the Student
The hearing was scheduled to begin at 9:45 a.m. At that time, neither the Student, nor
anyone on the Student’s behalf, were logged onto the Zoom link. The Panel adjourned the
hearing until 10:00 a.m. to allow time for the Student to attend it. At that time, the Student
was still not present and the University then requested that the Panel proceed with the
hearing in the Student’s absence.
Pursuant to rule 18 of the University Tribunal’s Rules of Practice and Procedure (“Rules”),
a notice of a virtual hearing must include the date, time, place and purpose of the hearing;
a reference to the statutory authority under which the hearing will be held; information
about the manner in which the hearing will be held; and a statement that if a person does
not attend the hearing, the Panel may proceed in the person’s absence. rule 21 provides that
where notice of a virtual hearing has been given to a person and that person does not attend
the hearing, the Panel may proceed with the hearing in the party’s absence. The Rules
conform to sections 6 and 7 of the Statutory Powers Procedure Act (the “SPPA”), which
set out the notice requirements.
Pursuant to rule 13, a notice of hearing may be served on a student by various means,
including by emailing a copy of the document to the student’s email address contained in
the University’s Repository of Student Information (“ROSI”).
The University’s Policy on Official Correspondence with Students dated September 1,
2006 expressly states that students are responsible for maintaining on ROSI a current and
valid mailing address and University-issued email account, and that “[f]ailure to do so may
result in a student missing important information and will not be considered an acceptable
rationale for failing to receive official correspondence from the University.” Students are
expected to monitor and retrieve their email on a frequent and consistent basis. Students

2

have the right to forward their University-issued email account to another email account,
but remain responsible for ensuring that all University email communications are received
and read.
The onus of proof is on the University to establish that it provided the Student with
reasonable notice of the hearing in accordance with these Rules.
In this case, the University provided evidence relevant to service by way of the evidence
of two witnesses: Alexciya Blair (“Ms. Blair”), a Legal Assistant at the law firm of Paliare
Roland Rosenberg Rothstein LLP and Andrew Wagg (“Mr. Wagg”), a Manager, Incident
Response at Information Security, Information Technology Services at the University.
These two witnesses provided their evidence by affidavit, which were accepted by the
Panel pursuant to rule 66 of the Rules.
The contents of the affidavits (without Exhibits) of these two witnesses are set out below:
a) Evidence of Ms. Blair
Ms. Blair’s affidavit provides as follows:
1.

I am a legal assistant at the law firm Paliare Roland Rosenberg Rothstein LLP. I work with
William Webb, an associate at Paliare Roland, who acts as Assistant Discipline Counsel to
the University of Toronto. As such, I have knowledge of the matters contained in this
affidavit. Where I do not have direct knowledge of a matter contained in this affidavit, I
state the source of my knowledge and I believe it to be true.

A.

The Dean’s Office

2.

The academic integrity team in the Office of the Vice-Principal Academic & Dean (the
“Dean’s Office”) at the University of Toronto Scarborough (“UTSC”) is responsible for
investigating allegations of academic misconduct and arranging meetings between students
and the Dean or Dean’s Designate in accordance with the process set out in the Code of
Behaviour on Academic Matters (the “Code”).

3.

The Dean’s Office provided our office with a copy of all emails between their office and
K

H

(the “Student”) about the allegations in this matter. The emails show that their

3

office tried to schedule a meeting between the Student and a Dean’s Designate to discuss
the allegations in this matter from May 2022 to September 2022, but that the Student did
not respond. I have attached a copy of these emails to my affidavit as Exhibit A.
4.

The Dean’s Office provided our office with copies of the Student’s academic record and
contact information in the Repository of Student Information (“ROSI”), which are current
as of July 5, 2023. I have attached copies of these documents to my affidavit as Exhibit B.

5.

According to the Student’s academic record, the Student last completed courses at the
University in Winter 2022.

B.

Charges and Disclosure

6.

On February 2, 2023, the Office of the Vice-Provost, Faculty and Academic Life
(“VPFAL”) served the charges on the Student by email to their University email address
and the Gmail account that the Student has listed in ROSI

@gmail.com). I have

attached a copy of this email and the charges to my affidavit as Exhibit C.
7.

On February 3, 2023, the Office of Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances (the
“ADFG”) sent the Student a letter about the charges in this matter and a pamphlet for
Downtown Legal Services. I have attached a copy of this email, letter, and pamphlet to my
affidavit as Exhibit D.

8.

On February 4, 2023, Mr. Webb emailed the Student to introduce himself and suggest that
they have a call to discuss the case. Mr. Webb and the Student exchanged several emails
and set up a meeting for February 5, 2023. I have attached a copy of these emails to my
affidavit as Exhibit E.

9.

Mr. Webb has advised me that, on February 5, 2023, he met with the Student by Zoom to
discuss the allegations in this case on a without prejudice basis. Mr. Webb has advised me
that, during this meeting, he encouraged the Student to retain counsel and informed the
Student that the matter would proceed to a hearing.

10.

On April 6, 2023, Mr. Webb emailed the Student a disclosure letter and disclosure brief.
In his email, Mr. Webb stated in part: “Please note that the University expects you to
monitor and retrieve your emails on a frequent and consistent basis per the University’s
Policy on Official Correspondence with Students”. Mr. Webb included a hyperlink to this

4

policy in his email to the Student. I have attached a copy of this email and the disclosure
letter to my affidavit as Exhibit F.
C.

Hearing Scheduling

11.

On April 21, 2023, Mr. Webb emailed the Student about scheduling a hearing date. Mr.
Webb stated in full:
Dear K
I am writing to schedule a hearing before the University Tribunal in this matter.
Please let me know any dates that you are unavailable to attend a hearing in
June, July, and August 2022.
Please get back to me by no later than May 1, 2023 with your availability. If I
do not hear from you by then, I will proceed to schedule the hearing. You will
receive a notice of hearing confirming the date and time of the hearing once it
has been scheduled. Please note that if you do not attend the hearing once
scheduled, the hearing may take place in your absence without further notice
to you.
Regards,
Will
[Emphasis in Original]

12.

On April 30, 2023, at 10:44 am, the Student responded to Mr. Webb by stating in part:
“June is difficult because I am not currently in Canada. However, from the end of July to
the middle of August, it is always possible. Thank you.”

13.

On April 30, 2023, at 10:57 am, Mr. Webb responded to the Student by stating in part:
“Given your availability, I will request a virtual hearing in late July. You will receive a
notice of hearing confirming the date and time of the hearing. If you do not attend the
hearing once scheduled, the hearing may proceed in your absence without further notice to
you. I understand that you intend to represent yourself at the hearing. If you retain a lawyer,
please let me know.” Mr. Webb sent this email to the Student’s Gmail account
(

@gmail.com) and her utoronto account (k

h @mail.utoronto.ca). I have

attached a copy of the emails between Mr. Webb and the Student about scheduling a
hearing to my affidavit as Exhibit G.

5

14.

On April 30, 2023, at 11:03 am, Mr. Webb emailed the ADFG to schedule a hearing for
July 24, 2023, at 1:45 pm Toronto Time. The Student’s Gmail account and her utoronto
account were copied on this email.

15.

On May 1, 2023, the ADFG issued a Notice of Electronic Hearing to take place via zoom
on July 24, 2023, at 1:45 pm EST. The email was sent to the Student’s Gmail account and
the Student’s utoronto account. I have attached a copy of this email thread and the Notice
of Electronic Hearing to my affidavit as Exhibit H.

16.

On July 10, 2023, Mr. Webb emailed the Student a copy of the Affidavit of R. Allen and
stated that the University intended to rely on the affidavit. A copy of this email is attached
to my affidavit as part of the email thread at Exhibit F.

D.

SWS Activity Log

17.

The Accessible Campus Online Resource Network (“ACORN”) is a web-based tool that
stores students’ academic, personal, and financial records. Students can view their records
and update their contact information in ACORN. To access their ACORN account, students
need to input their UTORid and the password for that account. Students’ activity in
ACORN is recorded in a Student Web Services Activity Log (“SWS Activity Log”).

18.

On July 17, 2023, the Dean’s Office provided our office with a copy of the Student’s SWS
Activity Log, which is current as of July 17, 2023. I have attached a copy of the Student’s
SWS Activity Log to my affidavit as Exhibit I.

19.

According to the Student’s SWS Activity Log, someone accessed the Student’s ACORN
account several times in July 2023 to add and drop courses. Most recently, someone logged
into the Student’s ACORN account on July 12, 2023.

E.

Further Attempts to Contact the Student

20.

Mr. Webb has advised me that, on July 17, 2023, he called the Student’s cellular number
listed in ROSI, but he received a message that stated in part: “the cellular number you are
calling is not assigned.”

6

21.

On July 17 and 20, 2023, Mr. Webb emailed the Student to reminder (sic) her about the
hearing and request that she confirm her attendance. I have attached a copy of this email
thread to my affidavit as Exhibit J.

22.

Mr. Webb has advised me that, on July 23, 2023, at 11:30 am and 8:30 pm, he called the
telephone number that was listed on a transcript order that the Student placed in January
2022 by using the international pre-fixes for calling South Korea from Canada (011-82).
On both occasions, he received a message in a language that he did not understand, and
there was no opportunity to leave a message. I have attached a screen shot of the transcript
order, which the University’s Registrar’s Office sent to our office, to my affidavit as
Exhibit K.

23.

To date, our office has not received any further communication from the Student.

b) Evidence of Mr. Wagg
Mr. Wagg’s affidavit provides as follows:
1.

I am the Manager, Incident Response at Information Security, Information Technology
Services at the University of Toronto (the “University”). As such, I have knowledge of the
matters contained in this affidavit. Where I do not have direct knowledge of a matter
contained in this affidavit, I state the source of my knowledge and I believe it to be true.

2.

Information Technology Services provides many services to the University, including
management of the email accounts used by students. To access an email account one needs
to input both the user’s login id and the password for that account. The Microsoft 365
Exchange portal automatically records the last time someone accessed a particular
University-issued email account. This is denoted with the code “LastUserActionTime.”
The LastUserActionTime log only updates when someone logs in to a University-issued
email account.

3.

On July 24, 2023, I checked the portal records to determine the last time someone accessed
the email account k

h @mail.utoronto.ca. To view the LastUserActionTime log, I ran

a PowerShell script.
4.

I determined that the last time someone accessed this e-mail account was on October 20,
2022, at 4:16 PM, local Toronto time.

7

c) Further Evidence of Ms. Blair
Ms. Blair’s further affidavit provides as follows:
1.

I am a legal assistant at the law firm Paliare Roland Rosenberg Rothstein LLP. I work with
William Webb, an associate at Paliare Roland, who acts as Assistant Discipline Counsel to
the University of Toronto. As such, I have knowledge of the matters contained in this
affidavit. Where I do not have direct knowledge of a matter contained in this affidavit, I
state the source of my knowledge and I believe it to be true.

A.

The previous hearing

2.

A hearing into the charges that were issued against K

H

(the “Student”) on February

2, 2023, was previously scheduled to take place on July 24, 2023.
3.

On July 24, 2023, at 11:14 am, Mr. Webb emailed the Office of Appeals, Discipline and
Faculty Grievances (the “ADFG”), stating that he did not know whether the Student would
attend the hearing and that the Provost would request that the hearing proceed in her
absence if she did not attend.

4.

At 11:57 am, the Student emailed Mr. Webb, stating that she apologized for the late reply,
that she would attend the hearing, and that she “received a confirmation email belatedly
due to the e-mail's storage space being exceeded”. The Student asked Mr. Webb whether
there was anything else that she needed for the hearing.

5.

At 12:03 pm, Mr. Webb responded to the Student, stating that she should carefully review
the information that the ADFG had previously sent to her about the charges and the hearing,
and that she should carefully review the Provost’s hearing materials that he had previously
sent to her and the ADFG.

6.

At 1:23 pm, the Student emailed Mr. Webb, stating in part: “I'm asking you just in case.
Shortly after I arrived in Canada, I couldn't find a good defense. (The law centre in canada)
In this case, is it okay to proceed today?”

7.

At 1:23 pm, Mr. Webb emailed the Student, stating that they could address the matter as a
preliminary issue at the hearing.

8

8.

At 1:25 pm, the Student emailed Mr. Webb, stating in full: “Can other hearings be held
besides today?” I have attached a copy of this email thread between Mr. Webb and the
Student to my affidavit as Exhibit A.

9.

At 1:41 pm, Mr. Webb emailed the ADFG, stating that the Student emailed him requesting
an adjournment to retain counsel. Mr. Webb stated that the Provost consented to the
Student’s adjournment, but was concerned that the Student was trying to delay a hearing
into the allegations that she forged a transcript. Mr. Webb noted that the ADFG sent the
Student information about Downtown Legal Services in February 2023, he met with the
Student by zoom in February 2023 and encouraged her to retain counsel at that time, he
sent the Student additional information about Downtown Legal Services in April 2023, and
that the Student had consented to the current hearing date back in May 2023.

10.

At 1:46 pm, the Student responded to Mr. Webb’s email, stating in part: “Thank you to
care of me that I asked you. So now should I attend Zoom as scheduled?”

11.

At 1:49 pm, Mr. Webb emailed the Student, stating in part: “Please log into the zoom
hearing. We will address your request for an adjournment.” I have attached a copy of this
email thread between Mr. Webb and the Student to my affidavit as Exhibit B.

12.

At 2:21 pm, Mr. Webb sent the Student an email that stated in full:
Dear [Student],
Please make it a priority to retain a lawyer as soon as possible.
You may wish to contact Downtown Legal Services, which is a legal clinic
that is available to University of Toronto students. You can find out more
information
about
Downtown
Legal
Services
here:
https://downtownlegalservices.ca/. Alternatively, you may wish to retain a feefor-service lawyer. If you would like the contact information of lawyers who
represent students facing academic integrity charges, please let me know.
I will contact you in one month to schedule a hearing.
Please note that the University expects you to monitor and retrieve your emails
on a frequent and consistent basis per the University’s Policy on Official
Correspondence with Students. Please note that if I do not hear back from you
when I contact you in the future, I will request a hearing date without your
input. You will receive a notice of hearing confirming the date and time of the
hearing once it has been scheduled. Please note that if you do not attend the
hearing once scheduled, the hearing may take place in your absence without
further notice to you.

9

Regards,
Will
[Emphasis in original]
13.

Mr. Webb sent the email to the Student’s Gmail account and the Student’s utoronto
account. I have attached a copy of this email to my affidavit as Exhibit C.

14.

At 3:25 pm, the ADFG sent the parties a hearing outcome letter that stated in part:
[…]
A Tribunal Hearing for your matter proceeded on Monday, July 24, 2023 at
1:45 p.m. You were in attendance, but unrepresented at the tribunal hearing.
The matter was presided over by Shaun Laubman (Chair), Professor Joseph
Clarke (Faculty Panel Member) and Giselle Sami Dalili (Student Panel
Member).
The Panel heard submissions from Assistant Discipline Counsel regarding
your request for an adjournment to retain counsel. Upon consideration, the
Panel granted an adjournment to a date to be determined. This panel is not
seized in your matter. Please correspond with Mr. William Webb, Assistant
Discipline Counsel at william.webb@paliareroland.com, to discuss timing and
possible dates.
[…]

15.

The ADFG sent the email and the letter to the Student’s Gmail account and the Student’s
utoronto account. I have attached a copy of this email and letter to my affidavit as Exhibit
D.

B.

Scheduling the current hearing

16.

On August 28, 2023, over one month after the initial hearing date, Mr. Webb emailed the
Student to request that she provide him with an update on whether she had retained counsel
or whether she intended to represent herself. Mr. Webb sent the email to the Student’s
Gmail account and the Student’s utoronto account.

17.

On September 11, 2023, the Student responded to Mr. Webb, stating in full:
Dear, William
Thank you for your email.

10

Is it possible to schedule the hearing for mid-October?
I'm trying to defend myself.
Thank you
[The Student]
18.

Later that day, Mr. Webb emailed the Student, stating that he would check in with the
University’s witnesses to see whether they were available for a hearing in mid-October and
that he would get back to the Student shortly. Mr. Webb sent the email to the Student’s
Gmail account and the Student’s utoronto account. I have attached a copy of this email to
my affidavit as Exhibit E.

19.

Later that day, Mr. Webb emailed the ADFG, stating in part: “[The Student] has informed
me that she would prefer a hearing take place in mid-October 2023. I am therefore writing
to request that a hearing be scheduled for October 19, 2023 at 9:45 am.” Mr. Webb sent
the email to the Student’s Gmail account and the Student’s utoronto account. I have
attached a copy of this email to my affidavit as Exhibit F.

20.

On September 13, 2023, the ADFG issued a Notice of Virtual Hearing to take place on
October 19, 2023, at 9:45 a.m. (EST), via Zoom. The ADFG sent the email and the Notice
of Virtual Hearing to the Student’s Gmail account and the Student’s utoronto account. I
have attached a copy of this email thread and the Notice of Virtual Hearing to my affidavit
as Exhibit G.

C.

The Student’s online activity

21.

Acorn is a web-based tool that stores University of Toronto students’ academic, personal,
and financial records. Students can update their contact information in Acorn. To access
their Acorn account, students need to input their UTORid and the password for that
account.

22.

The Student Web Services Activity Log for the Student, dated October 16, 2023, shows
that the last time that someone accessed the Student’s Acorn account was on September
25, 2023. I have attached a copy of the Student’s Student Web Services Activity Log to
my affidavit as Exhibit H.

11

23.

On October 16, 2023, Mr. Webb emailed Andrew Wagg, Manager, Incident Response at
Information Security, Information Technology Services, University of Toronto, to request
information about the last time that someone checked the Student’s utoronto account. Later
that day, Mr. Wagg informed Mr. Webb that the Last User Action Time timestamp for the
Student’s utoronto account was on October 20, 2022 at 4:16 pm. I have attached a copy of
this email to my affidavit as Exhibit I.

24.

I have attached a copy of the Student’s academic record, which is current as of October 16,
2023, to my affidavit as Exhibit J.

D.

Further attempts to contact the Student

25.

On October 16, 2023, Mr. Webb emailed the Student to reminder (sic) her that a hearing
had been scheduled for October 19, 2023, at 9:45 a.m. (EST) via Zoom. Mr. Webb asked
Ms. H

to confirm whether she planned to attend the hearing. Mr. Webb sent the email to

the Student’s Gmail account and the Student’s utoronto account. I have attached a copy of
this email to my affidavit as Exhibit K.
26.

Mr. Webb has advised me that, on October 18, 2023, at approximately 10:45 am, he called
the Student’s cellular number listed in the Repository of Student Information (“ROSI”),
but he received a message that stated in part: “the number you are calling is unavailable”.
I have attached a copy of the Student’s contact information, which is current as of October
18, 2023, in ROSI to my affidavit as Exhibit L.

27.

Mr. Webb has advised me that, on October 18, 2023, at approximately 10:55 am, he called
the telephone number that was listed on a transcript order that the Student placed in January
2022 by using the international pre-fixes for calling South Korea from Canada (011-82).
Mr. Webb has advised me that he received a message that stated in part, “the number you
have dialed is not in the directory.”

28.

There are no other telephone numbers for the Student listed in ROSI.

29.

To date, our office has not received any further communication from the Student.

The evidence establishes that the Student was aware that October 19, 2023 had been chosen
as the date for the hearing. The University then did everything it could reasonably have
done to contact the Student and did take the steps it was required to under the Rules.
12

Accordingly, the Panel was satisfied it was more likely than not that the Student had made
a deliberate choice to avoid and turn her back on any official communications from the
University and not to attend the hearing. That choice has consequences.
Therefore, in light of the evidence and the submissions of Assistant Discipline Counsel,
the Panel was satisfied that the Student had been given reasonable notice of the time, date
and place of the hearing and of the fact that it may proceed in her absence if she did not
attend it, in compliance with the notice requirements of the SPPA and the Rules.
Accordingly, the Panel decided to hear the case on its merits in the absence of the Student.
Charges and Particulars
The charges alleged against the Student as filed by the Provost on February 2, 2023 are as
follows:
1.

You knowingly forged or in any other way altered or falsified an academic record, and/or
uttered, circulated or made use of such forged, altered or falsified record, namely, a
document that purported to be a Transcript of Consolidated Academic Record from the
University of Toronto Scarborough, dated January 10, 2022, contrary to section B.I.3(a) of
the Code.

2.

In the alternative, you knowingly engaged in a form of cheating, academic dishonesty or
misconduct, fraud or misrepresentation not otherwise described in the Code in order to
obtain academic credit or other academic advantage of any kind, in connection with a
document that purported to be a Transcript of Consolidated Academic Record from the
University of Toronto Scarborough, dated January 10, 2022, contrary to Section B.I.3(b)
of the Code.

The particulars related to charges 1 and 2 are as follows:
1.

At all material times, you were a student at the University of Toronto Scarborough.

2.

On or before January 13, 2022, you knowingly forged or in any other way altered or
falsified a Transcript of Consolidated Academic Record from the University of Toronto
Scarborough, dated January 10, 2022 (the “Purported Transcript”).

13

3.

On or before January 13, 2022, you knowingly uttered, circulated or made use of the
Purported Transcript to First Advantage Korea, a company that provides background
screening services to employers, or to a prospective or current employer, or to others.

4.

The Purported Transcript falsely represented your academic record in several ways,
including your grades, marks, courses, session grade point averages, annual grade point
averages, and/or cumulative grade point average.

5.

You knew or ought to have known that the Purported Transcript document was forged,
altered, or falsified and misrepresented your true academic history when you uttered,
circulated or made use of it.

6.

You had an obligation to provide accurate and truthful information and not to misrepresent
your academic record.

7.

You knowingly engaged in a form of cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud
or misrepresentation not otherwise described in the Code in order to obtain academic credit
or other academic advantage of any kind in connection with the Purported Transcript.

Assistant Discipline Counsel advised the Panel that if a finding was made for Charge 1, the
Provost would then withdraw Charge 2.
The Student’s Position
Given that the Student was not present nor represented, she was deemed to have denied the
charges. As a result, the hearing proceeded on the basis that the University bore the burden
of proving the charges on the balance of probabilities.
Overview
In addition to the previously identified affidavits, the University tendered the evidence of
one witness, Rachelle Allen (“Ms. Allen”), a Service Coordinator, Transcripts, in the
Registrar’s Office at the University, who provided her evidence by affidavit, which was
accepted by the Panel pursuant to rule 66 of the Rules.
After careful deliberation, and having considered all the evidence, the Panel found that on
the balance of probabilities the evidence was sufficiently clear, cogent and convincing to
14

discharge the burden of proof on the University and found that the Student had committed
academic misconduct.
The Evidence
The contents of the affidavit (without Exhibits) of the one witness is set out below:
a) Evidence of Ms. Allen
Ms. Allen’s affidavit provides as follows:
1.

I have worked as the Service Coordinator, Transcripts, in the University Registrar’s Office
(the “Registrar’s Office”) at the University of Toronto (the “University”) since March
2023. I previously worked as a Transcript Clerk in the Faculty of Arts and Science at the
University from 2009 to 2011, a Transcript Courier Liaison in the Faculty of Arts and
Science at the University from 2011 to 2018, and a Transcript Courier Liaison in Enrolment
Services at the University from 2018 to March 2023. As such, I have personal knowledge
of the matters set out in this affidavit. Where I do not have personal knowledge of a matter,
I state the source of my information and I believe it to be true.

A.

The Registrar’s Office

2.

The Registrar’s Office oversees financial aid and awards, student accounts, client services,
transcripts, and student systems. The Transcript Services Office is part of the Registrar’s
Office. The Transcript Services Office provides support to students upon their request,
including issuing official transcripts. The Transcript Services Office often receives
requests from other academic institutions and employment agencies seeking to verify a
student’s academic record. Other institutions or agencies often ask us to confirm the
accuracy of a transcript, or to confirm the authenticity of the degree information noted in
the transcript presented by a student as proof that the student graduated from the University.

3.

The University offers an official electronic transcript (an “eTranscript”) in a Portable
Document Format (“PDF”) format. The eTranscript is securely transmitted to recipients
via the University’s eTranscript vendor, Parchment Inc. (“Parchment”), and is certified
with a digital signature.

15

4.

Parchment is a digital credential service, allowing learners, academic institutions, and
employers to request, verify, and share credentials in simple and secure ways.

5.

Students may submit eTranscript requests through the online University of Toronto
Parchment Storefront. Students must specify a recipient to whom they want the eTranscript
sent. After students submit their order online, the University processes their request.

6.

Recipients of the eTranscript receive an email from Parchment on behalf of the University
when the transcript is ready for download. eTranscripts sent on behalf of the University
from Parchment come from the email address, noreply@parchment.com, with the subject
line, “University of Toronto : Parchment Send Service : Document #”. Recipients have 20
calendar days to access the transcript using the secure download link provided in the email.
Students are required to place a new eTranscript order if the secure download link expires
before the eTranscript is downloaded by the recipient.

7.

The eTranscript is only official when the document displays an encoded security feature
called the “blue ribbon seal” that declares the document was certified by Parchment Inc.

B.

Academic History

8.

K

H

(the “Student”) first enrolled at the University of Toronto Scarborough

(“UTSC”) in Fall 2019. The Student has 2.00 credits and a CGPA of 1.52. I have attached
a true copy of the Student’s transcript (the “True Transcript”), dated February 9, 2023, to
my affidavit as Exhibit A.
9.

The Repository of Student Information (“ROSI”) contains a record of the Student’s
complete enrolment history, which lists every course to which the Student has applied,
every course in which the Student has been enrolled, and every course from which the
Student has withdrawn. University employees can export a copy of a student’s complete
enrolment history from ROSI into an Excel file. I have attached a PDF copy of the
Student’s complete enrolment history that was exported from ROSI into an Excel file on
July 6, 2023 to my affidavit as Exhibit B.

10.

The “Activity Date” column in the Student’s complete enrolment history shows the date
on which a user updated the Student’s enrolment history.

16

11.

The “Activity Status” column in the Student’s complete enrolment history contains the
following codes:
(a)

APP: Request approved. Student is enrolled in course.

(b)

REF: Request denied. Student is not enrolled and may not make another request
for this course via the web during this session.

(c)

CAN: Course cancelled (student withdrew from course before deadline).

(d)

WAIT: No room in the meeting section. Student has been placed on a waiting list
based on category and will be enrolled automatically if space becomes available.

(e)
12.

DWAIT: Student has cancelled place on the waiting list or been removed.

The “Updated USERID” column shows who updated the enrolment activity. The code
“SWS” means that the enrolment activity was updated by a user who was logged into the
Student’s Student Web Services account, which is called ACORN.

13.

The “Session Code” column shows the year and semester of the course in terms of a fivedigit number. The first four digits refer to the year and the fifth digit refers to the semester
(1 = Winter, 5 = Summer, and 9 = Fall).

C.

The Transcript Order and Verification Request

14.

On January 10, 2022, at 8:41 p.m. Eastern Standard Time, the Student ordered an
eTranscript via Parchment to the email address

@gmail.com. The Student paid

$15 for the eTranscript. I have attached a screen shot of the Student’s parchment order to
my affidavit as Exhibit C.
15.

@gmail.com is listed as the Student’s email address in ROSI. I have attached a
copy of the Student’s Email Address page in ROSI to my affidavit as Exhibit D.

16.

On January 12, 2022, First Advantage Korea sent the Registrar’s Office a request to verify
the Student’s enrolment. First Advantage Korea sent the Registrar’s Office three
documents:

17

(a)

A Request for Verification of Enrolment form in which First Advantage Korea
requested verification of the Student’s enrolment at the University;

(b)

A consent form that was signed by the Student that gave First Advantage Korea
permission to conduct a records check; and

(c)

A copy of the Student’s Transcript of Consolidated Academic Record that states it
was issued to the Student on January 10, 2022 (the “Purported Transcript”). I
have attached a copy of the emails between First Advantage Korea and the
Registrar’s Office and these three attachments to my affidavit at Exhibit E.

17.

The Request for Verification form states that First Advantage Korea offers pre and post
employment screening services to give their clients an accurate assessment of a job
applicant’s track record and background, and that First Advantage Korea’s clients include
multinational corporations, investment and retail banks, technology companies, business
advisors, law firms and governments.

18.

Later that month, Sana Kawar, former Manager of the Transcript Centre, emailed First
Advantage Korea that the Purported Transcript was not a true copy of the Student’s
academic achievement at the University of Toronto.

19.

Ms. Kawar has since retired from the University.

D.

The Purported Transcript Contains Inaccurate Academic Information

20.

The Purported Transcript contains information that does not accurately reflect the Student’s
academic record at the University of Toronto. I have attached a copy of a chart that
compares the Student’s True Transcript to the Purported Transcript to my affidavit at
Exhibit F.

21.

The Purported Transcript states that many of the Student’s grades, marks, and grade point
averages (“GPAs”) are higher than what she actually received, and that she earned more
credits than what she actually earned. For example:
(a)

The Purported Transcript states that the Student’s grades and marks are higher in
every course than what she actually received (except EESA06H3: Introduction to
Planet Earth and NEW280Y1: Introductory Swahili).

18

(b)

The Purported Transcript states that the Student’s sessional GPAs, annual GPAs,
and cumulative GPAs are higher than what she actually received (except for the
Student’s Winter 2020 sessional GPA). The Purported Transcript does not contain
an annual GPA or a cumulative GPA for Winter 2020, whereas the True Transcript
contains both.

(c)

The Purported Transcript states that the Student earned more credits in Fall 2019,
Summer 2020, Winter 2021, and Fall 2021 than what she actually earned.

22.

The Purported Transcript contains information about the Student’s history in the Winter
2021 semester that is inaccurate. For example:
(a)

The Purported Transcript incorrectly states that the Student completed the course
“MGEA02H3: Introduction to Macroeconomics” in Winter 2021. The Student did
not complete this course in Winter 2021. According to the True Transcript,
“MGTA02H3: Managing the Business Organization” was the only course that the
Student finished in Winter 2021 (the Student obtained a failing grade in this
course).

(b)

The course codes and names on the Purported Transcript for the Winter 2021 term
are incorrect. The UTSC Calendar lists all of UTSC’s course offerings for each
academic year. The calendar contains the correct course names and codes for each
academic year. The 2020-2021 Calendar states that “MGEA02H3” was the course
code for “Introduction to Microeconomics: A Mathematical Approach”, and that
“MGEA05H3” was the course code for “Introduction to Macroeconomics”. I have
attached excerpts from the UTSC 2020-2021 Calendar to my affidavit as Exhibit
G.

(c)

According to ROSI, the Student has never been enrolled in the Winter 2021 session
of MGEA02H3. The Student has been enrolled in several different sessions of this
course (Fall 2019, Summer 2020, Fall 2020, and Fall 2021), but never the Winter
2021 session of this course. According to the True Transcript, the Student has
never completed this course.

(d)

According to ROSI, the Student has never been enrolled in MGEA05H3.

19

23.

The Purported Transcript states that the Student completed five courses in Fall 2021 that
she did not complete that semester. In particular:
(a)

ENGA11H3: Literature and Film for Our Time: Dawn of the Digital: the Purported
Transcript states that the Student completed this course in Fall 2021 and received
a mark of “73” and a grade of “B”, whereas the True Transcript states that the
Student completed this course in Winter 2022 and received a mark of “40” and a
grade of “F”. The Purported Transcript states that the course average was a “B+”,
whereas the True Transcript states that the course average was a “B”. When the
Student ordered the transcript in January 2022, there was no reported course
average because the course had not yet concluded.

(b)

ENGB74H3: The Body in Literature and Film: according to ROSI, the Student was
enrolled in the Winter 2022 session of ENGB74H3 for a brief period of time before
she withdrew on in March 2022, but she has never been enrolled in the Fall 2021
session of this course. According to the True Transcript, the Student has never
completed this course.

(c)

MGEA06H3: Introduction to Macroeconomics: A Mathematical Approach:
according to ROSI, the Student enrolled in this course in several different sessions
(Winter 2020, Winter 2021, Summer 2021, Winter 2022, and Winter 2023), but
she has never been enrolled in this course in the Fall 2021 session. According to
the True Transcript, the Student has never completed this course.

(d)

MGTA06H3: Introduction to Business II:
(i)

The Purported Transcript incorrectly states that “MGTA06H3” is the
course code for “Introduction to Business II”. The UTSC 2021-2022
Calendar lists all of UTSC’s course offerings for the academic year from
Fall 2021 to Summer 2022. According to the UTSC 2021-2022 Calendar,
UTSC did not offer any courses with this code or name in the 2021-2022
academic year. I have attached a copy of the UTSC 2021-2022 Calendar
to my affidavit as Exhibit H.

20

(ii)

I have reviewed every UTSC Calendar from 2018-2019 to 2022- 2023.1
The last time that UTSC offered the course “MGTA06H3” was in the
2018-2019 academic year, but the course was called “Introduction to
Health Management”, not “Introduction to Business II”. I have attached
excerpts from the UTSC 2018-2019 Calendar to my affidavit as Exhibit
I.

(iii)

According to ROSI, the Student has never enrolled in a course with the
course code “MGTA06H3”.

(iv)

According to the True Transcript, the Student has never completed a
course with the code “MGTA06H3”, the name “Introduction to Health
Management”, or the name “Introduction to Business II”.

(e)

MGTA33H3: Managing the Business Organization II: according to ROSI, the
Student has never been enrolled in this course. According to the True Transcript,
the Student has never completed this course. According to the University of
Toronto Scarborough 2021-2022 Calendar, the University of Toronto Scarborough
did not offer any course with this code or name in the 2021-2022 academic year.

This concluded the University’s evidence.
University’s Submissions
Assistant Discipline Counsel submitted that the evidence of Ms. Allen, supports a finding
on the balance of probabilities that the Student committed the academic offences as alleged.
In that regard, it was submitted that the evidence in its totality demonstrated that the Student
forged, altered or falsified and circulated a document that purported to be a Transcript of
Consolidated Academic Record from the University.

1

The calendars are all available online at https://utsc.calendar.utoronto.ca/calendar-pdfs.

21

Standard of Proof
The onus is on the University to establish, based upon clear and convincing evidence on a
balance of probabilities, that the academic offences charged have been committed.
Decision of the Tribunal
Based on the evidence and the submissions by counsel for the University, the Student was
found guilty of:
(a)

One count of knowingly forging or in any other way altering or falsifying an academic
record, or uttering, circulating or making use of such forged, altered or falsified record,
contrary to section B.I.3(a) of the Code.

Given this finding, the University withdrew Charge 2.
Reasons for Decision
The Panel accepted the unchallenged evidence of Ms. Allen, finding that her evidence was
credible and reliable.
The evidence of Ms. Allen clearly demonstrated that the Purported Transcript contained
information that did not accurately reflect the Student’s academic record at the University.
The evidence also clearly established that the Student knowingly forged, altered or falsified
and circulated a document that purported to be the Student’s Transcript of Consolidated
Academic Record dated January 10, 2022 from the University.
As such, the Panel was satisfied on the balance of probabilities that the Student committed
the academic offence of knowingly forging or in any other way altering or falsifying an
academic record, or uttering, circulating or making use of such forged, altered or falsified
record, contrary to section B.I.3(a) of the Code as alleged in Charge 1 filed by the Provost
on February 2, 2023.

22

Sanction
The University’s Evidence
The University had no further evidence.
The University’s Submissions
The University provided the Panel with a Book of Authorities containing a number of prior
decisions of this Tribunal and a chart summarizing them.
Counsel for the University submitted that the proper sanctions to be imposed on the Student
should be:
(a)

an immediate suspension from the University for a period of up to five years from
the date of this order or until Governing Council makes its decision on expulsion,
whichever comes first, and that a corresponding notation be placed on the Student’s
academic record and transcript;

(b)

a recommendation to the President of the University that the President recommend
to the Governing Council that the Student be expelled from the University; and

(c)

that this case be reported to the Provost for publication of a notice of the decision
of the Tribunal and the sanctions imposed, with the name of the Student withheld.

Assistant Discipline Counsel reviewed with the Panel the chart summarizing the sanctions
which have been given to students by this Tribunal in prior similar cases.
Assistant Discipline Counsel then reviewed with the Panel the principles relative to
sanction as set out in The University of Toronto and Mr. C. (Case No. 1976/77-3,
November 5, 1976) (“Mr. C.”), namely:
(a)

The character of the Student;

(b)

The likelihood of a repetition of the offence;

(c)

The nature of the offence committed;
23

(d)

Any extenuating circumstances;

(e)

The detriment to the University caused by the misconduct; and

(f)

The need for general deterrence.

In this regard, Assistant Discipline Counsel submitted that as the Student did not attend the
hearing there is no evidence of remorse or insight or whether the Student has taken
responsibility and learned from her mistakes consequently, there is no evidence as to her
character or any extenuating circumstances and so that is a neutral factor.
Further, with respect to the Student’s character, there is no evidence from the Student and
as a result there is little information on this.
With respect to likelihood of repetition, Assistant Discipline Counsel noted that the Student
did not have any prior discipline history, but that there was a strong likelihood of repetition
of the conduct given that she had in this case falsified and forged her Transcript of
Consolidated Academic Record. This suggests that there is a likelihood of repetition of the
conduct by the Student.
With respect to the nature of the offence, it was submitted that knowingly altering and
forging an academic record is a serious form of academic misconduct.
With respect to mitigation, as the Student did not attend the hearing there was no evidence
from her and so there is no evidence with respect to mitigation before the Panel, apart from
the fact that she had no prior academic misconduct.
With respect to the detriment to the University, and to deterrence, Assistant Discipline
Counsel submitted that it is important that students be deterred from creating false
academic records. Academic integrity is seriously undermined by falsifying academic
records and there is significant detriment to the University as these type of documents are
relied upon by third parties and therefore this conduct needs to be deterred.
Assistant Discipline Counsel reviewed with the Panel comparisons between the True
Transcript and the Purported Transcript in this case and how the Purported Transcript had

24

been altered and forged by the Student. The Student’s conduct in this regard shows why
deterrence is equally applicable to detriment to the University in this case.
The Student in this case altered and forged an academic record in order to obtain pre and
post-employment screening services and is consistent with other cases from this Tribunal
which have found that those circumstances require expulsion as the Student’s conduct was
egregious.
In the submission of Assistant Discipline Counsel, where the Student has engaged in
conduct such as this including forgery, expulsion can only be avoided by significant
mitigating factors, but none are present here and therefore the appropriate sanction is to
recommend expulsion.
Assistant Discipline Counsel also reviewed with the Panel the chart of prior decisions and
reviewed in detail several of those prior decisions of the Tribunal to demonstrate that the
proposed penalty was consistent with decisions of this Tribunal in similar circumstances.
Sanction Decision
After deliberations, the Panel ordered that the following sanctions shall be imposed on the
Student:
(a)

an immediate suspension from the University for a period of up to five years from
the date of this order or until Governing Council makes its decision on expulsion,
whichever comes first, and that a corresponding notation be placed on the Student’s
academic record and transcript;

(b)

a recommendation to the President of the University that the President recommend
to the Governing Council that the Student be expelled from the University; and

(c)

that this case be reported to the Provost for publication of a notice of the decision
of the Tribunal and the sanctions imposed, with the name of the Student withheld.

An Order was signed at the hearing by the Panel to this effect.

25

Reasons for Sanction
The Panel considered the submissions of Assistant Discipline Counsel and the factors and
principles relevant to sanction in Mr. C, supra, as set out above.
In addition to these factors, the Panel considered the chart of prior decisions and the other
decisions of this Tribunal involving similar misconduct as contained in the University’s
Book of Authorities and the sanctions imposed. However, the Panel remained cognizant of
the fact that no two cases are identical and that it is not bound by past decisions of this
Tribunal. However, the Tribunal does try to develop a consistent body of cases so that
students are treated fairly and consistently in similar circumstances.
By knowingly altering and forging an academic record, the Student broke the honour code
that is essential to modern learning.
Students must understand that this kind of misconduct will have serious repercussions so
that they will be dissuaded from the temptation to consider falsifying an academic record.
The Panel accepted the University’s submission that by knowingly altering and forging an
academic record, the Student committed a serious form of academic misconduct.
The Student committed the offences knowingly and deliberately, not through carelessness
or inadvertence. The offences were the result of the Student’s calculated conduct.
In different ways, the University is vulnerable to, and suffers detriment from, the forgery
offences that the Student committed here particularly as the forgery was directed towards
a third party in the University’s name.
As this Tribunal held in the University of Toronto and M.K. (Case No. 491, November 5,
2008), at para. 43, “such conduct will and must meet with the most severe reaction when
uncovered.”
This factor weighs heavily in favour of a recommendation of expulsion.
The need to deter others from committing similar offences also weighs heavily in the
circumstances of this case. In the Tribunal’s view, a strong message must be conveyed to
26

the University community that serious offences such as these will not be tolerated, and that
those who commit them will face serious sanctions.
It is critical for the University that students be dissuaded from committing forgery. Forgery
is often difficult to detect, thus requiring a strong deterrent when it is discovered.
The Panel is persuaded that a severe sanction is required where a student is guilty of forgery
to deter others who may contemplate similar misconduct.
This factor also weighs in favour of a recommendation of expulsion.
Forgery is among the most serious academic offences. The usual penalty is a
recommendation of expulsion, although in some cases a five-year suspension has been
imposed. As the Tribunal observed in the University of Toronto and M.S. (Case No. 498,
February 3, 2010), at para. 30, “it is clear that forgery is treated as one of the most serious
offences in the University environment and most cases result in expulsion.”
Where forgery has been found, a student normally only avoids a recommendation of
expulsion where there are significant mitigating factors, or where there is a joint
recommendation on sanction, or both. There is no joint recommendation on sanction here,
and as discussed above, no real mitigating circumstances, which in our view, outweigh the
effect of the other factors here. See the University of Toronto and L.M. (Case No. 808,
February 1, 2016), at paras. 78-79.
In the circumstances, the Tribunal’s view is that the factors heavily weigh in favour of
expulsion. The seriousness of the offences and the need for deterrence are particularly
compelling in this case.
Accordingly, the Tribunal finds that a recommendation that the Student be expelled (along
with the additional terms sought by the University) is the appropriate sanction.

27

Dated at Toronto, this 15th day of January 2024
Original signed by:
______________________________________
Christopher Wirth, Chair
On behalf of the Panel

28

