Case 1492

   DATE:

   January 15, 2024

   PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v. K.H. ("the Student")

   HEARING DATE:

   October 19, 2023, via Zoom

   PANEL MEMBERS:

   Christopher Wirth, Chair
   Professor Emily Nacol, Faculty Panel Member
   Harvi Karatha, Student Panel Member

   APPEARANCES:
   Mr. William Webb, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland
   Rosenberg Rothstein LLP

   NOT IN ATTENDANCE:

   The Student

   HEARING SECRETARY:

   Samanthe Huang, Coordinator & Hearing Secretary, Office of Appeals,
   Discipline and Faculty Grievances

   The Student was charged with one count under s. B.i.3(a) Code of
   Behaviour on Academic Matters, 2019â¯(the âCodeâ) on the basis that
   they knowingly forged or in any other way altered or falsified an
   academic record, and/or uttered, circulated or made use of such forged,
   altered or falsified record, namely, a document that purported to be a
   Transcript of Consolidated Academic Record from the University of
   Toronto (the âPurported Transcriptâ). In the alternative, the Student
   was charged with knowingly engaging in a form of cheating, academic
   dishonesty, misconduct, fraud or misrepresentation not otherwise
   described in the Code in order to obtain academic creditor or other
   academic advantage of any kind, in connection with the Purported
   Transcript, contrary to section B.i.3(b) of the Code.

   Neither the Student nor a representative for the Student attended the
   hearing. Assistant Discipline Counsel (âCounselâ) filed evidence that
   the Student was served with the charges and the notice by way of email
   to their email address as recorded in the Repository of Student
   Information (ROSI).Â  The Panel found that the evidence established
   that the Student was aware of the hearing date that had been chosen
   which was scheduled during a period that the Student previously
   indicated to Counsel that they would be available. The Panel further
   found that the Student made a deliberate choice to avoid official
   communications and to not attend the hearing.Â  Counsel filed evidence
   that their office sent various communications to the Student to the
   email address provided in ROSI, once the hearing date had been chosen.
   Counsel made several attempts to contact the student by phone, using
   the Studentâs cellular number as listed in ROSI. The Student did not
   respond to any of these communications from the University. The Panel
   concluded that pursuant to the Statutory Powers Procedure Act and the
   University Tribunal Rules of Practice and Procedure (âRulesâ), the
   Student received reasonable notice of the hearing. The Panel was
   therefore satisfied to proceed in the absence of the Student.

   Regarding the charge under s. B.i.3(a) of the Code, the Panel
   considered the affidavit evidence of the Service Coordinator in the
   University Registrarâs Office. The Panel noted that the Service
   Coordinatorâs evidence was that their office received a request to
   verify the Purported Transcript.Â  The Service Coordinator deposed that
   the Purported Transcript contained information that did not accurately
   reflect the Studentâs academic record at the University, including
   grades, marks and grade point averages, and credits obtained that were
   higher than what the Student actually achieved. The Panel was satisfied
   that the evidence established that the Student knowingly forged,
   altered, or falsified and circulated a document that purported to be
   the Studentâs Transcript of Consolidated Academic Record. After
   deliberation and based on the evidence and the submissions of counsel,
   the Panel concluded that on a balance of probabilities, the evidence
   was sufficiently clear, cogent and convincing to discharge the burden
   of proof on the University and found the Student had committed the
   academic offence of knowingly forging or in any other way falsifying an
   academic record or uttering, circulating or making use of such forged,
   altered or falsified record, contrary to section B.i.3(a) of the Code.
   Given this finding, the University withdrew the second charge under
   B.i.3(b) of the Code.

   In determining an appropriate sanction, the Panel noted that the
   Studentâs actions were deliberately undertaken with a view of obtaining
   pre and post-employment screening services. The Panel considered the
   factors and principles relative to sanction as set out in University of
   Toronto and Mr. C. (Case No. 1976/77-3, November 5, 1976). In
   considering the aforementioned factors, the Panel outlined that there
   was no evidence regarding the Studentâs character or any extenuating
   circumstances. The Panel found that there was a likelihood of
   repetition of the Studentâs conduct. It further noted, with respect to
   the nature of the offence and the detriment to the University, that
   knowingly altering and forging an academic record is a serious form of
   academic misconduct, which seriously undermines academic integrity and
   is a significant detriment to the University. With respect to
   mitigation, the Panel observed that the Student did not attend the
   hearing and as such, there was no real evidence of mitigation aside
   from the fact that the Student had no prior discipline history. The
   Panel noted that the Studentâs conduct and the circumstances under
   which the Purported Transcript was used were similar to other cases in
   which the University Tribunal has recommended expulsion.Â  The Panel
   outlined the strong need to deter others from committing similar kinds
   of forgery and falsification of academic records. It further observed
   that a student normally avoids a recommendation of expulsion where
   there are significant mitigating factors which are not present in this
   case. The Panel imposed the following sanctions: immediate suspension
   from the University for a period of up to five years from the date of
   this order or until the Governing Council makes its decision on
   expulsion, whichever comes first, with a corresponding notation on the
   Studentâs academic record and transcript; immediate suspension from the
   University for a period of up to five years; a recommendation that the
   Student be expelled, as per s. C.ii(b)(i) of Code; and a report to the
   Provost for publication.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/31430
