THE UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
IN THE MATTER OF charges of academic dishonesty made on July 9, 2010;
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic
,Hallers, 1995;
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University ofToronto Act, 1971, S.O. 1971, c. 56 as amended
S, 0, [ 978, C, 88

BETWEEN:
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO

- and -

M

H

Date of Hearing: September 20, 2010
Members of the Panel:
Ms Lisa Brownstone, Barrister and Solicitor, Chair
Professor Gabriele D'Eleuterio, Institute for Aerospace Studies, Faculty Panel Member
Mr. Haoyu Feng, Student Panel Member
Appearances:
Ms Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Barristers
Mr. Daniel Goldbloom, Law Student, Downtown Legal Services
In Attendance:
Mr. M
H
, the Student
Professor Mark Kortschot, then Acting First Year Chair, Faculty of Applied Science and
Engineering
Mr. Christopher Lang, Director, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances

-2 -

Preliminan•

[!]

The Trial Division of the University Tribunal was convened on September 20, 2010 to
consider charges under the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic
1vfa/le1·s, 1995 (the "Code") laid against the student by letter dated July 9, 2010 from
Professor Edith Hillan, Vice-Provost, Faculty & Academic Life.

Hearing on the Facts

[2]

The 13 charges facing the student were as follow:
(l)

On 01· about May 11, 2010, you knowingly forged or in any other way altered or
falsified an academic record, or uttered, circulated or made use of any such
forged, altered or falsified record, in c01mection with a petition submitted to the
Registrar of the Faculty of Applied Science and Engineering, being assigned
Petition Number 5661 ("Petition"), that you submitted to obtain special
consideration in APS106Hl ("Course"), contrary to section B.l.3(a) of the Code.

(2)

In the alternative to paragraph I above, on or about May 11, 2010, you knowingly
forged or in any other way altered or falsified any document or evidence required
by the University, or uttered, circulated or made use of any such forged, altered or
falsified document, in cotmection with a petition submitted to the Registrar of the
Faculty of Applied Science and Engineering, being assigned Petition Number
5661 ("Petition"), that you submitted to obtain special consideration in APS I
06HI ("Course"), contrary to section B.1.1 (a) of the Code.

(3)

On or about May 11, 2010, or shortly thereafter, you knowingly forged or in any
other way altered or falsified any document or evidence required by the
University, or uttered, circulated or made use of any such forged, altered or
falsified doct1ment, whether the record be in print or electronic form, in
connection with an t1ndated letter purportedly from yourself to "Respected
Sir\Madam" regarding the Petition and its supporting documentation to obtain
special consideration in APS106Hl, contrary to section B.1.l(a) of the Code.

(4)

On or abot1t May 11, 2010, or shortly thereafter, you knowingly forged or in any
other way altered or falsified an academic record, or uttered, circulated or made
use of any such forged, altered or falsified record, in connection with a letter
dated 09/05/2010 purportedly from Dr. Abu Nasar Rizvi, which yot1 st1bmitted in
support of your Petition to obtain special consideration in APS I06H I , contrary to
section B. l .3(a) of the Code.

(5)

In the alternative to paragraph 4 above, on or about May 11, 2010, or shortly
thereafter, you knowingly forged or in any other way altered or falsified any
document 01· evidence required by the University, or uttered, circulated or made

. 3-

use of any such forged, altered or falsified document, in connection with a letter
with the date 09/05/20 IO purportedly from Dr. Abu Nasar Rizvi, which you
submitted in support of your Petition to obtain special consideration in
APS106H I, contrary to section B.1. I (a) of the Code.
(6)

On or about May 27, 20 I0, you knowingly forged or in any other way altered or
falsified any document or evidence required by the University, or uttered,
circulated or made use of any such forged, altered or falsified document, whether
the record be in print or electronic form, in connection with an email
senttofirstyear@ecf.utoronto.ca regarding your Petition to obtain special
consideration in APSI 06Hl, contrmy to section B.1. l(a) of the Code.

(7)

On or about May 31, 20 I0, you knowingly forged or in any other way altered or
falsified any document or evidence required by the University, or uttered,
circulated or made use of any such forged, altered or falsified document, whether
the record be in print or electronic form, in connection with an email from you to
ViceDean Undergrad at ViceDean@ecf.utoronto.ca regarding your Petition to
obtain special consideration in APS I06H I, contrary to section B.1.1 (a) of the
Code.

(8)

On or about June I, 20 I 0, you knowingly forged or in any other way altered or
falsified any document or evidence required by the University, or uttered,
circulated or made use of any such forged, altered or falsified document, whether
the record be in print or electronic form, in connection with a letter and/or
statement sent to the Registrar in the Faculty of Applied Science and Engineering,
regarding your Petition to obtain special consideration in APS I06Hl, contrary to
section B.1.1 (a) of the Code.

(9)

On or about June 1, 2010, you knowingly forged or in any other way altered or
falsified an academic record, or uttered, circulated or made use of any such
forged, altered or falsified record, whether the record be in print or electronic
form, in connection with a Jette!' dated May 27, 2010, purportedly from Dl'. Anisul
Islam at Square Hospitals Ltd. in suppoti of yom Petition to obtain special
consideration in APSI06Hl, contrary to section B. l .3(a) of the Code.

(10)

In the alternative to paragraph 9 above, on or about June 1, 2010, you knowingly
forged or in any other way altered 0l' falsified any document or evidence required
by the University, or uttered, circulated or made \lSe of any such forged, altered or
falsified document, whethel' the record be in print or electronic form, in
connection with a letter dated May 27, 2010, purportedly from Dr. Anisul Islam at
Square Hospitals Ltd. In support of your Petition to obtain special consideration
in APS 106H 1, contrary to section B.1.1 (a) of the Code.

-4-

(11)

On or about June I, 2010, you knowingly forged or in any other way altered or
falsified an academic record, or uttered, circulated or made use of any such
forged, altered or falsified record, whether the record be in print or electronic
form, in connection with an undated letter purportedly from Dr. Abu Nasar Rizvi
regarding the Petition to obtain special consideration in APS I06Hl, contrary to
section B.1.3(a) of the Code.

(12)

In the alternative to paragraph I I above, on or about June I, 2010, you knowingly
forged or in any other way altered or falsified any document or evidence required
by the University, or uttered, circulated or made use of any such forged, altered or
falsified document, whether the record be in print or electronic form, in
connection with an undated letter purpo11edly from Dr. Abu Nasar Rizvi
regarding the Petition to obtain special consideration in APS106Hl, contrary to
section B.1.1 (a) of the Code.

(13)

In the alternative to each of the paragraphs above, you knowingly engaged in a
form of cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or misrepresentation
not herein otherwise described, in order to obtain academic credit or other
academic advantage of any kind, in connection with the following forged and/or
falsified documents, submitted in support of your Petition to obtain special
consideration in APS I 06H 1, contra1y to section B.l.3(b) of the Code:
(i)

the Petition;

(ii)

a letter and/or statement you submitted to the Registrar in the Faculty of
Applied Science and Engineering on or shortly after May 11, 20 IO;

(iii)

a letter dated 09/05/20 IO purportedly from Dr. Abu Nasar Rizvi of Square
Hospitals Ltd.;

(iv)

an email you sent to firstyear@ecf.utoronto.ca on or about May 27,20 IO;

(v)

an email you sent to ViceDean Undergrad at ViceDean@ecf.utoronto.ca
on or about May 31,20 IO;

(vi)

a letter dated May 27, 2010, pmportedly from Dr. Anisul Islam at Square
Hospitals Ltd.;

(vii)

an undated letter purportedly from Dr. Abu Nasar Rizvi at Square
Hospitals Ltd submitted on or about June I, 20 IO; and/or

(viii) an undated lettet· purportedly from yourself to "Respected Sir\Madam"
submitted on or about June I, 2010.

-5-

[3]

Discipline counsel advised that charges (1), (3), (4), (6), (7), (8), (9) and (l l) were the
principal charges while charges (2), (5), ( l 0), (12) and ( 13) wern alternative charges, If
findings were made on the principal charges, findings would not be sought on the
alternative charges.

[4]

Particulars of the charges were set out as follows:
( l)

You were registered at the University of Toronto and enrolled in the First Year
Program of the Faculty of Applied Science and Engineering at all material times.

(2)

On or about April 16, 20 l O you wrote the final examination in APS 106Hl,
following which you received a failing grade in the Course.

(3)

On or about May 11, 2010 you submitted a Petition in which you requested that
your mark on the final examination in APS106Hl not be counted towards your
final mark in that Course, or alternatively that you be permitted to write a deferred
examination in that Course,

(4)

In your Petition, you stated that yom father had been admitted to the hospital the
day before the final exam in APS106Hl, and that he was subsequently diagnosed
with Guillain-Barre Syndrome and was in very critical condition, all of which
affected your prepnration for the APS 106Hl and subsequent exams,

(5)

In support of your Petition you submitted a letter and/or statement from you to the
Registrar, addressed to "Respected Sir/Madam", advising ofyom father's serious
medical condition and requesting that your final mark in APS106Hl be calculated
on the basis ofyo\11' midterm, project and lab marks ("First Statement").

(6)

Further in support of the Petition you submitted a letter on Square Hospitals Ltd,
letterhead, dated 09/05/2010, purportedly from Dr, Abu Nasar Rizvi, confirming
your father's serious medical condition,

(7)

On or about May 26, 20 l O you were advised by the University that there were
discrepancies in the petition documents which you had filed.

(8)

On or about May 27, 2010 you sent an email to firstyear@ecf.utoronto.ca which
you stated that there had been a mistake made in the doctor's statement submitted
in suppo1t of your Petition, and you requested assistance to correct the mistake.

(9)

On or about May 31, 2010 you sent an email to the ViceDean Undergrad at
ViceDean@ecf.utoronto.ca in which you stated that your father had collapsed and
had been rnshed to hospital with a very serious medical condition, which had
affected your ability to write your APS106HI exam,

-6-

[5]

(10)

On June 1, 2010 you submitted a letter dated May 31, 2010 from yourself to the
Registrar of the Faculty of Applied Science and Engineering containing the same
information as had been sent to the ViceDean Undergrad on May 31, 2010
("Second Statement").

(II)

Also on June 1, 2010 you submitted additional medical documentation to the
University in support ofyom Petition, which included a letter dated May 27, 2010
on the letterhead of Square Hospitals Ltd. purportedly from Dr. Anisullslam; and
you submitted a further letter, undated, purportedly from Dr. Abu Nasar Rizvi at
the same hospital, explaining that he had made errors in the dates in his earlier
letter of May 9,2010.

(12)

All of the letters purporting to be from the doctors at Square Hospitals Ltd. Are
false, as is the information contained therein. There are no such doctors associated
with Square Hospitals Ltd., and your father was not admitted to that hospital
suffering from a serious medical condition with the particulars as described.

(13)

Similarly, the information provided to the University in the Petition and in the
documents that you provided to support your Petition and/or to obtain assistance
with your Petition, including the First Statement, the email sent May 27, 2010 to
First Year Engineering, the May 31 email to the ViceDean Undergrad, the May
31 letter to the Registrar, and the Second Statement, all contained forged and
falsified information. None of the information pertaining to your father's health or
your family's financial circumstances or the information provided by the doctors
at the hospital was true.

(I 4)

you forged the documents and fabricated and falsified the information contained
therein so that the University would provide the special consideration requested
by you in your Petition, in order to receive an improved grade in the Course.

The parties provided the Panel with an Agreed Statement of Facts, which provided in
relevant part as follows;
hereby pleads guilty to Charge I, 3, 4, 6, 7, 8, 9, and 11 of the

(i)

Mr. H
Charges.

(ii)

The Provost agrees that if the Tribunal convicts Mr. H
011 Charge I, 3, 4, 6,
7, 8, 9, and 11 of the Charges, the Provost will withdraw Chat·ge 2, 5, I0, 12 and
13.

-7 -

Petition

(iii)

Mr. H
first registered as a student at the University of Toronto in the
Faculty of Applied Science and Engineering ("Faculty") in Fall 2009. At all
material times, Mr. H
remained enrolled at the University. At the end of
the 2009 Fall session, Mr. H
had a Cumulative GP A of 0.74 and was placed
on academic probation. At the end of the 20 IO Winter Session, Mr. H
had a
cumulative GPA of 0.98 and was placed on repeat probation. Mr. H
was
deemed to have failed and was required to withdraw from the Faculty for at least
one year. Mr. H
may apply to the Faculty for readmission to the Fall 2011
session.

(iv)

Mr. H

(v)

In the 20 IO Winter term Mr. H
of Computer Programming.

(vi)

On May 11, 2010, Mr. H
submitted an electronic petition request to the
Faculty's Registrar's Office, in which he asked for special consideration in
APS l 06 such that his course grade would be awarded on the basis of his term
work without consideration of the mark he obtained in the final exam he wrote on
April 16, 2010 ("Petition"). Alternatively Mr. H
requested that he be
permitted to write another final exam in APS106Hl in the summer. In describing
the problem 01· situation giving rise to this request, Mr. H
stated that his
father had been admitted as critically ill to the intensive care unit of a hospital
suffering from Guillain Barre Syndrome ("OBS") the day before Mr. H
's
final exam in APS106Hl. Mr. H
further stated that this incident, coupled
with concerns about related financial issues, affected his preparation for his final
exam in APS l 06Hl, as well as other courses.

(vii)

Between May 11 and May 21, 20 I0, Mr. H
submitted the following two
additional documents in hard copy to the Registrar's Office, in support of his
Petition:
(a)

is an international student from Bangladesh, where his family lives.
was enrolled in APS I 06H I: Fundamentals

undated letter to "Respected Sir\Madam" from M
stating that:
(i)

H

on the day before Mr. H
's final exam in APS106Hl his
father was admitted to hospital suffering from paralysis, and that
he was later diagnosed with GBS;

-8-

(b)

(viii)

(ii)

he had been unable to provide documentation any earlier because
of the burden placed on his mother by his father's illness;

(iii)

after 10 days his mother obtained a doctor's note from the doctor
and sent it to Mr. H
by post which did not arrive, so his
mother resent the note via DHL (courier) which he received;

(iv)

"Hope you my situation and give me the marks of this course
according to my midterm, project and labs." ("Undated H
Letter").

letter dated 09/05/2010 from Dr. Abu Nasar Rizvi, Senior Consultant,
Depm1ment of Ne11rology and neurosurgery, Square Hospitals Ltd., on
Square Hospitals Ltd. letterhead, stating the following:
(i)

Mr. M
·H
, age 55, was admitted to Square hospital, at
15/03/20 IO with severe lower limb paralysis, dysphagia and
respiratory problems, and was diagnosed with a severe form of
OBS;

(ii)

the patient had to be shifted to the intensive care unit one day after
his admission as a result of a further deterioration with extensive
upper and lower limb paralysis and autonomic nervous system
complications, where he remained for 4 weeks.

(iii)

the patient was moved out of the ICU on April 23, 2010, and he is
expected to be discharged within 3 weeks. ("May 9 Dr. Rizvi
Letter").

On May 26, 20 I0, Leslie Grife, an academic counsellor in the Registrar's Office,
spoke with Mr. H
to advise him that his petition had been denied as she had
identified discrepancies between the statements he had made in his petition and
the medical documentation provided to that date. In particular Ms. Ori fe
identified that Mr. H
's Petition and the Undated H
Letter submitted in
support of that petition stated that Mr. H
's father had become ill and
admitted to hospital the day before the APSI06Hl final exam held on April 16,
20 IO; yet the May 9 Dr. Rizvi Letter stated M,
H
had been admitted
to hospital on March 15, 20 I0. Mr. H
told Ms. Grife that he would try to
get new documentation with a letter of apology for the errors in the May 9 Dr.
Rizvi Letter. Ms. Grife also asked that Mr. H
provide contact information
for the doctor and the hospital.

. 9.

(ix)

On May 27, 2010, Mr. H1
sent an email to the Faculty's First Year Office
regarding his Petition. He stated that he believed there had been a mistake in the
doctor's statement, and that he had been asked by the authorities in the hospital
for a copy of the May 9 Dr. Rizvi Letter in order for them to verify the process
and correct their mistake ("May 27 Email").

(x)

On May 31, 2010, Mr. H
sent an email to the Faculty's Office of the ViceDean, Underf,•raduate Studies, regarding his final grades ("May 31 Email"), "to
explain the unfortunate incidents that had been taking place in [his] life lately".
He stated the following:

(xi)

(a)

his comse marks in the winter te1m had been at an average of 65-70%, but
that his father had collapsed and been rnshed to hospital the day before his
APS106 final exam, such that his final mark in APS dropped to 45%;

(b)

his father had been diagnosed with GBS and was in the ICU;

(c)

his mother had difficulty getting the required medical documentation to
support his petition;

(d)

the documents received from the hospital contained errors with the dates;

(e)

the hospital authorities looked into the matter and decided to send the
documents again;

(f)

all these incidents had a negative influence on his exam preparation and
performance as he found it hard to concentrate;

(g)

he was on the verge of leaving for Bangladesh as he was desperate to be
able to help and be with his family;

(h)

had it not been for his father's illness which had a significant negative
impact on his APSI06Hl exam and all his other exams he would have
continued with summer school; and

(i)

he was clearly a victim of many unfortunate incidents and should therefore
be given one more chance to prove his worth and continue "in your
prestigious institute",

On June I, 20 I 0, Mr. H
Year Office:

submitted the following documents to the First

- l O-

(a)

a hard copy of an undated letter from himself to Dear Sir/ Madam ("June l
H
Letter"). The June 1 I-11
Letter was identical in content to
the May 31 Email.

(b)

a letter dated 27/05/2010 on Square Hospitals Ltd. letterhead signed by
Dr. Anisul Islam, Member of Board of Directors, and Dr. Abu Nasa Rizvi,
stating the following:

(c)

(i)

Mr. M
·H
, age 55, was admitted to Sq1rnre Hospital
on 15/04/20 IO with GSB.

(ii)

the patient was shifted to ICU around 15 hours prior to his
admission, and was kept in ICU for around 3 weeks.

(iii)

the patient was out ofICU on 05/05/20 I0.

(iv)

the patient "is expected to be dischm·ged with 3-4 weeks."

(v)

the previous ce11ified document sent by Abu Nasar Rizvi had two
errors regarding dates:
a.

the admission date was 15/04/20 I0, and not 15/03/20 l O as
previously indicated; and

b.

the date of discharge from the ICU was 05/05/2010 [and
not April 23, 2010 as previously indicated).

(vi)

Dr. Islam as a member of the Board of Directors sincerely
apologised on behalf of the hospital authorities for Dr. Nasar's
error and for all the confusion it caused;

(vii)

Dr. Nasar has agreed to provide an additional apology "as he
realises that magnitude of Mr. M
<'s situation." ("Dr. Islam
Letter"),

an undated letter on Square Hospitals Ltd. letterhead from Dr. Abu Nasar
Rizvi to Respected Sfr\Madam conveying sincere apologies for any
inconvenience caused because of the error regarding dates, and explaining
that Mr. H
's father had been confused with another patient with a
similar name ("Dr. Rizvi Apology Letter"). This letter also contained an
email address: abu.nasarrizvi@yahoo.ca, and a mobile phone number,

- 11 -

with an invitation to contact Dr. Rizvi with any questions or emergency
query.
(xii)

Mr. H
attended a meeting with the Dean's Designate pursuant to the Code
on June 18, 20 I0. At that meeting he was asked to explain the documents he had
filed in support of his Petition. He explained that hismother obtained the May 9
Dr. Rizvi Letter, the Dr. Islam Letter, and the Dr. Rizvi Apology Letter for him,
and that when he told her that questions had been asked by the Registrar about the
authenticity of the documents, his mother admitted to having falsified them. He
further explained that he was not aware that his mother had provided him with
forged and falsified documents.

(xiii)

On Monday June 21, 20 I 0, Mr. H
sent a letter to the dean via email. In this
letter he confessed that he had falsified the documents submitted for his Petition.
He described some of the pressures he faced at the time. He further indicated that
a close family friend in Bangladesh, S.A. Farooque, had convinced Mr. H
to falsify the medical documents and file a petition, so that Mr. H,
could
avoid telling his parents that he would lose his year of school due to his low
academic standing. When the University asked questions about the initial
documents, Mr. H
, explained that Mr. Farooque continued to advise Mr.
H
to falsify new documents and information regarding his father's medical
condition.

(xiv)

Mr. H

admits the following:

(a)

his father did not become ill with GBS in 20 I 0, and was not admitted to a
hospital with a critical illness in 20 IO;

(b)

the information contained in the Petition was entirely false;

(c)

the following documents were forged and provided by Mr. H,
, to the
University when he knew they were forged and contained false
information:
(i)
(ii)
(iii)

(d)

the May 9 Dr. Rizvi Letter;
the Dr. Islam Letter; and
the Dr. Rizvi Apology Letter.

the following documents were knowingly falsified by Mr. H
and
provided by him to the University when he knew they contained false
information;

• 12 ·

(i)
(ii)
(iii)
(iv)

(e)

(16)

the Undated HLetter;
the May 27 Email;
the May 31 Email; and
the June 1 H
Letter.

he knowingly uttered, used and circulated the Petition, the Undated
H1
Letter, the May 9 Dr. Rizvi Letter, the May 27 Email, the May 31
Email, the June 1 H
t Letter, the Dr. Islam Letter, and the Dr. Rizvi
Apology Letter, knowing that they were forged and contained false
information, in order to avoid having his mark from his final exam in
APS106Hl counted in his final grade for APS106Hl:

Mr. Hi
acknowledges and admits that the conduct described above in
paragraph 17 constitutes academic misconduct as described in the Charges, and in
particular that his conduct is contrary to:
(a)

section B.I.3(a) of the Code as described in Charges 1, 4, 9 and 11; and

(b)

section B.1.1 (a) of the Code as described in Charges 3, 6, 7 and 8.

Decision of the Tribunal

(6]

On the basis of the Agreed Statement of Facts and taking into account the nature of the
documents and the wording of section B.l.3(a) of the Code and section B.l.l(a) of the
Code, the Tribunal accepted the plea and found contraventions of the Code as set out in
the principal charges (1), (3), (4), (6), (7), (8), (9) and (11). No findings will be made on
the alternative charges (charges (2), (5), (JO), (12) and (13) and, according to the Agreed
Statement of Facts, these were withdrawn by the University.

Penalty Plrnse

[7]

Mr. H
was sworn, and read a prepared statement. In that statement, he
acknowledged that the Tribunal and University would have "good reason to be annoyed"
with him and his behaviour, that he was deeply sorry for his "irresponsible, shameful
behaviour." He explained some of the difficulties he encountered in his year studying far
from his home country, that the tuition has been a big burden on his family, and that the
decision to live off campus had made things more difficult for him in his new country,
where he was home sick and finding it difficult to balance his daily life. He talked about
family problems that lasted from July 2009 until the summer of 2010, and his own
medical issues that had caused him embarrassment and discomfort over the year. He

- 13 -

acknowledged tlrnt after his first semester, in which he achieved very poor grades, the
University gave him a second chance by allowing him to continue on in his program of
study. The second semester commenced well, but he did very poorly on the examination
in question, He described himself as confused, stressed and scared to tell his parents. He
said that he turned to a family friend who asked if he could fight for marks and made
suggestions about claiming his father was ill, and then said he was foolish enough to do
this and engage in a series of shameful acts. When he was confronted, he initially
repeated the shameful acts, and placed blame upon his mother. He realized that this was
foolish, irresponsible and shameful behaviour, "had enough" and confessed.
[8]

Mr. H
took responsibility for his actions, and indicated that he still wishes to
achieve his goal of studying and obtaining a degree at the University. He has not done
any acts of this kind before and says that he never will again, that he has learned his
lesson and that he feels guilty. He ended his statement by apologizing once again and
expressing his deep sorrow.

[9]

In response to other questions from Mr. Gold bloom, he gave some details of the financial
dispute that his parents were involved in, and advised that he was concerned about the
state of his parents' marriage.

[I OJ

Under cross-examination by Ms Hanner, Mr. H
acknowledged that he could have
earliet· gone to the University to seek help and chose not to do so. He acknowledged that
in his meeting with Professor Kortschot, they went through the documents that he had
presented to the University in support of his petition and had a fairly detailed discussion,
which included Professor Kortschot pointing out the Yahoo.ca e-mail address he had
given to a doctor supposedly not from Canada. Ms Harmer suggested to Mr. H
that
by the time he left that meeting, he knew Dr. Kortschot didn't believe him, nor would he
be expected to believe that Mr. H
s mother made up a story and mislead Mr.
H
, about his father's ill health for purposes of assisting with his examination.

[ 11]

Ms Hanner suggested that as Professor Kortshot pointed out the problems with his story
and documentation, Mr. Hi
knew he would never be able to convince anyone that
his story was true, and only then decided to write the e-mail accepting responsibility.

(12]

Mr. H
reiterated that over the week-end, he realized that what he had done was
morally wrong.

[13]

Ms Harmer, on behalf of the University asked the Tribunal to impose the following
sanction:
(i)

impose a final grade of zero (0) in the course APS I 06HI;

(ii)

suspend the student from the University for five (5) years slatting September 1,
2011 (he is suspended until that date for academic reasons) and that a notation of

- 14 -

the suspension remain on his transcript from now until one year after the end of
the suspension; and
(iii)

report the case to the Provost who may publish the decision with the student's
name withheld.

(14]

The significant point of disagreement between the University and the student was with
respect to the length of the suspension: Mr. Goldbloom on behalf of the student, asked
the Tribunal to impose a suspension of2 to 3 years.

[15]

The Panel considered the factors that are relevant to sanction. In paiiicular, the Panel
agrees with the submissions of counsel that forgery and falsification are at the very
serious end of the spectrum of offences. Although Mr. Hi
perpetuated the sto1y
several times to different fornms and different audiences over a period of three weeks
(May 11-June I), the Panel has also considered Mr. H
's submission that this related
to a single examination in a single course and a single petition for accommodation. It
appears to the panel as though this may be all the student would have needed to attain the
average mark he required in order to be able to continue at the university. Nonetheless,
the panel agrees that in this respect, the facts before us are not like those in some of the
other cases to which the Panel was referred, where students seek to change several marks
in several comses by forgery or falsification.

(16]

The detriment to the University is significant. The Code emphasizes the responsibility for
integrity in the relationship between the student and the University. The petition process
exists in order to assist students and requires a fundamental relationship of trust in order
for the system to work properly. Students who take advantage of this process hurt both
the University and other students who wish to use this process properly and in good faith.
As such, the detriment to the University in this process is enormous.

[ 17]

Deterrence is also obviously an important factor in this case, as other students need to be
deterred from misusing processes that the University has set up specifically for their
benefit. A cleat· message needs to be sent to Mr. H
and other students, as well as to
the faculty and the public at large, that misuse of this process and forge1y of
documentation will not be tolerated. There will be very serious consequences for this
kind of breach of trust.

[ 18]

The likelihood of repetition is unknown. This is Mr. H
's first offence and there are
extenuating circumstances. Mr. H
was living a long way from home for the first
time, his family was dealing with difficult issues which were weighing on him.

[ 19]

The Panel agrees that many students find themselves in these kinds of situations, and
cheating is not to be countenanced as a way of dealing with the stresses that students
face, which stresses may be patiicularly hying in the case of international students.

- 15 -

(20)

The Tribunal notes that Mr. H
did provide a full e-mail confession almost
immediately following the meeting with Professor Kortschot, that he has been fully cooperative with this process, pleaded guilty and signed an agreed statement of facts,
thereby obviating the need for the University to have a hearing and prove its case. fn
addition, Mr. H
participated in the process, came to the Tribunal hearing and took
responsibility for his actions before this Tribunal. Although the e-mail confession came,
in the University's submission, only once he knew that his story would not be believed,
the Panel is of the view that it is a mitigating factor. That is, even if the confession did
come only once the student knew he was, in effect, "caught", he did spare the university
the steps of having a full hearing, and he did engage in the process. These are mitigating
circumstances.

[21]

The student submitted that a 2-3 year suspension is a significant amount of time and
would achieve the University's objective in this case. The Panel does not agree.

[22)

However, given Mr. H
's cooperation with the University, his guilty plea, his
expressed remorse and regret, his taking full responsibility and participating in the
process, his lack of prior offences, his full admission of the offence which came before
he retained counsel, the Panel is of the view that although a five year suspension is
appropriate, that suspension should be effective from September 1, 2010, and should not
nm consecutively to his academic suspension which ends in September, 20 I I.

(23 J

Ms Harmer candidly advised the Panel that with a 5 year suspension on top of a I year
academic suspension, the likelihood of Mr. H
ever returning to the University was
very small. While the Panel does not accept that a 5 year suspension would be a marked
departure from the case law, as suggested by Mr. Goldbloom, the Panel is of the view
that in order for this to be a real second chance for Mr. H
, as opposed to simply a
notional second chance, the total suspension should not be longer than 5 years. Mr.
H1
said he still has the goal of completing his studies here and the Panel is of the
view that he ought to be given one more chance to do so with integrity, To be an
engineer is to have public trust. In order to earn that trust, the student must acquit
himself with integrity and honesty, and take responsibility for his actions. It is hoped and
expected that this sanction will bring home to the student the importance of his
responsibility to the University and to the public at large, and the seriousness of his
actions.

Sanction
(24]

Therefore the Panel orders:

(i)

that Mr. H

(ii)

that Mr. Hi
be suspended from the University commencing September l,
2010, for a period of 5 years with a notation of the sanction on his academic

. receive a final grade of zero in the course APS106Hl;

- 16 -

record and transcript for a period of six years from September 20, 2010 to
September 20, 2016; and
(iii)

that this case slmll be reported to the Provost for publication of a notice of the
decision of the Tribunal and the sanctions imposed, with the name of the student
withheld.

Dated this 3'd day of November, 20 I 0,

