Case #600

   DATE: November 3, 2010
   PARTIES: University of Toronto v. M.H.
   Hearing Date(s): September 20, 2010
   Panel Members:
   Lisa Brownstone, Chair
   Professor Gabriele DâEleuterio, Faculty Member
   Haoyu Feng, Student Member
   Appearances:
   Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel for the University
   Daniel Goldbloom, DLS for the Student
   In Attendance:
   M.H., the Student
   Professor Mark Kortschot, First Year Chair, Faculty of Applied Science
   and Engineering
   Trial Division â s. B.I.3(a); s. B.I.1(a); s. B.I.3(b) of Code â false
   medical petition â forged medical documentation â forged doctorsâ
   letters âÂ  hearing attended â Agreed Statement of Facts â guilty plea
   - no prior academic offences â mitigating factorsÂ  â full cooperation
   â full e-mail confession â expression of remorse âÂ  final grade of
   zero in the Course; five-year suspension not to run consecutively with
   sanction; six-year notation on transcript; report to Provost
   Student charged with thirteen offences under s. B.I.3(a), s. B.I.1(a),
   and s. B.I.3(b) of the Code. The charges related to the allegations
   that the Student submitted forged medical documents, submitted
   information in a medical petition known to be false, and lied in
   communications with the University regarding these documents. The
   Student submitted three separate forged medical letters containing
   false information. The Student further submitted four letters and
   e-mails containing information known to the Student to be false. The
   Student submitted these materials in order to avoid having his mark
   from his final exam in a course counted towards his final grade. The
   matter proceeded on the basis of an Agreed Statement of Facts. The
   Panel accepted the Studentâs guilty plea and found contravention of the
   Code by the Student of eight charges under s. B.I.3(a) and s. B.I.1.(a)
   of the Code. The remaining charges were withdrawn by the University.Â
   A point of disagreement between the University and the Student existed
   regarding the length of the suspension. The Panel considered the
   factors relevant to the sanction, finding that, although forgery and
   falsification are serious offences and that the Student perpetuated the
   story several times to different forums and different audiences over a
   period of three weeks, the Student submitted these materials in
   relation to a single course and a single petition for accommodation.
   The Panel noted the detriment to the university and the need for
   deterrence. The Panel further noted the Studentâs full confession, his
   cooperation with the process, his guilty plea, the signing of an Agreed
   Statement of Facts, and his taking of responsibility for his actions.
   The Panel rejected the Studentâs submission that a 2-3 year suspension
   was appropriate. The Panel noted that in order for the Student to have
   a real second chance, the total suspension should not be longer than 5
   years. The Panel imposed a final grade of zero in the Course, a
   five-year suspension to not run consecutively with his academic
   suspension, a six-year notation of the academic misconduct on the
   Studentâs academic record, and that a report to the Provost be issued.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12763
