Case #687

   DATE: July 16, 2013
   PARTIES: University of Toronto v. Y.Z.
   Hearing Date(s): September 24, 2012
   Panel Members:
   Andrew Pinto, Chair
   Karen Dion,Â Faculty Member
   Yingxiang Li, Student Member
   Appearances:
   Robert Centa, Assistant Discipline Counsel for the University
   John Koziar, Student Representative, DLS
   In Attendance:
   Kristi Gourlay, Manager, Office of Academic Integrity
   Natalie Ramtahal, Coordinator, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty
   Grievances

   Trial Division â s. B.i.3(a) of the Code â forged academic record â
   submitted forged academic record to employer â Student did not attend
   hearing â Agreed Statement of Facts â guilty plea â Joint Submission on
   Penalty â Student admitted guilt and cooperated with the University â
   Student expressed contrition â misconduct undermined integrity of the
   recruitment process â Joint Submission on Penalty accepted â five-year
   suspension; seven-year notation on transcript; report to Provost for
   publication

   Student charged with one offence under s. B.i.3(a) of the Code . The
   charge related to an allegation that the Student submitted an altered
   academic record to a potential employer. The Student did not attend the
   hearing. The Student admitted to receiving reasonable notice of the
   hearing in the Agreed Statement of Facts. The Student pleaded guilty
   and the matter proceeded by way of an Agreed Statement of Facts. The
   employer informed the Student in an interview that a successful
   candidate would have a grade point average of 3.5 or higher. The
   Student did not inform the employer that his grade point average was
   below 3.5. The Student was offered a position by the employer. The
   employer requested a copy of the Studentâs transcript to complete his
   file. The Student admitted to forging and falsifying his academic
   record in at least twenty-three ways before submitted it to the
   employer. The Panel accepted the Studentâs guilty plea. The parties
   presented a Joint Submission on Penalty. Transcript forgery is among
   the most serious offences. The Student cooperated from the outset of
   the discipline process and the misconduct in question transpired very
   quickly. The Student had expressed contrition. The Panel noted that
   employers and other third parties must be able to rely on academic
   transcripts and that the Studentâs misconduct undermines the integrity
   of the recruitment process. The Panel accepted the Joint Submission on
   Penalty and imposed a five-year suspension, a seven-year notation on
   the Studentâs transcript, and ordered that the case be reported to the
   Provost for publication.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12877
