UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
GOVERNING COUNCIL
REPORT NUMBER 268 OF THE ACADEMIC APPEALS COMMITTEE
August 1, 2002
To the Academic Board,
University of Toronto
Your Committee reports that it held a hearing on Thursday August 1, 2002, at which the
following were present:
Assistant Dean Bonnie Goldberg, Chair
Professor David Jenkins
Professor John Furedy
Mr Harmeet Gill
Professor Luigi Girolametto
Mr Paul Holmes, Judicial Affairs Officer
In Attendance:
Mr A.M., the Appellant
Mr Rashmi Desai, Associate Dean, Physical Sciences and Engineering for the
School of Graduate Studies
Professor Shamim Sheikh, Graduate Studies Coordinator, Physical Sciences and
Engineering, School of Graduates Studies
This is an appeal from the decision of the Graduate Academic Appeals Board (“GAAB”),
dated December 10, 2001, dismissing an appeal from the decision of Associate Dean
Rashmi Desai, dated June 25, 2001. The decision of Associate Dean Desai was a
dismissal of an appeal from a decision of the Examination and Degree Committee of the
Graduate Department of Civil Engineering, dated June 13, 2001. The latter Committee
dismissed an appeal by the appellant who appealed failing grades in two graduate level
Mechanical Engineering courses. Specifically the student failed CIV1281H and CIV514,
taken in the spring term of 2001. Owing to a departmental rule that the failure of two
courses results in a student being asked to withdraw from the program, the student was
asked to withdraw. Upon failure to withdraw, he was terminated from the program. The
appellant has appealed on compassionate grounds and requested that he be allowed to
remain in the program and repeat the two courses; or alternately, that he be allowed to
apply for re-admission to the program.
The appellant entered the M.Eng program in January 2001, having been permitted to
defer his start date for financial reasons. He registered as a full-time student, and enrolled
in three courses. He passed one course, and failed the other two.

Report Number 268 of the Academic Appeals Committee

The appellant put forward several grounds of appeal at the previous levels of deliberation
and before your Committee. First, the appellant argues that due to financial reasons, he
made the decision to work during the school term, while carrying a full-time course load.
He did not think he could reduce his course load in the event that this would disqualify
him from OSAP. He argues that his academic performance suffered greatly as a result.
Second, the appellant argues that his performance suffered due to his enrollment at the
Yorkdale Adult Learning Centre for continuing education in the civil engineering field.
This program involved full-time classes until February. Further, the appellant notes that
by the drop date, he did not think he had an accurate picture of his performance, having
only written one mid-term. He remained optimistic that he would be able to succeed
academically.
The appellant also put forward additional grounds of appeal relating specifically to the
two courses. With respect to CIV1281H, the appellant argues that he found difficulty
acclimatizing himself to the culture in Canada and U of T. In particular, he had difficulty
navigating the system of obtaining textbooks from the library for the course. Further, he
states that he repeatedly approached his professor for assistance and direction regarding
his independent study project, worth half the course marks. However, the professor
informed the appellant that he would have to make the necessary decisions on his own.
With respect to the second failure, in CIV514, the student received a failing grade in his
term project, after having obtained a high grade on the project’s progress report. The
professor in this course suggested to the student that some or part of the project appeared
to be plagiarized. However, your Committee received evidence that the alleged of
plagiarism was only apparent to the professor after he marked the project, and that he did
not detract any grades for the alleged plagiarism nor did he want to pursue the matter
further. The student was also concerned that at an earlier point in the term, this professor
suggested to the appellant that he had cheated during the mid-term examination.
While extremely sympathetic to the many obstacles encountered by this student who was
committed to working in order to make financial ends meet, and to supplementing his
learning at the Yorkdale Adult Learning Centre, a majority of your Committee believes
that it cannot permit this to be an excuse for failing to meet the standards required by the
University of Toronto in a graduate level engineering program. A majority of members
support the department’s defence that they award grades, and by extension degrees, based
solely on achievement. In this case, the appellant did not meet the necessary standards,
and the department contends that it could not recommend any action other than
termination from the program. A majority of the Committee does not believe that the
circumstances of the appellant’s case are such as to allow it to override a departmental
rule requiring a student to leave the program after two failures. The majority of the
Committee does not consider it appropriate to request that the department make an
exception in this case to a rule, which many departments adopt as general policy for
graduate programs at this university, entry into which is very competitive."

Page 2 of 6

Report Number 268 of the Academic Appeals Committee
With respect to CIV1281H, the majority of your Committee believes that the appellant
was not unduly disadvantaged relative to other students. He had an older version of the
textbook with which to navigate the course, and ultimately obtained the book before the
examination. Further, the professor’s decision not to provide additional assistance to the
appellant was consistent with the approach of the professor in the course requiring
students to work autonomously. We heard throughout the hearing that the Graduate Civil
Engineering department considers a student’s ability to work independently one of the
hallmarks of the program and a necessary component for any student to achieve academic
success at the graduate level.
With respect to CIV514H, a majority of your Committee sees no compelling reason to
interfere with the decision of the GAAB which found that there is no basis on which to
review the marks assigned for the work in this course. As the GAAB decided, there is no
evidence of procedural error, unfairness or bad faith in the assessment process, and
absent any of these factors, the GAAB accepted the correctness of the grade, as does your
Committee. A majority of the Committee is satisfied that the evidence disclosed that the
appellant failed the course based on poor performance, and not as a result of the
allegation of plagiarism.
Your Committee’s decision is not unanimous. A minority of the Committee would grant
relief to the appellant on compassionate grounds, in the belief that all the circumstances
combined worked against the student’s ability in an unfortunate, unforeseeable, and
almost insurmountable way. The minority would allow him to repeat the courses, having
satisfied itself that the student has learned from his errors, and would now be more likely
to achieve greater academic success in his program of study. The minority believes this
University should recognize hardship and difficult circumstances and would give the
student the benefit of the doubt and a second chance.
Before closing, your Committee wishes to make a comment about the defence put
forward by the department. Your Committee notes that the professor who made the
allegation of plagiarism did not attend at the hearing, or at the hearing of the GAAB.
Professor Sheikh testified on his behalf as to the allegation and a majority of your
Committee satisfied itself as to the details of the situation. However, your Committee
wishes to reiterate the message of Professor Ralph Scane, who chaired the GAAB
hearing, who wrote in his decision of the difficulty in deciding matters affecting a
student’s academic career without benefit of hearing from the professor(s) directly
involved in the matter. Further, your Committee wishes to note that it was concerned to
hear that the professor who failed the student in one of the courses in question and who
made the allegation of plagiarism against the appellant was the same professor who
chaired and signed his name to the letter from the Examination and Degree Committee
which dismissed the appellant’s original appeal. We heard evidence to satisfy us that this
professor was not involved in the decision-making. However, we are pleased to note that
the Graduate Studies department realizes that this raises the specter of an apparent
conflict of interest and has taken steps to ensure that this does not occur again.

Page 3 of 6

Report Number 268 of the Academic Appeals Committee
The decision of the Committee is by a majority decision, and therefore, the appeal should
be dismissed.

Paul J. Holmes
Secretary

Bonnie Goldberg
Chair

Page 4 of 6

UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
GOVERNING COUNCIL
ADDENDUM TO REPORT NUMBER 268
OF THE ACADEMIC APPEALS COMMITTEE
August 1, 2002
To the Academic Board,
University of Toronto
Your Committee reports that it held a hearing on Thursday August 1, 2002, at which the
following were present:
Assistant Dean Bonnie Goldberg, Chair
Professor David Jenkins
Professor John Furedy
Mr Harmeet Gill
Professor Luigi Girolametto
Mr Paul Holmes, Judicial Affairs Officer
In Attendance:
Mr A.M., the Appellant
Mr Rashmi Desai, Associate Dean, Physical Sciences and Engineering for the
School of Graduate Studies
Professor Shamim Sheikh, Graduate Studies Coordinator, Physical Sciences and
Engineering, School of Graduates Studies
Report Number 268 of the Academic Appeals Committee was released on August 22,
2002. The decision was not unanimous. The Chair has consented to the release of an
additional minority opinion as an addendum to the previously released decision.
The release of the minority opinion does not change the result: the appeal is denied for
the reasons specified in Report Number 268.
Respectfully Submitted,

Paul J. Holmes
Secretary

Bonnie Goldberg
Chair

Addendum to Report Number 268 of the Academic Appeals Committee
Minority Opinion
While we have no concerns over the majority decision, based on technical
grounds, where the emphasis has been on grades as the single criterion on which to base
academic judgements, we feel we must write a dissenting opinion based on
compassionate grounds.
From this vantage point we see a young man, driven by financial concerns, who
took on too many activities, a night watchman’s job, additional courses at Yorkdale Adult
Learning Centre and a full U of T course load to ensure future eligibility for OSAP
funding. As a consequence he failed to meet the requirements in two of his U of T
courses (borderline failures).
We are grateful for the frank comments made by Dr. Sheikh representing the
Faculty of Engineering Graduate Department who came from the same background as the
student and said that even a bright student who does not devote himself full time to this
engineering graduate program would be expected to fail.
We acknowledge that our colleagues in the majority recognized the
compassionate dimension to this case but were convinced that grades must be the
overriding criterion on which all academic decisions should be made. They considered
that failure in this regard would compromise academic excellence and rigor as The
University’s standard.
We in the minority, while acknowledging the importance of grades, considered
that financial hardship may have had more to do with the present unfortunate outcome
then a true test of the student’s ability. Had universal assured graduate student funding
been in place, which is the goal of the university, we believe this situation would have
been avoided. Our hope is that some form of ad hoc arrangement can be made, possibly
on a part time basis to allow the student to continue his studies at the University of
Toronto.
We do not believe this sets a dangerous precedent but rather might be seen as a
degree of flexibility towards individual needs in the conduct of university affairs.

Page 2 of 2

