Report #268

   DATE: August 22, 2002
   PARTIES: Mr A.M., the Appellant v. School of Graduates Studies
   Hearing Date(s): August 1, 2002
   Committee Members:
   Assistant Dean Bonnie Goldberg, Chair
   Professor David Jenkins
   Professor John Furedy
   Mr Harmeet Gill
   Professor Luigi Girolametto
   Judicial Affairs Officer:
   Mr Paul Holmes
   In Attendance:
   Mr A.M., the Appellant
   Mr Rashmi Desai, Associate Dean, Physical Sciences and Engineering for
   the School of Graduate Studies
   Professor Shamim Sheikh, Graduate Studies Coordinator, Physical
   Sciences and Engineering, School of Graduates Studies
   School of Graduates Studies â request to remain in program and repeat
   two courses â alternative request to apply for reâadmission to program
   â financial circumstances â enrollment in continuing education â
   difficulty acclimatizing to university culture â allegation of bias â
   financial circumstances and decision to pursue supplemental learning
   could not excuse failure to meet University standards â circumstances
   did not allow two-failure rule to be overridden nor appropriate to make
   exception to rule â not unduly disadvantaged relative to other students
   â no evidence of procedural error, unfairness or bad faith in
   assessment process â minority opinion that financial hardship affected
   Studentâs performance and to grant relief on compassionate grounds
   would not be dangerous precedent â appeal dismissed
   Request to remain in the M.Eng program and repeat two courses.
   Alternatively, the Student requested that he be allowed to apply for
   reâadmission to the program. The Student received failing grades in two
   graduate level courses. The Student was subsequently terminated from
   the program. The Student appealed the failing grades on compassionate
   grounds.Â  The Student claimed that his academic performance suffered
   due to financial circumstances which required that he work during the
   school term and that he not reduce his course load so as to remain
   eligible for OSAP. The Student claimed that his performance also
   suffered due to his enrollment in continuing education classes. With
   respect to the first course failed, the Student claimed that he had
   difficulty acclimatizing to the university culture, and particularly
   navigating the library system. He also claimed that the he did not
   receive course work assistance from his professor. With respect to the
   second course failure, the Student received a failing grade in his term
   project and the course professor suggested that it appeared to be
   plagiarized. The Student also claimed that the course professor
   suggested that he had cheated on a prior exam. The Committee found that
   the Studentâs financial circumstances and decision to pursue
   supplemental learning could not excuse his failure to meet the
   necessary University standards. The Committee found that the
   circumstances of the Studentâs case did not allow it to override a
   Faculty rule requiring a student to leave the program after two
   failures, nor did the Committee feel it appropriate to request the
   Faculty to make an exception to the rule. With respect to the first
   course failed, the Committee found that the Student was not unduly
   disadvantaged relative to other students. He was able to obtain the
   text book before the examination, and the professorâs decision not to
   provide additional assistance to the Student was consistent with the
   approach of the professor in the course. With respect to the second
   course failed, the Committee found that the Student failed the course
   based on poor performance, and not as a result of the allegation of
   plagiarism as the appearance of plagiarism was only apparent to the
   professor after he marked the project. The Committee found that there
   is no basis on which to review the marks assigned for the work in the
   course, as there was no evidence of procedural error, unfairness or bad
   faith in the assessment process. A minority of the Committee found that
   financial hardship had more to do with the Studentâs performance in the
   courses then the studentâs true ability. The minority observed that had
   universal assured graduate student funding been in place the Studentâs
   situation would have been avoided and that to grant the Student relief
   on compassionate grounds would not create a dangerous precedent. Appeal
   dismissed.
   [1]View Report

References

   1. file:///media/12545
