Case #989

   DATE: March 4, 2019
   PARTIES: University of Toronto v. Z.Q.
   Hearing Date: February 20, 2019
   Panel Members:
   Ms. Sana Halwani, Chair
   Prof. Georges Farhat, Faculty Panel Member
   Ms. Xian Deng, Student Panel Member
   Appearances:
   Mr. Robert Centa, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland,
   Rosenberg Rothstein LLP
   In Attendance:
   Ms. Tracey Gameiro, Hearing Secretary and Associate Director, Appeals,
   Discipline and Faculty Grievances
   Not in Attendance:
   The Student
   Trial Division â s. B.i.3(a) of Code â forgery of academic record â
   Student knowingly forged, circulated or made use of a document
   purporting to be a degree certificate from the University of Toronto â
   forgery detected when independent third party requested verification by
   University ofÂ  forged degree certificate â Student did not attend
   hearing â reasonable notice of hearing provided - finding of guilt â
   general approach of Tribunal is to impose recommendation for expulsion
   when falsified degree is used and no mitigating circumstances â no
   remorse, character evidence or mitigating factors â no engagement in
   the discipline process â five-year suspension; recommendation for
   expulsion; and publication by the Provost of a notice of decision and
   sanctions with the Studentâs name withheld.
   The Student was charged with one count of academic misconduct under s.
   B.i.3(a) of the Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters , 1995 (the â
   Code â) on the basis that he knowingly forged, circulated or made use
   of a forged academic record, namely, a document purporting to be a
   degree certificate from the University of Toronto.
   Neither the Student nor a legal representative of the Student appeared
   at the hearing.Â  The University submitted affidavit evidence
   demonstrating that numerous attempts had been made to notify the
   Student of the hearing.Â  The Panel was satisfied that notice had been
   adequately provided to the Student and decided to proceed with the
   hearing despite his absence.
   The evidence established that the Student was a registered student at
   the University of Toronto Mississauga, and that he had registered for a
   handful of courses between 2011 and 2013, but never fulfilled his
   graduation requirements and never received a degree from the University
   of Toronto. In August 2017, the University of Toronto received a
   request from Auradata Inc. to verify the authenticity of a degree
   parchment purportedly issued by the University of Toronto to the
   Student.Â  Auradata Inc. provides degree verification services to
   employers seeking confirmation of a candidateâs accreditation.Â  The
   University determined that the degree parchment was not authentic, and
   further confirmed that the Student had never received a degree from the
   University of Toronto. The Panel concluded there was clear and
   convincing evidence that, on a balance of probabilities, the Student
   had committed an academic office under s. B.i.3(a) of the Code by
   either forging, circulating or making use of the falsified record.
   On the question of sanction, the Panel noted that Appendix C of the
   Code states that, absent exceptional circumstances, the Provost will
   request that the Tribunal recommend expulsion where a student has
   falsified an academic record.Â  The Panel observed that the general
   approach of the Tribunal has been to impose a recommendation of
   expulsion when the offence is as serious as the use of a falsified
   degree and where there are no mitigating circumstances. Given that the
   Student had not participated at any stage of the discipline process,
   the Panel found that he had not shown any remorse, not presented any
   character evidence and had not raised any mitigating factors to warrant
   a more lenient sanction. Although this was the Studentâs first offence,
   the Panel nevertheless concluded that a recommendation of expulsion was
   appropriate because of the seriousness of the offence and the Studentâs
   complete lack of engagement in the discipline process.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/28401
