Case No. 1063
THE UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
IN THE MATTER OF charges of academic dishonesty filed on February 6, 2020,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic
Matters, 1995,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Act, 1971, S.O. 1971, c. 56 as
amended S.O. 1978, c. 88

BETWEEN:
UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO

- and -

S

K

(the “Student”)

REASONS FOR DECISION

Hearing Date: May 1, 2020

Members of the Panel:
Ms. Johanna Braden, Barrister and Solicitor, Chair
Professor Kimberley Widger, Faculty Panel Member
Ms. Karen Chen, Student Panel Member

Appearances:
Mr. Robert Centa, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg Rothstein
LLP
Hearing Secretary:
Ms. Krista Kennedy, Hearing Secretary, Office of Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances,
University of Toronto

Not in Attendance
The Student

1.

A panel of the Trial Division of the University Tribunal (the “Panel”) was convened
on May 1, 2020 to consider charges brought by the University of Toronto (the
“University”) against the Student under the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour
on Academic Matters, 1995 (the “Code”).

2.

In accordance with an Order made by the Chair of this Panel on April 21, 2020, this
hearing was held electronically via Zoom. The documents which eventually formed
the record for this hearing were sent to the Panel electronically in advance of the
hearing. Participants were able to see and hear one another throughout. The Panel
was able to watch witnesses give their evidence so that their credibility could be
fairly assessed.

Preliminary Issue 1: Proceeding in the Absence of the Student

3.

The hearing was scheduled to begin at 9:45 am. Neither the Student, nor a
representative on behalf of the Student, were logged onto the Zoom link. The Panel
waited until 10:00 am to start the hearing. The University then requested that the
Panel proceed with the hearing in the Student’s absence.

4.

Pursuant to Rule 16 of the University Tribunal Rules of Practice and Procedure (the
“Rules”), notice of an electronic hearing must include the date, time, place and
purpose of the hearing; a reference to the statutory authority under which the

hearing will be held; information about the manner in which the hearing will be held;
and a statement that if a person does not attend the hearing, the panel may proceed
in the person’s absence. Rule 17 provides that where reasonable notice of an
electronic hearing has been given to a person and that person does not attend the
hearing, the Panel may proceed with the hearing in the party’s absence. The Rules
conform to sections 6 and 7 of the Statutory Powers Procedure Act (the “SPPA”).

2

5.

Pursuant to Rule 9, a notice of hearing may be served on a student by various
means, including by emailing a copy of the document to the student’s email address
contained in the University’s Repository of Student Information (“ROSI”).

6.

The University’s Policy on Official Correspondence with Students expressly states
that students are responsible for maintaining on ROSI a current and valid mailing
address and University-issued email account. Students are expected to monitor
and retrieve their email on a frequent and consistent basis.

7.

The onus of proof is on the University to establish that it provided the Student with
reasonable notice of the hearing in accordance with these Rules.

8.

In this case, the University provided evidence that the chronology related to service
is as follows.

(a)

On February 6, 2020 the Charges were sent to the Student’s ROSI-listed email
address.

(b)

On February 7, 2020, a letter from the University’s Office of Appeals, Discipline
and Faculty Grievances regarding the Charges was sent to the Student via
email and courier.

(c)

On February 21, the office of the Assistant Discipline Counsel sent the Student
a letter containing the University’s disclosure of evidence. This was sent via

email and a secure Dropbox link. Among other things, the letter stated, "My
office and the University will continue to send you important communications
about this matter via e-mail to your utoronto account. It is therefore essential
that you regularly monitor your utoronto account and respond to all
communications in a timely manner.” Additionally, in his cover email to which
the letter was attached, Assistant Discipline Counsel wrote, "If I do not hear

3

from you by Friday, February 28, 2020, we will schedule the hearing without
further consultation.”

(d)

Also on February 21, 2020, the Student’s email account was accessed.

It

was not accessed again between February 21 and April 15 (the last date on
which the Student’s email account was checked by the University).

(e)

Originally this matter was scheduled to be an oral in-person hearing taking
place on April 6. The original Notice of Hearing was sent to the Student via
email on March 10, 2020.

(f)

On March 16, 2020 the hearing date was vacated because of the Covid-19
pandemic. Multiple emails were sent to the Student, advising her of the
vacated hearing date, the University’s subsequent request for an electronic
hearing, the Panel Chair’s request for submissions on the issue of the manner
of hearing, the Panel Chair’s eventual determination that an electronic hearing
would be appropriate, and the Notice of Electronic Hearing dated April 23,
2020. The Student did not respond to any of these emails.

9.

There is evidence the Student received actual notice of the Charges. There is no
evidence the Student received actual notice of the hearing. However, the Rules
do not require actual notice. The University can serve the Student, but cannot make
the Student actually read what is served.

10.

This hearing took place in the midst of a global pandemic that has shut down many
parts of the world. Based on her mailing address, the Student may have returned
to her home country of Pakistan. The Panel considered the possibility that there
was a pandemic-related reason preventing the Student from accessing her email
and/or participating in this hearing. However, as the Student apparently stopped
accessing her email account altogether on February 21, 2020, the Tribunal was

4

satisfied it was more likely than not that the Student was deliberately avoiding her
email and choosing to not participate in this process.

11.

In light of the evidence and the submissions of Assistant Discipline Counsel, the
Panel was satisfied that the Student had been given reasonable notice of the
hearing in compliance with the notice requirements of the SPPA and the Rules.
The Panel decided to hear the case on its merits in the absence of the Student.
The hearing proceeded on the basis that the Student was deemed to deny the
Charges alleged against her.

The Charges

12.

Two sets of charges, with particulars, were laid against the Student, as follows.

A.

Charges related to PHL 101

1.

On or about November 10, 2017, you knowingly represented as your own an idea or
expression of an idea, and/or the work of another in an essay titled “If there is no free
will, is it possible for actions to be right/wrong”, which you submitted in partial
completion of the requirements for PHL 101, contrary to section B.I.1(d) of the Code.

2.

On or about December 8, 2017, you knowingly represented as your own an idea or
expression of an idea, and/or the work of another in an essay titled “Hume”, which you
submitted in partial completion of the requirements for PHL 101, contrary to section
B.I.1(d) of the Code.

3.

In the alternative to each of the charges above, you knowingly engaged in a form of
cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or misrepresentation not

5

otherwise described in the Code in order to obtain academic credit or other academic
advantage of any kind contrary to section B.I.3(b) of the Code.
Particulars related to these charges are as follows:
(a)

At all material times, you were a registered student at the University of Toronto
Mississauga.

(b)

In Fall 2017, you were registered in PHL 101: Introduction to Philosophy.

(c)

On or about November 10, 2017, you submitted an essay in response to
assignment #2, which was worth 17.5% of the final grade. Your essay contained
ideas, the expression of ideas, and verbatim or nearly verbatim text from
articles, textbooks, or other academic work, including but not limited to
(i)

Free Will from the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy,

(ii)

“Determinism

and

Free

Will

in

Science

and

Philosophy”,

(TheGreatDebate.org),

(d)

(iii)

Can Moral Responsibility Exist Without Free Will? (Hubpages.com),

(iv)

S. Cave, “There’s no such thing as Free Will” The Atlantic, June 2016,

(v)

P. Goetz, “Separate Morality From Free Will” (lesswrong.com), and

(vi)

S. Harris, “Life Without Free Will” (SamHarris.org)

On or about December 8, 2017, you submitted an essay in response to
assignment #3, which was worth 20% of the final grade. Your essay contained

6

ideas, the expression of ideas, and verbatim or nearly verbatim text from
articles, textbooks, or other academic work, including but not limited to

(e)

(i)

the website Sparknotes.com, and

(ii)

the website EssayMania.com

In the essays you submitted, you knowingly represented the work of other

persons as your own, and you knowingly included ideas and expressions that
were not your own, but were the ideas and expressions of other persons, which
you did not acknowledge.
(f)

For the purposes of obtaining academic credit and/or other academic
advantage, you knowingly committed plagiarism in the essays that you
submitted.

B.

Charges related to SOC 100

4.

On or about March 8, 2019, you knowingly represented as your own an idea or
expression of an idea, and/or the work of another in an essay titled “Realization” that
you submitted in partial completion of the requirements for SOC 100, contrary to section
B.I.1(d) of the Code.

5.

In the alternative, you knowingly engaged in a form of cheating, academic dishonesty
or misconduct, fraud or misrepresentation not otherwise described in the Code in order
to obtain academic credit or other academic advantage of any kind, contrary to section
B.I.3(b) of the Code.

The particulars related to these charges are as follows:

7

(a)

At all material times, you were a registered student at the University of Toronto
Mississauga.

(b)

In Winter 2019, you were registered in SOC 100: Introduction to Sociology.

(c)

During that term, you submitted an essay that was worth 20% of the final grade,
which contained ideas, the expression of ideas, and verbatim or nearly verbatim
text from articles, textbooks, or other academic work, including but not limited to
an essay submitted by [another student, K.N.]

(d)

In your essay, you knowingly represented the work of other persons as your own,
and you knowingly included ideas and expressions that were not your own, but
were the ideas and expressions of other persons, which you did not acknowledge.

(e)

For the purposes of obtaining academic credit and/or other academic advantage,

you knowingly committed plagiarism in each of the papers you submitted.

The Evidence

(a)

PHL 101

13.

For the first set of charges, the University tendered two affidavits of Professor
Andrew Sepielli, who taught Introduction to Philosophy in the Fall academic term of

2017 (“PHL 101”).

Professor Sepielli was present at the hearing and gave

testimony through Zoom to affirm and expand upon his affidavit evidence.

14.

Among other assignments, students in PHL 101 were required to complete
independently one 3-4 page paper, worth 17.5% of the final grade in the course
(“PHL Assignment 2”) and one 4-5 page paper, worth 20% of the final grade in the
course (“PHL Assignment 3”). Students in PHL 101 were required to submit all

8

assignments via TurnItIn, an online service that the University routinely uses to
detect plagiarism. This requirement was noted in the PHL 101 syllabus.

15.

On November 10, 2017, the Student submitted PHL Assignment 2, entitled “If there
is No Free Will, Is It Possible for Actions to be Right/Wrong?”, via TurnItIn. The
TurnItIn report for the Student’s PHL Assignment 2 indicated that it was 36% similar
to internet sources, publications, and student papers on TurnItIn’s database.
Professor Sepielli was informed of the similarities by his Teaching Assistant and
verified them himself.

16.

On November 21, 2017, Professor Sepielli emailed the Student, writing that he
would like to schedule a meeting to discuss her PHL Assignment 2. The Student
did not respond. On December 7, 2017, Professor Sepielli emailed the Student
again, writing that he wanted to meet to discuss her PHL Assignment 2. Again, the
Student did not respond.

17.

On December 8, 2017, the Student submitted PHL Assignment 3, entitled “Hume”,
via TurnItIn. The TurnItIn report for the Student’s PHL Assignment 3 indicated that
it was 45% similar to internet sources and student papers in the TurnItIn database.

18.

On December 11, 2017, Professor Sepielli sent an email to the Student asking to
meet about PHL Assignment 3. The Student did not respond. On January 30,
2018, Professor Sepielli reported both instances of the Student’s suspected
plagiarism.

(b)

SOC 100

19.

For the second set of charges the University tendered the affidavit of Professor
Jayne Baker, who taught Introduction to Sociology in the Winter 2019 academic
term (“SOC 100”). Professor Baker was present at the hearing and gave testimony
through Zoom to affirm and expand upon her affidavit evidence.

9

20.

Among other assignments, students in SOC 100 were required to complete
independently an essay worth 20% of the final grade in the course (the “Sociology
Essay”). Students in SOC 100 were required to submit all assignments via TurnItIn,
an online service that the University routinely uses to detect plagiarism. This
requirement was noted in the SOC 100 syllabus.

21.

On March 8, 2019, the Student submitted the Sociology Essay, entitled
“Realization”, via TurnItIn. The TurnItIn report for the Student’s Sociology Essay
indicated that it was 21% similar to a paper that a different University student
(“K.N.”) had previously submitted to the University (the “K.N. Essay”).

22.

Professor Baker made three attempts to contact the Student in March of 2019. All
went unanswered. Professor Baker also contacted the student K.N. The Panel
accepted hearsay evidence from Professor Baker that K.N. told her he had given
the K.N. Essay to some friends, including the Student.

Decision of the Tribunal on the Charges

23.

The University bears the burden of proving on a balance of probabilities that the
Student knowingly represented as her own an idea or expression of an idea and/or
the work of another. The requirement that the Student act “knowingly” is made out
if the Student ought reasonably to have known that she represented as her own an
idea or expression of an idea and/or the work of another. The evidence must be

clear, cogent and convincing.

24.

As to the PHL 101 Charges, the Panel carefully reviewed the two assignments
submitted by the Student, the TurnItIn reports and the excerpts from the source
materials as detected by the TurnItIn reports.

10

(a)

The Student’s PHL Assignment 2 contained multiple verbatim or nearly
verbatim passages from six different internet sources. While some of the
impugned passages were relatively benign descriptions of basic concepts,
others were more significant thefts of another’s words and ideas. The Student
did not cite, paraphrase or attribute these other sources. She did not reference
the source material or use any method to indicate that she had borrowed
words, phrases and ideas from others.

(b)

Before she submitted PHL Assignment 3, the Student knew that Professor
Sepielli wanted to speak to her about her PHL Assignment 2. Although his
emails to the Student apparently did not use the word “plagiarism”, the Student
knew that he wanted to discuss her work. Instead of reaching out to Professor
Sepielli to find out what his concerns were, the Student submitted another
assignment - PHL Assignment 3 - which involves arguably more plagiarism
than PHL Assignment 2.

(c)

The Student’s PHL Assignment 3 contained verbatim or nearly verbatim
passages from seven different internet sources. One source - a Sparksnote
Study Guide - is a significant source of what can only be described as obvious
plagiarism. It was clear to the Panel from a review of the source material and
the Student’s essay that the Student’s essay contains verbatim and nearly
verbatim text from the Sparksnote Study Guide. The Student did not cite,
paraphrase or attribute these sources appropriately or at all. She did not
reference the works or use any method to indicate appropriately that she had

taken verbatim or nearly verbatim text from other sources.

25.

As to the SOC 100 Essay, the Student purported to write an essay entitled
“Realization”, about how watching a friend’s father in Canada cook a meal and
clean the dishes sparked a realization about the difference between gender roles
in Canada and her home country of Pakistan. The K.N. Essay - submitted during
an earlier academic term - describes how, on a visit to his home country of Pakistan,

11

K.N. tried to explain to his Pakistani family how men in Canada are expected to
participate more in cooking and cleaning than men in Pakistan are.

Both the

Student and K.N. note that the Canadian vision of gender parity in household tasks
is resisted by Pakistani women, who believe that women should cook and clean
because men work all day. The premises of both essays are strangely similar, but
there is more.

(a)

Meaningful chunks of the K.N. Essay are repeated verbatim in the Student’s
SOC 100 Essay, including key phrases, and the exact same basic attempts to
cite

(b)

source

material.

The fundamental ideas underpinning both essays are the same. The only
attempt the Student has made at originality is to make changes that are
required to reflect the difference in gender between the Student and K.N.

(c)

Although it was not determinative, the Panel also considered Professor
Baker’s evidence that K.N. had told her that he had given his essay to the
Student, who was a friend of his. The Panel recognized that this was hearsay
evidence, which could not be tested through cross-examination or questions
from the Panel. On the whole, the Panel found this evidence reliable. K.N.’s
statement was against his own interest - he effectively admitted to enabling
the Student in her commission of an academic offence.

Further, it is

corroborated by the overwhelming similarity between the two essays. It defies
logic that the similarities are by chance. The Student must have seen K.N.’s

Essay before writing her own.

While this charge of plagiarism was proven

without the hearsay evidence (the overlap is simply too significant), the
hearsay evidence helped contextualize the offence.

26.

In sum, having considered the burden and standard of proof and the evidence, the
Panel finds it is more likely than not that the Student is guilty of Charges 1, 2 and
4. The plagiarism in this case extends beyond the simple repetition of basic facts.

12

Without any attribution of any source material whatsoever, the Student held out as
her own the words, phrases and ideas of others. In her SOC 100 Essay, the entire
premise of what appears to be a personal essay has been taken from another
student’s paper.

27.

If the Student did not know this was an academic offence, she reasonably ought to
have known. Certainly by the time of the SOC 100 Essay - more than a year after
her two PHL 101 assignments were reported for further investigation - the Student
must have known that she was plagiarizing. She cannot have reasonably believed
that she could take another student’s paper and apply only modest modifications.

28.

As Charges 3 and 5 were in the alternative, they were withdrawn by the University.

Decision of the Tribunal on Penalty

29.

The University sought the following sanctions:

(a)

a final grade of zero in courses PHL 101 and SOC 100;

(b)

a suspension from the University for three years from the date of the
hearing;

(c)

a notation of this sanction on the Student’s academic record and transcript
until four years from the date of the hearing; and

(d)

a report to the Provost for publication of a notice of the decision of the
Tribunal and the sanctions imposed, with the name of the student withheld.

30.

The Tribunal considered the factors and principles relevant to sanction as set out by this
Tribunal in University of Toronto and Mr. C. (Case No. 1976/77-3, November 5, 1976).

13

(a)

The character of the Student: there were no other academic offences on the
Student’s record. Her grades were poor. The Student did not attend the hearing.
The Student made no effort to respond to the multiple outreach efforts of the
University. While this is not held against the Student, it does mean that the
Tribunal has no information about the Student’s character other than what is
revealed by the record before us.

(b)

The likelihood of repetition of the offence: the Student seemed unable or unwilling
to learn from her mistakes. Even taking the most charitable view possible of the
Student’s first instance of plagiarism (that, despite the warnings and resources
available to her, she may not have actually understood the need to properly cite
her sources), the Student failed to respond to her professor’s multiple attempts to
meet and discuss the shortcomings of her work. Each episode of plagiarism was
worse than the previous one. There is nothing in the record to suggest that the
Student is remorseful or repentant.

(c)

The nature of the offence committed: the plagiarism ranged from relatively mild

acts of copying to more blatant thefts of ideas. None of it could be described as
accidental or inadvertent. For the two PHL Assignments, the Student must have
gone to some effort to cobble together a variety of copied-and-pasted excerpts
from multiple internet sources. For the SOC 100 Essay, the Student simply took
another’s essay and tweaked it slightly before passing it off as her own. There is
no evidence the Student purchased any of the essays, which would be a significant
aggravating factor.

(d)

Any extenuating circumstances: the Student declined to participate in this hearing.

There may have been exceptional, mitigating facts that might have caused the
Panel to make a more lenient order, however, without the Student’s participation,
there is no evidence of extenuating circumstances for the Panel to consider.

(e)

The detriment to the University caused by the misconduct: plagiarism strikes at
the very heart of academic integrity. Falsely representing another’s words and
ideas as your own undermines the entire purpose of university education.

14

(f)

The need for general deterrence: this is a significant concern. While TurnItIn and
similar tools make detection easier, it is a sad fact that the University must devote
so many resources to uncovering plagiarism. Students must understand how
important it is that they cite, paraphrase and attribute the work of others properly.

31.

Although the Panel is not bound by previous cases of this Tribunal, and while each case
must be decided on its own facts, it is useful for like cases to be treated alike so that all
parties can come to hearings with a reasonable expectation of what kind of penalty they
can expect based upon the findings. The Panel reviewed four cases involving acts of
plagiarism submitted at this hearing by the University. In all four cases, students received
a grade of zero for the affected courses, as a direct and appropriate consequence of the
misconduct. In all cases, students received a three-year term of suspension and a fouryear notation. However, those cases refer to other plagiarism cases where there is more
variation in sanction. In University of Toronto and B.S. (Case No. 697 December 17, 2013)
the Tribunal summarized the jurisprudence as follows (at paragraph 26):

It is clear that many students who are convicted of a first offence of plagiarism
receive a suspension of two years. However, there are some who receive
lighter penalties where there are mitigating factors (e.g., L.O. [Case 557;
November 3, 2009], K.(L).X. [Case 597; May 31, 2010] - where the students
were suspended for 18 months due to the relatively minor acts), and some who
receive longer suspensions when aggravating factors are present (e.g., S. K.
[Case 595; October 12, 2010] and M.W.E.L. [Case 551; January 7, 2010] - 3
years where the acts were deliberate and there appears to have been some
attempts to mislead or evade responsibility, either before the Panel or in
dealing with the Faculty).

32.

A two-year suspension is, as a general rule, the threshold sanction for an act of deliberate
dishonesty such as plagiarism. We have found the Student plagiarized three times. This
requires a harsher suspension, and the three-year range is appropriate. However, the
Panel also noted as follows:

(a)

The two PHL charges occurred when the Student was in her first term of university.
They took place almost 2.5 years before this hearing.

15

(b)

The original hearing date had to be vacated because of Covid-19, and not through
any fault of the Student.
The Student was given a year’s academic suspension following the Winter 2019

(c)

term. A three-year suspension from the date of the hearing would mean that, at
best, the Student would not be able to return until the Summer term of 2023, more
than 5 years after the first instances of plagiarism.

33.

In all the circumstances, the Panel determined that the appropriate period of suspension
was 2 years and 8 months, so that the Student can theoretically return to the University for
the Winter academic term in 2023. We believe the sanctions ordered are fair, proportional
and appropriate.

The Tribunal’s Order

34.

This Panel of the Tribunal made an order as follows.

1.

THAT the hearing may proceed in the absence of the Student;

2.

THAT the Student is found guilty of three counts of knowingly representing as her own
an idea, or expression of an idea, and/or the work of another in essay assignments
which she submitted for academic credit in PHL 101 and SOC 100, contrary to section
B.i.1(d) of the Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters;

3.

THAT the following sanctions shall be imposed on the Student:
(a)

a final grade of zero in the courses PHL 101 and SOC 100;

(b)

a suspension from the University commencing the day the Tribunal makes its
order and ending on December 31, 2022; and

16

(c)

a notation of the sanction on her academic record and transcript commencing
the day the Tribunal makes its order and ending on December 31, 2023; and

4. THAT this case shall be reported to the Provost for publication of a notice of the decision of
the Tribunal and the sanctions imposed, with the name of the student withheld.

Dated at Toronto, this 27th day of July, 2020

______________________________________
Ms. Johanna Braden, Chair

17

