Case 1063

   DATE: July 27, 2020

   PARTIES: University of Toronto v. S.K. (âthe Studentâ)

   HEARING DATES: May 1, 2020, via Zoom

   Panel Members:
   Ms. Johanna Braden, Chair
   Professor Kimberley Widger, Faculty Panel Member
   Ms. Karen Chen, Student Panel Member

   Appearances:
   Mr. Robert Centa, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland
   Rosenberg Rothstein LLP

   Not in Attendance:
   The Student

   In Attendance:
   Ms. Krista Kennedy, Administrative Clerk and Hearing Secretary, Office
   of the Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances, University of
   Toronto

   TheÂ University laid two sets of charges against theÂ Student.
   First,Â she was charged with twoÂ counts underÂ s.Â B.i.1(d) of
   theâ¯Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters, 1995â¯(âCodeâ) on the basis
   thatÂ sheÂ knowingly represented asÂ herÂ own an idea orÂ expression of
   an idea, and/or the work of another inÂ twoÂ essaysÂ submitted in
   partialÂ completion of the requirements forÂ a
   course.Â Second,Â sheÂ was chargedÂ with one count underÂ s.
   B.i.1(d)Â with respect toÂ an essayÂ sheÂ submitted in partial
   completion of the requirements forÂ another course.Â Alternatively,
   sheÂ was charged under s.Â B.i.3(b) of theÂ CodeÂ forÂ theseÂ offences.

   An in-person hearing was initiallyÂ scheduled, but due to the Covid-19
   pandemic,Â theÂ hearing
   wasÂ rescheduledÂ andÂ proceededÂ electronicallyÂ via Zoom.Â Neither
   the Student nor a representative onÂ herÂ behalf logged onto the Zoom
   link. The University provided evidence regarding its attempts to serve
   theÂ StudentÂ with the hearing materials and notice of hearingÂ by
   email. RelyingÂ onÂ Rules 9, 16 and 17 of theÂ Tribunal Rules of
   Practice and ProcedureÂ (âRulesâ),Â ss. 6 and 7 of theÂ Statutory
   Powers Procedure ActÂ (âSPPAâ)Â and the UniversityâsÂ Policy on
   Official Correspondence with Students, the University requested that
   theÂ hearingÂ proceed in theÂ StudentâsÂ absence.Â According to the
   Panel, there was evidence theÂ StudentÂ had received actual notice of
   the charges, but there was no evidence she had receivedÂ actualÂ notice
   of the hearing.Â However, it notedÂ that the Rules do not require
   actual notice and stated that the University can serve
   theÂ StudentÂ but cannot make theÂ StudentÂ actually readÂ what is
   served. The hearing proceeded in theÂ StudentâsÂ absence.

   RegardingÂ the charges laid underÂ s. B.i.1(d) of theÂ Code, the Panel
   commented thatÂ theÂ requirement that theÂ StudentÂ act knowingly is
   made out if theÂ StudentÂ ought reasonably to have known that she
   represented as her own an idea or expression of an idea and/or the work
   of another.Â TheÂ Panel foundÂ thatÂ itÂ wasÂ more likely than not that
   theÂ StudentÂ wasÂ guilty. Among other things, itÂ notedÂ the
   following: (1)Â that the plagiarism extendedÂ beyond the simple
   repetition of basic facts;Â (2)Â thatÂ theÂ StudentÂ held out as her
   own the words, phrases and ideas of othersÂ without any attribution of
   any source material;Â andÂ (3)Â thatÂ ifÂ she did not know thatÂ this
   wasÂ anÂ academic offence,Â she reasonably ought to have known.Â Given
   the Panelâs finding, the University withdrew the charges under s.
   B.i.3(b).

   InÂ determiningÂ the sanction, the PanelÂ held
   thatÂ theÂ StudentÂ seemed unable or unwilling to learn from her
   mistakes.Â It notedÂ theÂ StudentâsÂ failureÂ to respond to her
   professorâs multiple attempts to meet and discuss the shortcomings of
   her work, observed that each episode of plagiarism was worse than the
   previous one, andÂ foundÂ nothing in the record to suggest that
   theÂ StudentÂ wasÂ remorseful or repentant.Â According to the Panel,
   the plagiarism ranged from relatively mild acts of copying to more
   blatant thefts of ideasÂ and couldÂ notÂ be described as accidental or
   inadvertent.Â Without the Studentâs participation, it found no evidence
   of extenuating circumstances.Â It held that students must understand
   the importance of citing, paraphrasing andÂ attributingÂ othersâÂ work
   properly.Â Furthermore,Â while recognizing that itÂ is not bound by
   previous cases ofÂ theÂ TribunalÂ andÂ thatÂ each case must be decided
   on its own facts,Â the PanelÂ highlighted the principleÂ thatÂ like
   casesÂ shouldÂ be treated alike so that all parties can come to
   hearings with a reasonable expectation of what kind of penalty they can
   expect based upon the findings.Â It reviewed four casesÂ involving
   plagiarism, includingÂ University of TorontoÂ andÂ B.S.Â (CaseÂ No.
   697,Â DecemberÂ 17,Â 2013). ItÂ held that,Â as a general rule,Â a
   two-year suspension is the threshold sentence for an act of deliberate
   dishonesty such as plagiarism.Â The Panel found that theÂ StudentÂ had
   plagiarized three times, which required a harsher
   suspension.Â Theâ¯Tribunalâ¯imposed the following sanctions:Â grade
   assignment of zero forÂ bothÂ courses;Â suspensionÂ commencingÂ the day
   the Tribunal made its Order and ending on December 31, 2022;Â notation
   on theÂ StudentâsÂ academic record and transcriptÂ from the date the
   Tribunal made its Order and ending on December 31, 2023,Â with
   theÂ StudentâsÂ name withheld.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/29392
