Case 829

DATE:

   December 16, 2015

PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v W.L.

Hearing Date(s):

   November 25, 2015

Panel Members:

   Roslyn Tsao, Chair
   Gabriele D‚Eleuterio, Faculty Member
   Raylesha Parker, Student Member

Appearances:

   Robert Centa, Assistant Discipline Counsel
   Lucy Gaspini, Manager, Academic Affairs, University of Toronto
   Mississauga
   Ken Derry, Department of Historical Studies, University of Toronto
   Mississauga

In Attendance:

   Christopher Lang, Director, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances
   Student charged in relation to an Essay she submitted. In the term
   following the submission of the Essay, the Student was suspended from
   the University for a period of 3 years as a result of unrelated poor
   academic performance. The Student was not present at the hearing. The
   Panel took into account that the Student was first emailed about the
   Course Instructor‚s concerns regarding the Essay a year after the
   completion of the Course and a year after the Student‚s 3-year
   suspension, by which point the Student had likely moved abroad. The
   Student did not respond to emails detailing the charges and the notice
   of hearing. The Panel noted that though email service to the Student‚s
   ROSI email is usually acknowledged as sufficient notice, the Panel did
   not think that the emails in this case conformed with the notion of
   effective service. In this case, the Student, who was suspended for a
   year by the time the email was sent to her by the professor, might
   reasonably not have been checking her email account and, as such, the
   Panel was not comfortable proceeding in the Student‚s absence. The
   hearing was adjourned sine die for the University to consider other
   service of notice to the Student. The Panel also noted its concern
   about the resources that would be required to serve notice to the
   Student, and questioned the utility of addressing the matter if the
   Student never seeks to re-enrol with the University.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12888
