THE UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
IN THE MATTER OF charges of academic dishonesty filed on September 14, 2015,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters, 1995,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Act, 1971, S.O. 1971, c. 56 as amended S.O. 1978,
C. 88

BETWEEN:
UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO

- and -

REASONS FOR DECISION

Hearing Date: November 25, 2015

Members of the Panel:
Ms. Roslyn Tsao, Barrister and Solicitor, Chair
Professor Gabriele D'Eleuterio, Faculty Panel Member
Ms. Raylesha Parker, Student Panel Member
Appearances:
Mr. Robert Genta, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland, Barristers
Ms. Lucy Gaspini, Manager, Academic Affairs, University of Toronto, Mississauga
Professor Ken Derry, Department of Historical Studies, University of Toronto,
Mississauga
In Attendance:
Mr. Christopher Lang, Director, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances, University
of Toronto

Not In Attendance:
Ms.
Student

V\11 LI,

-2-

This hearing came before the Panel on November 25, 2015 at 1:45pm pursuant to the
Revised Notice of Hearing ("NOH") dated November 6, 2015. At the outset, University
counsel advised that he did not believe that the Student would be attending.

We waited 5

minutes and proceeded to receive evidence and hear submissions regarding service of the
charges dated September 14, 2015 ("Charges") and NOH.
The charges stem from an essay submitted in the Winter 2013 term. The Student appears to
have been suspended after that term for three years as a result of her academic performance
(and not for misconduct).
Although the Charges and NOH were duly served by email to the Student's ROSI email
address, a courier to the Student's ROSI address was sent back with a notation "Moved to
China". Service of the Charges and NOH by email was performed on September 15, 2015
and November 6, 2015, respectively.
The University sought leave to proceed with the Hearing in the Student's absence on the
basis that service had been effected with the requisite warning to the Student in the NOH that
the hearing could proceed in her absence.
Professor Derry gave evidence that the Student was first emailed about his concerns
regarding the essay in May, 2014, a year after the completion of the course and the Student's
3 year suspension. The reason for the delay was due to the death of Professor Derry's
mother shortly after the end of the Winter 2013 term, resulting in his inability to address the
matter at the time. Professor Derry was also not able to pursue the matter during the 20132014 academic year because of his teaching responsibilities, exacerbated by circumstances
related to his mother's death.
The Student did not respond to Professor Derry's emails and, as such, the matter was
necessarily referred to the Dean's Office for disposition sometime after November 2014.
In ourview, the delay in alerting the Student of the matter until May 2014, a year after the
Student had been suspended raises concerns about whether service to the ROSI email address

-3was effective. Although Rule 9 of the Rules of Practice and Procedure have greatly assisted
to reduce the former, and sometime Herculean, efforts of University Counsel to demonstrate
effective service, Rule 9 does not, in my view, determine conclusively that service is effected
by the methods set out in subsection (b) by courier to a ROSI address or (c) by email to a

ROSI email. In most cases, such service will be acknowledged as sufficient by the Panel but
the principles of fundamental justice still entail the notion of effective service.
In the case, the Student who was suspended for a year by the time the email was sent to her
by the professor, might reasonably not have been checking her email account and, as such,
the Panel is not comfortable proceeding in the Student's absence based on the service by
email, in this case. University counsel is, in no way, faulted for proceeding this way and in
accordance with the service mechanisms set out in Rule 9.
That said, upon further request by the University, the hearing was adjourned sine die for the
University to consider other service, perhaps on an international address that is in the
Student's file.
Gratuitously, I indicated that I had some concern about efforts and resources being spent on
this matter given the likelihood that the Student has moved to China, even if only for the
duration of her suspension.

It would seem that if the Student attempts to return to the

University at the conclusion of her suspension (after April, 2016), she can then be served
with the charges and the matter can be addressed at that time, perhaps even at the faculty
level. If the Student never seeks to re-enrol with the University, one questions the utility,
noting particularly that notice to the Student was a year after the incident, of pursuing
prosecution at this time.
Dated: December 16, 2015

Roslyn M. Tsao, Chair

