Case 579

DATE:

   November 15, 2010

PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v. X.P.Z.

Hearing Date(s):

   May 7, 2010

Panel Members:

   Julie Hannaford, Chair
   Professor Louis Florence, Faculty Member
   Sadek Ali, Student Member

Appearances:

   Robert Centa, Assistant Discipline Counsel for the University
   Betty-Ann Campbell, Law Clerk, Paliara Roland Barristers
   Gregory Ko, Articling Student, Paliare Roland Barristers
   Kante Easley, Course Instructor
   Y.Z., different student enrolled in Course

In Attendance:

   Tamara Jones, Academic Integrity Officer

   Student charged with an offence under s. B.I.1(b) of the Code . The
   Tribunal convened without the Student present. The Panel heard about
   the efforts made to contact the Student, and the numerous modes of
   communications engaged to give the Student notice of the charges and of
   the pending proceedings. The Panel determined the Student should be
   regarded as having been served and having had notice of the
   proceedings. The charge related to the allegation that the Student
   submitted an assignment worth ten percent of a final grade that
   contained nearly identical answers to those submitted by another
   student in the class. The other student admitted he and the accused
   collaborated in formulating the answers to the questions in the
   assignment. The Panel found the Student guilty of the offence. The
   Panel imposed a final grade of zero in the Course, a five-year
   suspension, and a notation of the academic misconduct on the Studentâs
   academic record until graduation. The Panel asked the University to
   make submissions regarding costs, specifically, whether costs should be
   awarded, and, if so, the appropriate amounts, and the terms and
   conditions of costs. The Panel noted the request for submissions on
   costs came from the Panel and not the University. The Panel reviewed s.
   C.II.(a)17(b) of the Code regarding matters of cost. The Panel noted
   the award of costs should relate to circumstances that would logically
   call for costs. The Panel held that when a party confounds the process
   of delivering a fair and transparent process for determination of a
   charge that consideration of costs sanctions should arise. The Panel
   further held that this was such an instance. The Panel noted they had
   had to convene twice to hear allegations of academic misconduct against
   the Student, who did not attend two hearings. The Panel noted the 2006
   case of University of Toronto v. P.D. (Case #441) in which the Tribunal
   ordered a student to pay costs incurred to locate and serve the
   student. The Panel then noted the cost the University had expended to
   locate the Student on two occasions. The Panel noted the two scales of
   costs that exist in cost awards, partial indemnity and substantial
   indemnity. The Panel noted that fairness and proportionality suggest
   that a punitive award of substantial or even full indemnity should be
   reserved for cases where there has been egregious and extraordinary
   behaviour, in line with the case of Mr. K (Case 1990/00; April 20,
   1992), which held that substantial indemnity be reserved for cases
   where there has been reprehensible, scandalous, or outrageous conduct
   by a party. The Panel held that the Student pay incremental costs
   associated with his failure to participate in the hearing process
   calculated on a partial indemnity basis. The Panel held that the
   Student be required to pay these costs before registering again at the
   University.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12766
