Case #480

   DATE: information not available
   PARTIES: University of Toronto v. Ms. Z. A.
   Hearing Date(s): March 21, 2007
   Panel Members:
   Ms. Laura Trachuk, Chair
   Prof. Melanie Woodin, Faculty Panel Member
   Mr. Gaurav Nagla, Student Panel Member
   Appearances:
   Mr. Robert Centa, Counsel for the University
   Ms. A., the Student, did not appear
   In attendance:
   Ms. Gerda Grecko, Supervisor of Student Records, Ryerson Polytechnic
   University
   Ms. Barbara Patterson, Associate Director, University of Toronto
   Transcript Centre
   Trial Division - s. B.i.1(a) and s. B.i.3(a) of Code â forged academic
   records - forged transcript submitted in application for admission to
   University and forged University transcript submitted in application
   for admission to other university â hearing not attended â Student
   responded to Notice of Hearing - discrepancies between submitted
   documents and official transcripts â finding of guilt - academic
   records falsified on two occasions - no evidence of extenuating
   circumstances â Universityâs submission on sanction accepted -
   recommendation that the Student be expelled, as per s. C.ii.(b)(i) of
   Code; and report to Provost
   The Student was charged under s. B.i.1(a), s. B.i.3(a) and
   alternatively, under s. B.i.3(b) of the Code. The Student was not
   represented and did not attend the hearing. The Panel reviewed the
   Studentâs response to the Notice of Hearing and permitted the hearing
   to proceed in the Studentâs absence. The charges related to allegations
   that the Student submitted a forged transcript from another university
   in her application for admission to the University, and that she
   subsequently submitted a forged University transcript in her
   application for admission to the College of Dentistry at a second
   university. The Panel reviewed the Studentâs official transcript from
   her first university and the document submitted by the Student to the
   University and found that the comparison revealed discrepancies. The
   Panel reviewed the Studentâs official University transcript and the
   document submitted by the Student to the second university and found
   that the comparison revealed discrepancies. The transcript the Student
   provided to the second university was actually the academic record of
   another University student. The panel found that the University had
   proved the charges under s. B.i.1(a), s. B.i.3(a) of the Code on clear
   and compelling evidence. The University withdrew the alternative
   charges. The Panel reviewed past Tribunal decisions about sanctions.
   The Panel found that the alteration of the University transcript was
   among the most serious offences a student could commit and that the
   Student grossly falsified her academic records for her personal benefit
   on two occasions. The Panel had no evidence of any extenuating
   circumstances. The Panel found that expulsion would provide a deterrent
   to others. The Panel accepted the Universityâs submission on sanction
   and imposed a recommendation to the President, further to s.
   C.ii.(b)(i) of the Code, that the Student be expelled; and that a
   report be issued to the Provost.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12702
