REPORT NUMBER 257 OF THE ACADEMIC APPEALS COMMITTEE
October 15, 2001
To the Academic Board,
University of Toronto
Your Committee reports that it held a meeting on Tuesday, October 15, 2001, at
which the following members were present:
Professor Emeritus Ralph Scane (Acting Chair)
Professor Clare Beghtol
Ms Susan Scace
Professor Donna Wells
Ms Geeta Yadav
Mr. Paul Holmes, Judicial Affairs Officer, Secretary to the Academic Appeals
Committee
In Attendance:
Mr. G.M., the Appellant
Mr. Daniel Wigdor, for the Appellant
Associate Dean William Michelson, for the University of Toronto, Faculty of
Arts and Science
Professor John Carson
Ms Elaine Ishibashi, University of Toronto, Faculty of Arts and Science
This is an appeal from a decision of the Academic Appeals Board of the Faculty of
Arts and Science, dated April 5, 2001, dismissing an appeal from a decision of the
Committee on Standing of that Faculty. The latter decision denied a petition to
substitute a grade of CR for the assigned grade of D- in the course POL208Y1, taken
in the 1999 - 2000 academic year. The Student had sought this relief pursuant to a
memorandum issued by the Office of the Registrar of the Faculty, dealing with
special academic relief which might be afforded to students following upon the strike
of teaching assistants in the University which took place throughout roughly the first
month of the Winter Term in 2000.
The relevant portion of the memorandum from the Registrar's Office read:

Report Number 257 of the Academic Appeals Committee
1. A student who considers that the disruption
unreasonably affected his or her grade may submit
a petition to the Committee on Standing....
requesting that his/her original grade be replaced
by one of the following:
•
•
•

an amended grade
a grade of CR (credit), or
a grade of NCR (no credit)

From the submissions made to your Committee on behalf of the Faculty, and from the
decision of the Academic Appeals Board itself, your Committee understands that both
the Board and the Committee on Standing interpreted this memorandum as requiring
that only the effect of the strike itself could be considered in deciding whether the
special grades referred to in the memorandum could be awarded to a petitioning
student. Thus, the cumulative effect of the strike and any other factor that may have
adversely affected the performance of a student could not give rise to this special
relief. In such cases, some other form of relief, if any, would have to be sought. The
Student did not seek any other form of relief.
As the correctness of this strict interpretation is relevant on the facts of this appeal,
your Committee has considered and rejected that interpretation. The memorandum
was intended to relieve against academic difficulties arising out of the strike, and, as a
remedial provision, should be given an expansive reading. Students seeking relief
from academic harm which they allege flowed from the strike should not have to
engage in an exercise in statutory interpretation to select the precise form of remedy
they should seek, at peril of receiving no remedy at all if they guess wrongly. Your
Committee considers that the special remedies afforded by the memorandum should
be available when the effects of the strike are a significant factor among a number of
factors which cumulatively justify academic relief to a student.
Even if the memorandum were to be read restrictively, as the tribunals below thought
proper, the effect of the strike would have to be considered with respect to the
individual student who is petitioning, not with respect to some "typical" student. If a
student's performance has been adversely affected by other factors than the strike, the
effect of the strike alone should be judged as it impacts that student as so affected. On
either approach, the result would be the same. The cumulative effect of all adverse
conditions, including the strike, affecting a student's performance, may be considered
in weighing whether the special relief should be afforded.
In this case, the TA assigned to the seminar section in which the Student was enrolled
appears to have been ill and unable to give all the scheduled seminars in the course
which were scheduled. In addition to the four seminars lost due to the strike, four
more were lost due to the TA's inability to meet the group to which the Student
belonged. Between the strike and the lost seminars due to the TA's illness, eight of
twenty-six scheduled seminars were lost. In addition, the TA was unable to attend at

2

Report Number 257 of the Academic Appeals Committee
many of her scheduled office hours, and the Student gave evidence that on a number
of occasions when he attended at the TA's office during scheduled hours to obtain
assistance, she was absent. The Student admitted that he was aware that he could
attend seminars led by other assistants assigned to the course. However, he had a part
time job, and could not find one that did not conflict with his other courses or his
employment.
The Faculty presented a breakdown of his term and final marks in the course, and
argued that they were consistently low, and did not drop significantly after the strike.
However, it was argued on behalf of the Student that he was prejudiced by missed
seminars in the Fall Term, as well as by the strike. The fact of Student's low overall
performance in the course cuts both ways. While it might be consistent with lack of
ability, it also might indicate that this was a student who needed all the help from his
seminars in this course that he could get, and missed a significant proportion of what
was intended to be available through no fault of his own.
Your Committee also felt unease over the lack of evidence that the University had
taken any substantial proactive role in dealing with the problem of missed seminars
and office hours caused by the TA's illness. Professor Carson, the course instructor,
advised us that he was not made aware by the University of the problems for this
TA's group of students until sometime after the strike. He stated that if he had been
made aware of them, he would have tried to intervene in some way to assist the
students affected. As mentioned, students were apparently told that they could attend
other TA's seminars. It may be that this was all that was feasible in the circumstances.
However, as mentioned, this was not helpful to the Student in his particular situation.
In all the circumstances, your Committee found that, on the balance of probabilities,
the Student was sufficiently adversely affected by the missed seminars and office
hours resulting from the combination of the strike and the problems arising from the
TA's illness that the relief sought should be granted.
The appeal is allowed. The grade of D- presently assigned as the final mark in
POL208Y1 shall be vacated, and a grade or CR substituted for it.
November 6th, 2001

3

