Case #257

   DATE : November 6, 2001

   PARTIES :Â G.M. (the âStudentâ) v. Faculty of Arts and Science

   HEARING DATE : October 15, 2001

   Committee Members:
   Professor Emeritus Ralph Scane (Acting Chair)
   Professor Clare Beghtol
   Ms. Susan Scace
   Professor Donna Wells
   Ms Geeta Yadav

   Secretary: Mr. Paul Holmes, Judicial Affairs Officer

   Appearances:

   For the Student Appellant:
   G.M. (the âStudentâ)
   Mr. Daniel Wigdor

   For the Faculty of Arts and Science:
   Associate Dean William Michelson, University of Toronto Faculty of Arts
   and Science
   Professor John Carson
   Ms. Elaine Ishibashi, University of Toronto Faculty of Arts and Science

   The Student appealed a decision of the Academic Appeals Board of the
   Faculty of Arts and Science (the Faculty), dismissing an appeal from a
   decision of the Facultyâs Committee on Standing. The latter decision
   denied a petition to substitute a grade of CR for the assigned grade of
   D- in a course taken by the Student. The Student had sought this relief
   pursuant to a Faculty memorandum dealing with special academic relief
   which might be afforded to students following the teaching assistant
   (TA) strike at the University.

   The Faculty interpreted the memorandum as requiring that only the
   effect of the strike itself could be considered in deciding whether
   special relief could be awarded to a petitioning student. Thus, the
   cumulative effect of the strike and any other factor that may have
   adversely affected the performance of a student could not give rise to
   the relief. The Academic Appeals Committee (AAC) rejected this strict
   interpretation, holding that the memorandum, as a remedial provision,
   should be given an expansive reading. The AAC stated that students
   seeking relief from academic harm flowing from the strike should not
   have to engage in an exercise in statutory interpretation to select the
   precise form of remedy they should seek, at peril of receiving no
   remedy at all if they guessed wrongly. The AAC considered that the
   special remedies afforded by the memorandum should be available when
   the effects of the strike are a significant factor among a number of
   factors which cumulatively justify academic relief to a student. Even
   if the memorandum were to be read restrictively, the AAC stated, the
   effect of the strike would have to be considered with respect to the
   individual student who is petitioning, not with respect to some
   âtypicalâ student. The AAC stated that the cumulative effect of all
   adverse conditions affecting a student's performance may be considered
   in weighing whether the relief should be afforded.

   The Studentâs TA had been ill and unable to give all of the scheduled
   course seminars, resulting in four seminars lost due to the strike and
   four lost due to the TAâs illness. The TA was also unable to attend
   many of her scheduled office hours. While the Faculty presented
   evidence of the Studentâs low overall marks, the AAC noted that this
   might indicate that this Student needed all the help from the seminars
   they could get. The AAC also expressed unease over the lack of evidence
   that the University had taken any substantial proactive role in dealing
   with the problem of missed seminars and office hours caused by the TA's
   illness. On the balance of probabilities, the AAC was satisfied that
   the Student was sufficiently adversely affected by the combination of
   the strike and the problems arising from the TA's illness that the
   relief sought should be granted.Â  The AAC vacated the grade of D-
   awarded to the Student in the course and substituted for it a grade of
   CR.
   [1]View Report

References

   1. file:///media/12679
