Case #574

   DATE: November 18, 2009
   PARTIES: University of Toronto v. S.H.
   Hearing Date(s): October 25, 2010
   Panel Members:
   Clifford Lax Q.C., Chair
   Professor Kathi Wilson, Faculty Member
   Michael Scott, Student Member
   Appearances:
   Andrew Vey, DLS for the Student
   Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel for the University
   In Attendance:
   S.H., the Student
   Professor G. Scott Graham, Deanâs Designate
   Trial Division â s. B.I.1(d); s. B.I.3(b) of the CodeÂ  - purchased
   essays â hearing attendedâ Agreed Statement of Factsâ guilty pleaÂ  â
   Joint Submission on Penalty â no prior academic offences â admission of
   guilt â cooperation with University officials ââ Joint Submission on
   Penalty accepted -Â  grade assignment of zero for courses; five-year
   suspension not to run concurrently with academic suspension; six-year
   notation on transcript; and report to Provost
   Student charged with four offences under s. B.I.1(d) and s. B.I.3(b) of
   the Code. The charges related to the allegations that the Student
   purchased essays for two courses. The Student acknowledged he had been
   warned that plagiarism was a serious offence and that students having
   been found to have plagiarized were subject to severe penalties. When
   first confronted with the evidence of plagiarism, the Student admitted
   he had purchased the essays and submitted them as if they were his own
   work. The matter proceeded on an Agreed Statement of Facts. The Panel
   accepted the guilty plea and found a contravention of the Code under s.
   B.I.1(d). The two alternate charges under s. B.I.3(b) were withdrawn
   upon the registration of the two convictions. The Panel noted that
   Student readily admitted his guilt and cooperated with the University
   officials in the course of their investigation. The Student was a
   first-year student with no prior academic offences. The matter then
   proceeded on a Joint Submission on Penalty. The Panel accepted the
   Joint Submission on Penalty and imposed a final grade of zero in the
   courses, a five-year suspension not to run consecutively with the
   Studentâs academic suspension, a six-year notation of the academic
   misconduct on the Studentâs academic record, and that a report to the
   Provost be issued.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/13008
