THE UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
IN THE MATTER OF charges of academic dishonesty made on September 29, 2009;
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic
kfatters, 1995;
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Act, 1971, S.O. 1971, c, 56 as amended
S,0, 1978, C, 88

BETWEEN:
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO

• and -

S

H

Hearing Date: October 25, 2010
Members of the Panel:
• Mr. Clifford Lax, Q,C., Chair
• Professor Kathi Wilson, Depat1ment of Geogrnphy, Faculty Panel Member
• Mr. Michael Scott, Student Panel Member
Appearances:
• Ms. Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Barristers
• Mr. Andrew Vey, Law Student, Downtown Legal Services

In Attendance:
• Mr S
H
, the Student
• Professor G, Scott Graham, Dean's Designate, University of Toronto Mississauga
• Ms. Natalie Ramtahal, Coordinator, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances

. 1.

Hearing on the Facts
I.

Pursuant to an Agreed Upon Statement of Facts (attached as Appendix A) filed at the
hearing, the student pleaded guilty to having engaged in cheating, academic dishonesty 01·
misconduct, fraud or misrepresentation in order to obtain academic credit by having
purchased essays which he submitted in PHL105Y, on October 8, 2009 and subsequently
submitted a second essay in POLI 12H5S on October 28, 2009.

2.

The student acknowledged that he had been warned that plagiarism was a very serious
offence and that students found to have plagiarized were subject to severe penalties,
including expulsion.

3.

When first confronted with the evidence of plagiarism, the student admitted that he had
purchased the essays and submitted them as if they were his own work.

Decision of the Tribunal
4.

On the basis of the Agreed Statement of Facts, the Tribunal accepted the plea of guilty and
found a contravention of the Code as set out in the first and third charges. The University
withdrew the second and fourth charges upon the registration of the two convictions.

Penalty Phase

5,

The parties submit that the appropriate penalty in all of the circumstances of this matter
should be:
a. The assignment of a grade of zero in the Spring 2009 Session in POLI 12H5S and
PHLI0SY;
b. That Mr. H
be suspended from attendance at the University of Toronto for a
period of five years from September I, 2010 to August 31, 2015;
c. That a notation be placed in Mr. H
's transcript from the date of this hearing
for a period of six years to August 31, 2016 or his graduation from the University,
whichever occ11rs first, to the effect that he was sanctioned for academic
misconduct;
d. That the Tribunal should report this case to the Provost who may publish a notice
of the decision of the Tribunal and the sanctions imposed, with Mr. H
's
name withheld.

6.

But for the fact that the student readily admitted his g11ilt when confronted with the evidence
of plagiarism, this Tribunal might well have recommended expulsion of the student from the
University. However, not only did the student admit his guilt, but he cooperated with the
University officials in the course of their investigation. The student was a first yeat· student,
with no prior academic offences.
-2-

7.

The Tribunal was advised that academic dishonesty by purchasing essays is a difficult matter
to prove, without the cooperation of the student involved. It may well have been possible for
the University to establish the offence of plagiarism by proving that the work submitted did
not reflect the work of the accused. The evidence of plagiarism would have included
evidence establishing the similarity of the work submitted by the accused with work
published by others or indeed submitted by others to the University on pl'ior occasions.
Therefore, the student might well have been caught for plagiarizing but not necessarily
caught for the offence of purchasing essays from a third pm1y.

Sanction

8.

The Panel thel'Cfore accepts the Joint Submission on Penalty (Attached as Appendix B) and
makes the following order:
(a)

That the student shall be assigned a final grade of zero in the Spring 2009 sessions
of POLI 12H5S and PHLI05Y;

(b)

That he shall be suspended from the University of Toronto from September I,
2010 to August 31, 2015;

(c)

That a notation shall be placed on the student's academic record and transcript
stating that he has been found to have committed academic offences, such
notation to run until August 31, 2016 or his graduation from the University,
whichever occurs first; and

(d)

That a report of this case be made to the Provost who may publish a notice of the
decision of the University of Toronto Tribunal and the sanctions imposed, with
the student's name withheld.

<JL
Dated at Toronto this/{ day of November, 2010.

,

-3-

APPENDIX A

THE UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL OF THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
IN THE MATTER OF charges of academic dishonesty filed on September 29,
2009,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic
Matters, 1995,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Act, 1971, S.O. 1971, c. 56
as amended S.O, 1978, c. 88

BETWEEN:
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO

-andS

... H

AGREED STATEMENT OF FACTS

1.

For the purpose of this hearing under the Code of Behaviour on Academic

Matters ("Code"), the Provost of the University of Toronto (the "Provost") and
S

H,

("Mr. H,

_") have prepared this Agreed Statement of Facts

("ASF") and a joint book of documents ("JBD"), The Provost and Mr. H
agree that:
a. each document contained In the JBD may be admitted Into evidence
before the Tribunal for all purposes, Including for the truth of the
document's contents, without further need to prove the document; and
b. If a document Indicates that It was sent or_ received by someone, that Is

pr/ma faoie proof that the document was sent and received as Indicated.

2

Charges and guilty plea

2.

This hearing arises out of charges of academic misconduct filed by the Provost
under the Code. A copy of the charges, which were filed on September 29,
2009, Is Included In the JBD at Tab 1 ("Charges"),

3.

Mr. H

• acknowledges that he received a copy of the Charges, waives the

reading of the Charges and hereby pleads guilty to charges #1 and #3.

4.

The Provost agrees that If the Tribunal convicts Mr. H

on charges #1 and

#3, the Provost will withdraw charges #2 and #4.
5.

The Notice of Hearing Into the Charges Is Included In the JBD at Tab 2. Mr.
H

6,

Mr. H

acknowledges that he has received reasonable notice of this hearing.
first registered as a student at the University of Toronto Mississauga

In Fall 2008. At all material times, he remained a student at the University, A
copy of Mr. H

·'s academic record dated October 1, 2010 Is Included In the

JBD at Tab 3,
POL112H5S

7.

In Spring 2009 Mr. H

was enrolled In POL 112H5S: Democracy In Theory

and Practice, a half year course taught by Professor Graham White. The Course
Syllabus contained a section entitled "Plagiarism" which warned students that
plagiarism Is a very serious offence, and that students found to have plagiarized
are subject to severe penalties, up to and Including expulsion. The section
explained what plagiarism Is and referred students to a website for further
Information on the subject of plagiarism. A copy of the Course Syllabus for
POL 112H5S for Spring 2009 is Included In the JBD at Tab 4.
8.

A final essay worth 25% of the course mark was due on April 7, 2009. Students
In POL 112H5S were required to submit their essay both in hard copy to their
assigned Tutorial Assistant, and electronically to turnltln.com.

768915-3

3

9,

On or about April 7, 2009, Mr. H

submitted his essay to fulfill the course

requirement In hard copy to his TA ("POL Essay"). Three weeks later, after being
told by Professor White that he would not receive a grade unless and until he
submitted the POL Essay to turnltln.com, on or about April 29, 2009 Mr. H
submitted the POL Essay electronically to turnltln.com, as required. A copy of
the POL Essay Is Included In the JBD at Tab 5.
10.

The Turnitln Originality Report for the POL Essay generated by Turnltln showed
an overall similarity Index of 49%. A copy of the Turnltln Originality Report for the
POL Essay Is Included In the JBD at Tab 6.

11.

Professor White compared the POL Essay to various websites available on the
Internet and determined that extensive passages had been reproduced virtually
verbatim to written passages available on the Internet. No attribution was given
to those sources. A copy of the Internet source material found reproduced in Mr,
H

12.

's POL Essay Is Included In the JBD at Tab 7.

Professor White attempted through an exchange of emails to arrange a meeting
with Mr, H
Mr. H

to discuss his concerns with the POL Essay. In these emails
repeatedly addressed his email messages to "miss"; when asked to

explain he stated: "I begin the emails with miss because Ive never met you
before and I assume I can call u miss as I call my t.a, sir (Mr. Ozgur)." Professor
White responded by expressing his puzzlement as to how Mr. H

I

could

think he was a woman if he had attended lectures. With respect to allegations
that his Essay was plagiarized, Mr, H

explained that the POL Essay:

"contained a lot of general facts that are cited everywhere In books and
through out the Internet however what ever was used was cited and other
Information Is common knowledge picked up throughout the political
science courses, there would be no point In plagiarizing If that Is what
your Implying Miss white,"
A copy of the emails exchanged by Professor Graham White and Mr. H
between Aprll 27 and 29, 2009 are Included In the JBD at Tab 8.
760915·3

4

13.

Mr. H

attended a meeting with Professor White by telephone on May 11,

2009, at which time he admitted lo having purchased the POL Essay.

He

explained that he had been under considerable family pressure, but
acknowledged that this was no excuse.
PHL105Y

14.

Mr. H

was also enrolled In PHL105V: Introduction to Philosophy, a full

year course, In the Fall 2008 and Spring 2009 semesters. The Spring semester
portion of the course was taught by Professor Jonathan Weisberg, In both terms
the students received a course syllabus which, among other things, warned that
academic dishonesty would be taken very seriously, and contained detailed
Information about plagiarism. Students were advised that It was a requirement of
the course that all required papers would be submitted electronically to
turnltln.com.

A copy of the Course Syllabus for the Fall 2008 semester is

Included In the JBD at Tab 9. A copy of the Course Syllabus for the Spring
semester In PHL 105Y Is Included In the JBD at Tab 10.
15.

An essay worth 10% of the course mark was due Aprll 8, 2009. Mr. H
handed In an essay In PHL 105Y on or about April 8, 2009 ("PHL Essay"). As
required, he su bmllted It In hard copy to his tutorial assistant, and also
electronically to turnltln.com. A copy of the PHL Essay Is Included In the JBD at
Tab 11.

16.

Professor Weinberg marked the PHL Essay and noted a number of anomalies,
Including:
a. at least two passages appeared to have been taken from an onllne
source;
b. the only Item listed In References appeared to be fictional;
c. an In-text reference to a source not listed in the References also appeared
to be fictional; and

768915-3

5

d, the essay made use of concepts, Ideas and phrases that went well beyond
the content and level of the course,
17,

The Turnltln Orlglnallty Report produced for the PHL Essay Identified an overall
similarity Index of 16%, A copy of this Report Is Included In the JBD at Tab 12.

18,

The PHL Essay contained passages taken from the Internet without attribution,
A copy of the Internet source material found reproduced In Mr, H

's PHL

Essay Is Included In the JBD at Tab 13.
19,

Mr. H

' attended a meeting with Professor Weisberg on April 30, 2009 to

discuss Professor Weisberg's concerns about his PHL Essay~
claimed that the PHL Essay was entirely his own work,
concluded on the understanding that Mr, H

Mr, H

The meeting was

would provide Professor

Weisberg with a source that he claimed to have used In his PHL Essay. Mr,
H

did not provide Professor Weisberg with the source.

Dean's meetings
20,

Mr, H

attended two consecutive meetings with the Dean's Designate on

June 24, 2009, first to discuss allegations of plagiarism in PHL 105Y, followed by
POL 112Y5S, Al the meeting to discuss PHL 105Y Mr, H

admitted for the

first time that he had purchased the PHL Essay and submitted It as If It was his
own work, He made the same admission In relation to the POL Essay, He
explained that his father had lost his job, that he wasn't "able to balance things
out between work, home, essays and exams", and that he "made a wrong
choice",
Admissions
21,

Mr, H

admits that he purchased each of the POL Essay and the PHL

Essay from an Internet-based business called customwritlng,com and paid
approximately $80 to $90 for each essay,

768915-3

G

22.

further admits, with respect to both the POL Essay and the PHL

Mr. H

Essay, that he:
a. did no meaningful academic work;
b. knowingly submitted them In essentially the same form as he received
them from the vendor;
c. knowingly represented the Ideas of another person, the expression of the
Ideas of another person, and the work of another person as his own;
d. knowingly committed plagiarism contrary to section B.1.1 (d) of the Code;
and
e. knew or ought to have known that he engaged In a form of cheating,
academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or misrepresentation not
otherwise described In the Code In order to obtain academic credit or
other academic advantage of any kind contrary to section B.1.3(b) of the
Code.
23.

Mr. H

acknowledges that:

a. the Provost of the University of Toronto has made no representations or
promises as to what sanction the Provost will seek In this case; and
b. he is signing this ASF freely and voluntarily, knowing of the potential
consequences he faces, and does so with the advice of counsel.

Signed on October 25, 2010.
S

760915,3

1H

7

Signed on October 25, 2010.

-4.'/12 f ;;

,C,\,<; j)

,v

LIiy Harmer
Assistant Discipline Counsel
University of Toronto

THE Ul\mtt'.::l\1BtTV TFIB3!.Jf\l/,\L
Uf~!\fl:Jtni ¼'\i or: TOFt()l\ffO
Mln
•• •••••t},•,

1:)
Tills Exlllbll 18 produced by
0
O I 01 l I II O I t 1 I . .

• < I ' > , . , ' ' • • 1 ' t1' Ot" I It l f 1

I/LY'.:',\' 1\/
, ••••••• , •• , •••••••••••••••• ,, ••••.•.••••••• ,
ti 10 ••••••Vi,\\
this ;;,,,, dayof liC{()jl(:.)f

,20,.I.<.) ..

...... \.. ,,r'x,/f,(,r:?>(
.

f.,, • .••.•.•••••......•.

168015,3

APPENDIXB

·nu.· i .',Ii(:!, i <::rv TntBUNAI
u11m 11·;•: .;\· •.J> ,n110Nro

UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO

/\\\!I ,

and

...... \.'!. .............I.I:
l/ii,: l):l1ibi1 ". 1J1od11c:r;;,.. ,;;:- " ... "

s

1-1

tho .... , ,li(f>.),1,Y,(t/':.':!,'/.,,.,,, ..... ,,,., .,,. ,..

thin

JOINT SUBMISSION ON PENAL TY

1.

The University of Toronto and S

H

,,h

cloy of (iL 101',( K'.

(d

submit to the Tribunal that

a. assignment of a grade of zero In the Spring 2009 session In:
I. POL 1121-158; and
II. PHL 105Y;
be suspended from attendance at the University of

Toronto for a period of 5 years, from September 1, 2010 to August
31,2015.
c. a notation be placed on Mr. H

's transcript from the date of

this hearing for a period of 6 years to August 31, 2016 or his
graduation from the University, whichever occurs first, to the effect
that he was sanctioned for academic misconduct.
2. The University of Toronto and Mr. H

.

20 I••1<i1••

II

·······.'.-'1~·:.t..cJ:1... :..... .

the appropriate penalty in all of the circumstances Is:

b. Mr. H

/i -

I

· submit that the Tribunal should

report this case to the Provost who may publish a notice of the decision of

2

the Tribunal and the sanction or sanctions imposed with Mr. 1-f;

's

name withheld.
3. The University of Toronto states that but for the mitigating circumstances
described in paragraph 20 of the Agreed Statement of Facts It would be
seeking a recommendation of expulsion,
4. Mr. H

acknowledges that the University of Toronto has advised him

lo retain Independent legal counsel before signing this Joint Submission
on Penalty and that he has either done so or deliberately waived that right.
Signed In Toronto on October 25, 201 0.

~--H
Witn;~-~---~--.

Signed in Toronto on October 25, 2010.
LIi armer
Assistant Disci line Counsel,
University of Toronto

700917-1

