Case #1051

   DATE: August 24, 2020

   PARTIES: University of Toronto v.Â A.J.Â (âthe Studentâ)

   HEARING DATE: May 27, 2020,Â in writing

   Panel Members:
   Ms.Â ShantonaÂ Chaudhury, Chair
   Professor Julian Lowman, Faculty Panel Member
   Mr. Andrey Lapin, Student Panel Member
   Appearances:
   Ms. Tina Lie, Assistant Discipline Counsel,Â PaliareÂ Roland Rosenberg
   Rothstein LLP
   Mr. JacobÂ Millns, Downtown Legal Services, Representative for the
   Student

   On two occasions, the Student was charged under s.Â B.i.1(d)Â of
   theâ¯Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters, 1995â¯(the
   âCodeâ)Â forÂ knowingly representing asÂ herÂ own an idea or expression
   of an idea or work of another in a paperÂ sheÂ submittedÂ for a
   course.Â She hadÂ committed plagiarism byÂ submittingÂ twoÂ papersÂ in
   which she included verbatim or near-verbatim passages from sources that
   were either not referenced or improperly referenced.Â She was charged
   alternatively underÂ ss.Â B.i.1(b)Â andÂ B.i.3(b) of theÂ CodeÂ for
   these offences.

   ThisÂ matter proceeded as a written hearing under Rule 47 of theÂ Rules
   of Practice and Procedure, pursuantÂ to the partiesâ joint
   request.Â The parties submittedÂ an ASF, a JBD, an ASFPÂ and a
   JSP.Â The StudentÂ pleaded guilty toÂ bothÂ chargesÂ underÂ s.
   B.i.1(d)Â of theÂ CodeÂ and acknowledged that sheÂ had doneÂ so freely
   and voluntarily, knowing of the potential consequences she faced, and
   having obtained the advice of legal counsel. The University withdrew
   theÂ alternativeÂ charges.

   Citing theÂ decision of theÂ Discipline Appeals BoardÂ inÂ S.F.Â (Case
   No. 690, October 20, 2014), the Panel notedÂ thatÂ âjoint submissions
   promoteÂ theÂ early resolution of disputes, the saving of time and
   expense and they provideÂ a level of certainty for the parties,Â which,
   in turn,Â may lead them to make accommodations that would otherwise not
   be made.âÂ InÂ the PanelâsÂ view, there was no basis to reject the
   JSP.Â ItÂ described plagiarismÂ asÂ a serious offenceÂ thatÂ diminishes
   the relationship of trust between the University and its
   studentsÂ andÂ undermines the evaluative process fundamental to the
   academic setting.Â The Panel found itÂ troubling that the Student had a
   prior plagiarism offence and committedÂ two further plagiarism
   offences.Â In its view, this militates in favour of a significant
   sanction.

   Theâ¯Tribunalâ¯imposed the following sanctions:Â grade assignment of
   zero in the course; suspension from the day the Panel made its order to
   the earlier of (1) three years from the date of the Panelâs order, or
   (2) May 31, 2023; notation on the Studentâs academic record and
   transcript from the day the Panel made its order until graduation;
   report to the Provost for publication of the decision and the sanctions
   imposed, with the Studentâs name withheld.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/29398
