Case No.: 1051
UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL

IN THE MATTER OF charges of academic dishonesty filed on October 29, 2019,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters, 1995,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Act, 1971, S.O. 1971, c. 56 as am. S.O. 1978, c. 88

B E T W E E N:
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
- and A

J

(the “Student”)

REASONS FOR DECISION
Hearing Date: May 27, 2020 (in writing)
Members of the Panel:
Ms. Shantona Chaudhury, Chair
Professor Julian Lowman, Faculty Panel Member
Mr. Andrey Lapin, Student Panel Member
Appearances via written submissions:
Ms. Tina Lie, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg Rothstein LLP
Mr. Jacob Millns, Downtown Legal Services, Representative for the Student

2

I - THE CHARGES AND THE HEARING
1.

On May 27, 2020, this Panel of the University Tribunal convened in writing to consider

the charges brought by the University of Toronto (the “University”) against the Student under the
Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters, 1995 (the “Code”).
2.

The matter proceeded as a written hearing under Rule 47 of the Rules of Practice and

Procedure to the parties’ joint request, which was granted by the Chair on April 27, 2020.
3.

The Student was represented in this matter by Jacob Millns of Downtown Legal Services.

4.

The charges against the Student are as follows:
1.

On or about February 6, 2019, you knowingly represented as your own an idea or
expression of an idea or work of another in a paper you submitted in WSTD16H3
(the “Course”), contrary to section B.I.1(d) of the Code.

2.

In the alternative, on or about February 6, 2019, you knowingly obtained
unauthorized assistance in connection with a paper that you submitted in the
Course, contrary to section B.I.1(b) of the Code.

3.

In the further alternative, on or about February 6, 2019, you knowingly engaged in
a form of cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or misrepresentation
not otherwise described in the Code in order to obtain academic credit or other
academic advantage of any kind in connection with a paper you submitted in the
Course, contrary to section B.I.3(b) of the Code.

4.

On or about March 1, 2019, you knowingly represented as your own an idea or
expression of an idea or work of another in a paper you submitted in the Course,
contrary to section B.I.1(d) of the Code.

3

5.

In the alternative, on or about March 1, 2019, you knowingly obtained unauthorized
assistance in connection with a paper that you submitted in the Course, contrary to
section B.I.1(b) of the Code.

6.

In the further alternative, on or about March 1, 2019, you knowingly engaged in a
form of cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or misrepresentation
not otherwise described in the Code in order to obtain academic credit or other
academic advantage of any kind in connection with a paper you submitted in the
Course, contrary to section B.I.3(b) of the Code.

2.

In brief, the Student is alleged to have submitted two essays in which she included verbatim

or near-verbatim passages from sources that were either not referenced or improperly referenced.
3.

The parties provided the Panel with an Agreed Statement of Facts (“ASF”), a Joint Book

of Documents (“JBD”), an Agreed Statement of Facts on Penalty (“ASFP”), and a Joint
Submission on Penalty (“JSP”). The University also filed written submissions and a Book of
Authorities.
4.

In the ASF, the Student admitted that she received a copy of the Charges, that she received

a copy of the Notice of Hearing, and that she received reasonable notice of the hearing. She waived
the reading of the Charges.
5.

The Student pleaded guilty to Charges 1 and 4. She acknowledged that she did so freely

and voluntarily, knowing of the potential consequences she faced, and having obtained the advice
of legal counsel.
6.

In its written submissions, the University advised that if the Tribunal returned a finding of

guilt on Charges 1 and 4, the Provost would withdraw Charges 2, 3, 5, and 6.

4

II – MISCONDUCT
(i) The Agreed Facts
5.

The Student agreed to the following relevant facts.

6.

In Winter 2019, the Student enrolled in WSTD16H3F (Socialist Feminism in Global

Context) (the “Course”), which was taught by Dr. Anup Grewal.
7.

The Course syllabus advised the students, inter alia, that it is an academic offence for

students “to use someone else’s ideas or words in their own work without acknowledging that
those ideas/words are not their own with a citation and quotation marks, i.e. to commit
plagiarism”, and “to include false, misleading or concocted citations in their work”.
8.

The Course syllabus also advised students that if they had any questions or concerns about

what constitutes appropriate academic behaviour or appropriate research and citation methods,
they were expected to seek out additional information on academic integrity from their instructor
or from other institutional resources. The syllabus provided a link to the University’s webpage on
academic integrity ‘Resources for Students’, as well as a link to a University document entitled
“How Not to Plagiarize”.
9.

Students in the Course were required to submit two short analysis papers, each worth

15% of their final grades.
The Student’s First Paper

5

10.

The first short analysis paper was due on February 10, 2019. For this assignment,

students were required to analyze the class readings on “Utopian Socialists” and respond to a
question posed by the instructor.
11.

On or about February 6, 2019, the Student submitted her first short analysis paper in the

Course, entitled “Utopian Socialist Thought” (the “First Paper”).
12.

On reviewing the First Paper, Dr. Grewal determined that there were numerous passages

in it that had been taken verbatim, or nearly verbatim, from three online sources (collectively, the
“First Paper Sources”):
•

“Utopian
socialism”,
from
the
(https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Utopian_socialism)

•

“History of Economic Thought Lecture Notes, Part III - The Critics of Capitalism”, from
the University of Texas at Austin website

Wikipedia

website

(http://la.utexas.edu/users/hcleaver/368/368lecturenotesIII.html)
•

13.

“Sexual Equality & Socialism” by Anne Phillips, in Dissent Magazine (available online at
https://www.dissentmagazine.org/article/sexual-equality-socialism)

The Wikipedia article on “Utopian Socialism” was not cited in the First Paper. The

URL for the “History of Economic Thought Lecture Notes” was included in the references for
the First Paper, but was inaccurately described in both the list of references and the in-text
citations. The article from Dissent Magazine was cited in the list of references and in one part
of the text of the First Paper, but the verbatim text was not placed in quotation marks.
14.

Copies of the First Paper and the First Paper Sources were included in the JBD.

6

15.

On March 6, 2019, Dr. Grewal met with the Student to discuss the allegation of

plagiarism in the First Paper.
The Student’s Second Paper
16.

The second short analysis paper was due on March 1, 2019. For this assignment, students

were required to analyze the class readings on “From Utopian Socialism to Marxism: Class,
Family, and the ‘Woman Question’” and respond to a question posed by the instructor.
17.

On or about March 1, 2019, the Student submitted her second short analysis paper,

entitled “Analysis Paper #2” (the “Second Paper”).
18.

Thus the Student submitted the Second Paper before Dr. Grewal had discovered the

suspected plagiarism in the First Paper.
19.

After Dr. Grewal discovered the suspected plagiarism in the First Paper, she gave the

Student the opportunity to take back the Second Paper and to re-write it before it was graded. The
Student declined to do so.
20.

Upon reviewing the Second Paper, Dr. Grewal determined that there were numerous

passages in the Second Paper that had been taken verbatim or nearly verbatim from an online
source: “The Marxist Perspective on the Family” from the Revise Sociology website
https://revisesociology.com/2014/02/10/marxist-perspective-

family/

(the

“Second

Source”).
21.

The Second Paper Source was not cited in the Second Paper.

22.

Copies of the Second Paper and the Second Paper Source were included in the JBD.

Paper

7

Meeting with the Dean’s Designate
On June 20, 2019, the Student met with Professor Nick Cheng, Dean’s Designate, to

23.

discuss the allegations of academic misconduct in the Course. Professor Cheng gave the Student
the required warning under the Code. During the meeting, the Student explained that it had not
been her intention to commit plagiarism, but admitted that her conduct with respect to both
papers constituted an academic offence.
24.

A copy of the meeting notes taken by the UTS note-taker was included in the JBD, and

the parties agreed that these notes accurately reflected the discussion that took place at the
meeting.
Admissions and Acknowledgments
25.

With respect to the First Paper, the Student admitted that she knowingly:
a) included verbatim or nearly verbatim passages from the First Paper Sources;
b) failed to attribute those verbatim or nearly verbatim passages appropriately in the First
Paper, including through the use of citations, quotation marks or other appropriate means;
c) represented the ideas, expression of ideas or work of another as her own in the First
Paper; and
d) committed plagiarism in the First Paper, contrary to section B.I.1(d) of the Code.

26.

With respect to the Second Paper, the Student admitted that she knowingly:
e) included verbatim or nearly verbatim passages from the Second Paper Source;
f)

failed to attribute those verbatim or nearly verbatim passages appropriately in the Second
Paper, including through the use of citations, quotation marks or other appropriate
means;

g) represented the ideas, expression of ideas or work of another as her own in the Second

Paper; and
h) committed plagiarism in the Second Paper, contrary to section B.I.1(d) of the Code.

8

27.

On the basis of the agreed facts in the ASF and the documents in the JBD, the University

asked the Tribunal to accept the Student’s guilty plea with respect to Charges 1 and 4.
(ii) Decision of the Panel
28.

The onus is on the University to establish on a balance of probabilities, using clear and

convincing evidence, that the academic offence charged has been committed by the Student.1
29.

The Panel reviewed the documents in the JBD to be satisfied that they supported the facts

in the ASF. The Panel noted that the First Paper is largely composed of near-verbatim extracts
from the First Paper Sources that are either uncited or improperly cited. The Panel noted that the
Second Paper contains a number of near-verbatim extracts from the Second Paper Source, which
was not cited at all.
30.

Upon considering the ASF, the JBD, and the written submissions of the University, and

after deliberations, the Panel was satisfied on a balance of probabilities that the University had
proven the elements of Charges 1 and 4. The Panel therefore accepted the Student’s guilty plea
with respect to these Charges.
III – PENALTY
The Joint Submission and Agreed Facts
31.

The parties filed a JSP. The Student acknowledged in the JSP that the University advised

her of her right to obtain legal counsel, and that she did so. The Student further acknowledged that

1

A.S. [Case No. 858; DAB – Appeal 2; April 18, 2019] at para 55.

9

she signed the JSP freely and voluntarily, knowing of the potential consequences she faced; and
knowing that the Tribunal would not be bound by the JSP and had the discretion to impose a
different penalty, including one that is more severe than the JSP recommends.
32.

In the JSP, the parties submitted that in the circumstances of this case, it was appropriate

that the Tribunal impose the following sanctions on the Student:
a) a final grade of zero in the course WSTD16H3F in Winter 2019;
b) a suspension from the University of Toronto to the earlier of (1) three years from the date
of the Tribunal’s order, or (2) May 31, 2023; and
c) a notation of the sanction on her academic record and transcript from the date of the
Tribunal’s order until the Student’s graduation.
33.

The parties further agreed that this case be reported to the Provost for publication of a

notice of the decision of the Tribunal and the sanction imposed in the University of Toronto
newspapers, with the name of the Student withheld.
34.

The Panel reviewed the JSP, as well as the ASFP, the Book of Authorities filed by the

University in support of the JSP, and the University’s written submissions.
Prior Offence
35.

In the ASFP, the Student acknowledged that she had one prior offence.

36.

On November 19, 2018, the Student submitted an assignment in PSYC36 (Psychotherapy)

for which she obtained unauthorized assistance, contrary to section B.I.1(b) of the Code. She
purchased this assignment from an online service.

10

37.

When the instructor for PSYC36 reviewed the Student’s assignment, he determined that it

contained large portions taken from a paper found on the internet, without citation. In addition,
many facts and details from the source were modified in the Student’s assignment.
38.

On January 31, 2019, the Student met with the Dean’s Designate, Professor Cheng, to

discuss the allegation of academic misconduct in PSYC36.
39.

During this meeting, the Student explained that she was going through a stressful time with

work coming due in multiple courses. She decided to take a shortcut by using an online service
called “EduBirdie”. EduBirdie wrote the assignment for her. The Student admitted that she had
obtained unauthorized assistance under section B.I.1(b) of the Code.
40.

On February 13, 2019, Professor Cheng sent the Student a letter regarding their meeting

and the sanction imposed. She received a zero on the assignment (which was worth 20% of her
final grade, a further reduction of 20% from her final grade, and a notation on her academic record
and transcript for one year, ending February 1, 2020.
41.

Professor Cheng advised the Student that a copy of his letter would be placed in her student

file, and that in the event of any further offence under the Code, it would be consulted.
42.

Professor Cheng further advised the Student that he trusted it was clear that the University

regards with great seriousness all acts of academic dishonesty. He told the Student that he hoped
she had learned from this unfortunate experience and that nothing similar would happen again.
The Student’s Personal Circumstances

11

43.

In the ASFP, the Student asked that certain personal circumstances be taken into

consideration in determining the appropriate sanction in this case.
44.

First, the Student’s grandfather passed away in November 2018. She was dealing with this

loss at the time of the offences.
45.

Second, at the time of the offences in late 2018 and early 2019, the Student was working

part-time (approximately 15-20 hours per week) at Shoppers Drug Mart.
46.

Third, the Student was experiencing significant stresses at home at the time.

47.

The University advised in its written submissions that it had taken these personal

circumstances into account in reaching the JSP.
48.

On the basis of these facts and submissions, the University asked the Panel to impose the

sanctions proposed in the JSP.
(ii) Decision of the Panel
49.

Although panels are not obliged to accept a joint submission on penalty, the Tribunal’s

jurisprudence confirms that they are expected to do so unless exceptional circumstances apply. A
joint submission on penalty may be rejected only where to give effect to it would be contrary to
the public interest or would bring the administration of justice into disrepute.2 As the Discipline
Appeals Board explained in the S.F. decision (Case No. 690, October 20, 2014, at para. 22), “joint
submissions promote early resolution of disputes, the saving of time and expense and they provide

2

M.O. [Case No. 652; November 12, 2012] at para 14.

12

a level of certainty for the parties which, in turn may lead them to make accommodations that
would otherwise not be made.”3
50.

In the Panel’s view, there was no basis to reject the JSP in this case. The proposed sanctions

are not contrary to the public interest and would not bring the administration of justice into
disrepute.
51.

In coming to this conclusion, the Panel considered the nature of the offences; the detriment

to the University occasioned by them; the need to deter others from committing a similar offence;
the likelihood of repetition; the character of the person charged, and the extenuating circumstances
surrounding the commission of the offence.4
52.

Plagiarism is a serious offence. It diminishes the relationship of trust between the

University and its students, and it undermines the evaluative process fundamental to the academic
setting.5
53.

In the present case, it is troubling that the Student had a prior plagiarism offence and

proceeded to commit two further plagiarism offences. This militates in favour of a significant
sanction.
54.

However, as the University acknowledged in it submissions, all three offences were

committed within a relatively short span of time: the prior offence was committed in November
2018, and the offences in the present case were committed in February and March 2019. The

3

S.F.. [Case No. 690; October 20, 2014] at para. 22.
M.O, November 12, 2012 at para 15, citing University of Toronto and Mr. C [Case No. 1976/77-3, November 5,
1976] at p 12.
5
M.O., at para 21.
4

13

Student was in her fourth year at the time of the November 2018 offence; prior to this, she had
completed three years at the University without committing any academic offences.
55.

Moreover, the Student was experiencing difficult personal circumstances at home during

this period of time, which the Panel accepted as a mitigating factor in the circumstances of this
case.
56.

The commission of all three offences within four months of each other, after three years at

the University untarnished by academic misconduct, suggests that the Student is not an inveterate
serial offender. Rather, the Student made a series of mistakes during a difficult time in her life.
57.

The Student’s early admission of guilt and co-operation with the discipline process

reinforce this view. She admitted to the offences both at her meeting with the Dean’s Designate in
June 2019 and before this Tribunal. She participated in and cooperated in the discipline process,
including by entering into agreed statements of facts for both the misconduct and penalty phases
of the hearing. In the Panel’s view, these were mitigating factors that should be taken into account
in this case.
58.

In light of the above, the Panel was satisfied that it is appropriate to impose the sanctions

proposed in the JSP.
59.

The Student has had enough credits to graduate since Summer 2019. Her 3-year suspension

will run from the date of the Tribunal’s order (May 27, 2020), and she will be able to graduate at
the June 2023 Convocation.

14

IV - ORDER OF THE TRIBUNAL
60.

Accordingly, the Panel made the following Order on May 27, 2020:
1)

THAT the Student is guilty of two counts of knowingly representing as her own
an idea or expression of an idea or work of another in any academic examination
or term test or in connection with any other form of academic work, contrary to
section B.I.1(d) of the Code.

2)

THAT the following sanctions shall be imposed on the Student:
a) a final grade of zero in the course WSTD16H3F in Winter 2019;
b) a suspension from the University of Toronto from the day the
Tribunal makes its order to the earlier of (1) three years from the
date of the Tribunal’s order, or (2) May 31, 2023; and
c) a notation of the sanction on her academic record and transcript from
the day the Tribunal makes its order until graduation.

3)

THAT this case be reported to the Provost for publication of a notice of the
decision of the Tribunal and the sanction imposed, with the Student’s name
withheld.

Dated at Toronto this 24th day of August, 2020

___________________________
Shantona Chaudhury, Co-Chair

