Case 1277

FILE:

   Case # 1277 (2021-2022)

DATE:

   June 9, 2022

PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v. H.Z. (‚the Student‚)

HEARING DATE(S):

   March 8, 2022, via Zoom

PANEL MEMBERS:

   Mr. Andrew Bernstein, Chair

   Professor Michael Saini, Faculty Panel Member

   Ms. Madison Kerr, Student Panel Member

APPEARANCES:

   Ms. Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg
   Rothstein LLP

   Mr. William Webb, Co-Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg Rothstein LLP

HEARING SECRETARY:

   Ms. Krista Kennedy, Director, Office of Appeals, Discipline and Faculty
   Grievances

   The Student¬ was charged with two counts under s. B.i.1(d) of the Code
   of Behaviour on Academic Matters, 1995 (‚Code‚) on the basis that the
   Student knowingly represented as their own an idea or expression of an
   idea, and/or the work of another in an assignment and a final exam . In
   the alternative, the Student was charged with two counts under s.
   B.i.3(b) of the Code on the basis that the Student knowingly engaged in
   a form of cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or
   misrepresentation in order to¬ obtain academic credit or other academic
   advantage¬ in connection with an assignment and a final exam.

   Neither the Student nor a representative for the Student appeared at
   the hearing . The University requested that the Panel proceed with the
   hearing in the absence of the Student pursuant to rule 17 of the
   Tribunal‚s Rules of Practice and Procedure (‚Rules‚) and s. 7 of the
   Statutory Powers Procedure Act (‚SPPA‚). The Panel noted that rule 17
   and s. 7 require that the University provide the Student with adequate
   notice of the hearing before the Panel can proceed in the Student‚s
   absence. These provisions require that the University establish that it
   took reasonable steps to notify the Student of the charges and the
   hearing. The University provided evidence that the Student was served
   with the notice of hearing at their email address listed in the
   University‚s Repository of Student Information (‚ROSI‚). The University
   provided further affidavit evidence outlining that the last time the
   Student‚s email account was accessed was in October of 2021. The Panel
   noted that the University‚s Policy on Official Correspondence with
   Students requires students enrolled at the University to maintain a
   current and valid postal address and an address for a University-issued
   email account in their ROSI records, to update their records when this
   information changes, and to monitor and retrieve their mail and email
   on a frequent and consistent basis. The University provided evidence
   that it attempted to contact the Student via telephone to the number
   listed in ROSI, and sent a courier package inclusive of a copy of the
   notice of hearing to the Student‚s ROSI-listed address. The Student had
   not responded to any of the efforts to contact them. The Panel found
   that the notice was properly provided in accordance with the Rules and
   therefore, ordered the hearing to proceed in the Student‚s absence.

   Regarding the two charges under s. B.i.1(d) of the Code, the Panel
   noted that the affidavit of Professor Bunce included a comparison
   between the Student‚s assignment and other sources. The Panel noted
   that it was clear from this comparison that the Student copied many of
   the sentences, and paraphrased others without citation. Regarding the
   Student‚s final exam, the Panel noted that the exam was open book, but
   the students were not allowed to directly copy sources, instead they
   were paraphrase. Upon review of the final exam, the Panel noted that
   the Student‚s answer to question 2 on the final exam contained passages
   that were extensively copied from an article without citation. Upon
   review of the assignment, the final exam, and the articles, the Panel
   concluded that on a balance of probabilities, the Student knowingly
   represented their own idea or expression of an idea of another,
   contrary to section B.i.1(d) of the Code.

   In determining sanction, the Panel considered the factors set out in
   the decision University of Toronto and Mr. C. factors (Case No.
   1976/77-3, November 5, 1976) and similar decisions of the Tribunal. The
   Panel ordered the penalty requested by the University; however, the
   Panel adjusted the penalty to begin on January 1, 2022. The Panel noted
   that the reason for the adjustment to the start date of the penalty was
   because there appeared to be a substantial delay between the incident
   itself and the scheduling of the hearing, and to ensure consistency
   with the effective lengths of the suspensions. The Panel further noted
   that the University has a lot of control over when academic discipline
   matters come to a hearing and there is nothing wrong with that, or with
   counsel setting a date that is convenient to them. However, counsel‚s
   convenience should not be permitted to have an adverse impact on when
   the student may re-enroll after a suspension. The Panel relied on the
   following Tribunal decisions: University of Toronto and X.Y. (Case No.
   1147), University of Toronto and G.L. (Case No. 1262), and University
   of Toronto and S.K. (Case No. 1063) in adjusting the start date of the
   penalty. The Panel imposed the following sanctions: a final grade of
   zero in the course, a three-year suspension; a four-year notation on
   the transcript, and a report to the Provost for publication.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/30574
