Case No.: 719
THE UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO

IN THE MATTER OF charges of academic dishonesty made on July 22, 2013,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters,
1995,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Act, 1971, S.O. 1971, c. 56 as amended
S.Q. 1978, C. 88

BETWEEN:

UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
- and -

ti
REASONS FOR DECISION

Hearing Dates: February 16, 2016, April 13, 2016, August 25, 2016, August 30, 2016,
October 6, 2016, November 2, 2016, January 16, 2017

Members of the Panel:
Ms. Sarah Kraicer, Barrister and Solicitor, Co-Chair
Professor Ernest Lam, Faculty Panel Member
Ms. Alice Zhu, Student Panel Member
Appearances:
Mr. Robert Centa, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland, Barristers
Ms. Lauren Pearce, Articling Student, Paliare Roland, Barristers (February 16, 2016,
April 13, 2016)
Ms. Emily Home, Articling Student, Paliare Roland, Barristers (August 25, 2016, August
30, 2016, October 6, 2016, November 2, 2016, January 16, 2017)

1

In Attendance:
Mr. W
the Student
Dr. Kristi Gourlay, Manager & Academic Integrity Officer, Office of Student Academic
Integrity, Faculty of Arts & Science {February 16, 2016, April 13, 2016, August 25, 2016,
August 30, 2016, November 2, 2016, January 16, 2017
Professor John Britton, Dean's Designate, Faculty of Arts & Science {February 16,
2016, April 13, 2016, August 25, 2016, October 6, 2016, January 16, 2017
Dr. William Ford, Educational Psychologist (October 6, 2016)
Mr. Paul Russell, Associate Registrar, Student Services, New College (October 6, 2016)
Ms. Krista Osborne, Administrative Assistant, Office of Appeals, Discipline and Faculty
Grievances (February 16, 2016)
Ms. Tracey Gameiro, Associate Director, Office of Appeals, Discipline and Faculty
Grievances, (February 16, 2016, April 13, 2016, October 6, 2016, January 16, 2017)
Mr. Christopher Lang, Director, Office of Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances
(April 13, 2016, August 25, 2016, August 30, 2016, November 2, 2016)
Mr. Sean Lourim, Technology Assistant, Office of the Governing Council (August 25,
2016, August 30, 2016, October 6, 2016, November 2, 2016, January 16, 2017)
Ms. Michelle Henry, Observer, newly-appointed Tribunal Co-Chair (August 25, 2016)

A. The Charges, Agreed Statement of Facts, and Plea

1. The Provost of the University filed 13 charges of academic dishonesty against the
Student on July 22, 2013.

These charges relate to eight separate incidents in four

courses (two incidents per course) occurring between September 2012 and April,
2013. The full Charges are attached as Appendix A to these Reasons.

2. On August 15 and 16, 2016, the University and the Student entered into an Agreed
Statement of Facts. {ASF). The ASF stated that the Student pleads guilty to eight of
the charges: Charges 1, 2, 4, 5, 7, 8, 11 and 12, and that the Provost agrees to
withdraw charges 3, 6, 9, 10 and 13. The Student and the University also signed a
Plea Agreement dated August 12 and August 16, 2016 to the same effect. In the
Plea Agreement, the Student agreed to plead guilty to two charges of making
falsified personal statements in two documents seeking academic accommodation,
and six charges of plagiarism in relation to six separate assignments. One of those
charges of plagiarism relates to the purchase of an essay.

2

3. In signing the ASF, the Student acknowledged that he received legal advice with
respect to the ASF, that he was signing the ASF freely and voluntarily, knowing of
the potential consequences he faces, and that the Provost made no representations
regarding what sanction or sanctions the Provost will seek at the hearing before the
Tribunal.
4. At the outset of the hearing before this Tribunal, the Student confirmed his plea of
guilty to the eight charges in the Plea Agreement and his acceptance of the ASF.
After reviewing the Plea Agreement, the ASF, and the Joint Book of Documents
(JBD), the Tribunal accepted the Student's plea of guilty to Charges 1, 2, 4, 5, 7, 8,
11 and 12.
5. The Tribunal therefore finds that the Student is guilty of two counts of the academic
offence of providing falsified evidence as set out in Charges 1 and 2, and particulars:

Charge 1. On or about September 17, 2012, you knowingly
falsified evidence required by the University of Toronto, namely, a
Personal Statement, which you submitted to the Committee on
Standing of the Faculty of Arts and Science ("Committee") in
support of a request for academic accommodation, in course CHM
139, contrary to Section B.1.1 (a) of the Code.
Charge 2. On or about December 2, 2012, you knowingly falsified
evidence required by the University of Toronto, namely, a Personal
Statement, which you submitted in support of an appeal from the
decision denying your request for academic accommodation in
course CHM 139, contrary to Section B.1.1 (a) of the Code.

The particulars for these charges are as follows:
(a)

At all material times you were a student at the University of
Toronto.

(b)

In September 2012, you submitted a petition seeking late
withdrawal from CHM 139. In support of this petition you
3

submitted a Personal Statement to the Committee on Standing.
You knew that the Personal Statement that you submitted
contained false statements.
(c)

This petition was denied and, on December 2, 2012, you
appealed this decision. You provided a personal statement in
support of your appeal. You knew that this statement contained
false statements, including that one of your relatives had died
before you wrote your exam on August 15, 2012.

(d)

You knowingly submitted all of the statements described above
understanding that the University of Toronto required such
statements to be presented in order to obtain the academic
accommodation you sought.

(e)

You knowingly submitted all of the statements described above
with the intention that the University of Toronto rely on them in
considering whether or not to provide you with the academic
accommodations you requested.

(f)

You knowingly submitted these falsified documents and other
false information in an attempt to obtain an academic
advantage.

6. The Tribunal also finds that the Student is guilty of six counts of the academic
offence of plagiarism, as set out in Charges 4, 5, 7, 8, 11 and 12:
Charge 4. On or about December 4, 2012, you knowingly
represented as your own an idea or expression of an idea, and/or
the work of another in an essay, which you submitted for academic
credit in NEW 241, contrary to section B.l.1(d) of the Code.
Charge 5. On or about April 2, 2013, you knowingly represented as
your own an idea or expression of an idea, and/or the work of
another in an Event Reflection, which you submitted for academic
credit in NEW 241, contrary to section B.1.1 (d) of the Code.

Particulars of these charges are as follows:

4

(a)

In Fall 2012, you registered in Introduction to Disability Studies
(NEW 241), which was taught by Eliza Chandler and Anne
McGuire.

(b)

On December 4, 2012, you submitted an essay titled "Claiming
Disability as an Identity is Important to Disrupt Notions of
Normalcy and Abnormalcy." Portions of this essay were taken
verbatim or nearly verbatim from other sources. You did not
properly attribute or reference these passages. You did not
include the source of one of these passages in the bibliography
for this essay.

(c)

You were also required to attend a disability community cultural
event and to submit a short reflection on the event that drew on and
engaged with one or more of the themes discussed in the class. On
or about April 2, 2013, you submitted your event reflection, which
was titled "Open Talk about Students" A significant part of your
event reflection was taken verbatim or nearly verbatim from an
editorial written by Eliza Chandler. You did not properly reference
these passages. You did not include Ms. Chandler's article in the
bibliography for your event recollection.

(d)

With respect to both submissions described above, you knowingly
represented the work of another as your own work. You knowingly
included in each submission ideas and expressions that were not
your own, but were the ideas and expressions of others, which you
did not acknowledge.

(e)

For the purposes of obtaining academic credit and/or other
academic advantage, you knowingly committed plagiarism in the
assignment.

Charge 7. On or about February 20, 2013, you knowingly represented as
your own an idea or expression of an idea, and/or the work of another in
Assignment 1, which you submitted for academic credit in NFS 284 Basic
Human Nutrition, contrary to section B.1.1 (d) of the Code.
Charge 8. On or about March 13, 2013, you knowingly represented as
your own an idea or expression of an idea, and/or the work of another in

5

Assignment 2, which you submitted for academic credit in NFS 284,
contrary to section 8.1.1 (d) of the Code.
Particulars of these charges are as follows

(a)

Students in NFS 284 were required to submit several
assignments, including Assignment 1, of which was worth 19%
of the final grade in the course, and Assignment 2, which was
worth 18% of the final grade.

(b}

On or about February 20, 2013, you submitted Assignment 1.
Portions of this essay were taken verbatim or nearly verbatim
from other sources. You did not properly attribute or reference
these passages. You did not include the source of some or all
of these passages in the bibliography for Assignment 1.

(c)

On or about March 13, 2013, you submitted Assignment 2.
You knowingly received unauthorized assistance from
Muhamed Aamir Iqbal, or other persons unknown, when the
assignment was written.

(d)

You purchased the document you submitted as Assignment 2
from Mr. Iqbal, or persons unknown, and submitted it without
doing any meaningful academic work on it.

(e)

With respect to both submissions described above, you
knowingly represented the work of another as your own work.
You knowingly included ideas and expressions that were not
your own, but were the ideas and expressions of others, which
you did not acknowledge. For the purposes of obtaining
academic credit and/or other academic advantage, you
knowingly committed plagiarism in each assignment

Charge 11. On or about November 5, 2012, you knowingly represented as
your own an idea or expression of an idea, and/or the work of another in
"Assignment 2," which you submitted for academic credit in UNI 209
Introduction to Health: Determinants of Health & Health Care, contrary to
section 8.1.1 (d} of the Code.

6

Charge 12. On or about December 10, 2012, you knowingly represented
as your own an idea or expression of an idea, and/or the work of another
in "Assignment 3," which you submitted for academic credit in UNI 209,
contrary to section B.1.1 (d) of the Code.

Particulars of these charges are as follows:
(a)

Students in UNI 209 were required to submit several assignments
including Assignment 2, which was worth 35% of the final grade in
the course, and Assignment 3, which was worth 50% of the final
grade.

(b)

On or about November 5, 2012, you submitted Assignment 2.
Portions of your submission were taken verbatim or nearly verbatim
from other sources. You did not properly attribute or reference
these passages.

(c)

On or about December 10, 2012, you submitted Assignment 3.
Portions of your submission were taken verbatim or nearly verbatim
from other sources. You did not properly attribute or reference
these passages at least one of, which you did not include in the
bibliography for this essay.

(d)

With respect to both assignments, you knowingly represented the
work of another as your own work. You knowingly included ideas
and expressions that were not your own, but were the ideas and
expressions of others, which you did not acknowledge. For the
purposes of obtaining academic credit and/or other academic
advantage, you knowingly committed plagiarism in each
assignment.

8. Sanction

7. The University sought the following sanctions:

(a) a final grade of zero in each of the affected courses,

7

(b) an order that the Student be immediately suspended from the University for
up to 5 years,
(c) an order that the Tribunal recommend to the President of the University that
he ask the Governing Council to expel the Student from the University, and
(d) an order that the case be reported to the Provost for publication with the
Student's name withheld.

8. A recommendation for expulsion is the most serious sanction this Tribunal can order.
It means that the student shall be denied any further registration in the University in
any program, and the expulsion is permanently recorded on the student's transcript.

9. The Student opposed these sanctions and asked that the Tribunal take a number of
mitigating factors into account, focusing primarily on the fact that he suffers from a
number of mental health conditions and learning disabilities. We address these
mitigating factors below. He did not specify what alternative sanction or sanctions he
considered appropriate.

10. The University filed documentary evidence, led evidence from Professor Britton
regarding two prior offences of plagiarism, and called reply evidence from Mr.
Russell regarding the Student's interactions with the Office of the Registrar
regarding his course load and academic difficulties. The Student filed documentary
evidence, testified himself, and called as a witness Dr. Ford, an educational
psychologist who had conducted a psychoeducational assessment of the Student in
2015. All witnesses were cross-examined. Both parties made argument on the
applicable principles and cases. In addition to his oral submissions, the Student also
filed a series of detailed written submissions, revised over the period of the hearing,
which referred to the evidence and outlined his arguments.

11. The sanction stage of this hearing was originally scheduled for one day, but in the
end took over 5 hearing dates. On the final date of the hearing, which had been
8

scheduled for 2 hours, the Student arrived 45 minutes late, and then left the hearing
early, after an evidentiary ruling that he disagreed with. The Tribunal then closed the
hearing, and reserved its decision on sanction and its reasons.

12. The relevant principles and criteria for this Tribunal to consider in relation to sanction
are set out in the decision of University of Toronto and Mr. C (Case No. 1976/77-3;
November 5, 1976). These are:

a.
b.
c.
d.

The character of the person charged;
The likelihood of a repetition of the offence
The nature of the offence committed
Any extenuating circumstances surrounding the commission of
the offence
e. The detriment to the University occasioned by the offence;
f. The need to deter others from committing a similar offence

13. In addition, while the individual circumstances of each case are the paramount focus
when considering the appropriate sanction, the Tribunal's sanction should be
generally consistent with the approach to sanctions that have been administered by
other Tribunals for similar offences to ensure that the student is being treated fairly
and equitably in relation to other students. We are not bound by other Tribunal
decisions, nor are there any benchmarks or presumptions that we must follow - we
must determine what is the appropriate sanction in the individual circumstances of
the case before us.

a) Evidence Regarding Prior Offences

14. The Student was previously sanctioned for plagiarism in respect of two separate
incidents arising in the preceding academic year 2011-2012. He submitted a
plagiarized essay in FOR303H1 for which he received the sanctions of a zero for the
assignment and a further reduction of his final grade of 25 marks, with a transcript
9

annotation for 3 years. He also submitted a plagiarized assignment in JMB170Y. He
received the sanctions of a zero for the assignment in question, and a further
reduction of his final grade of 12 marks, with a transcript annotation of 3 years.

15. The Student met with the Dean's Designate, Professor John Britton, about these two
prior offences on September 7, 2012. He received the sanction decisions from
Professor Britton via email on September 12, 2012.

Professor Britton testified

regarding this meeting, his email, and these prior offences.

16. With respect to FOR303H1, the Student was initially reluctant to take responsibility
for his plagiarism, or to admit that he had committed an academic offence, but
ultimately conceded that he had committed the academic offence of plagiarism.
Professor Britten's decision letter provided advice to the Student as to how to avoid
plagiarism in the future. It also advised the Student that it was his responsibility to
manage his academic and personal commitments in a manner that does not
compromise his academic integrity, and that if he needed advice on how to do so he
should speak to his college registrar for direction as to appropriate campus
resources. The letter concluded with a warning that "all future academic work must
follow the rules and regulations of the University; you are expected to be familiar
with them ... if you should come to my attention again for another allegation of
academic misconduct, you will be facing a possible suspension from the University."

17. With respect to JMB170Y, the Student initially tried to deny the allegations with
respect to the assignment, but ultimately conceded that he had resubmitted the
same work, that the assignment contained plagiarised material and that he had
committed an academic offence. The decision letter also stated that there had been
a "frustrating and ultimately unproductive" discussion with the Student regarding
submission of a medical note to support a claim that he had missed a term test
because of illness. While the Student was not found to have committed misconduct
with respect to this medical note, it is clear that he and the Dean's Designate had
had a discussion about the University's expectations for the requirements of medical
10

notes to support illness as a reason for missing a test. This decision letter also
included the same advice as to how to avoid plagiarism, and the same warning
about future allegations of misconduct. It added, "your behaviour troubles me
greatly and suggests a pattern of ignoring advice or instructions if that advice or
instructions are not agreeable to you. As I told you at out meeting, this is not the
way to succeed at the University of Toronto where the rules apply to everyone, and
failure to adhere to them can be construed as academic misconduct."

18. The Student sought to downplay the advice and warnings he had been given for
these previous offences in his evidence before us. He stated that during the
meeting with Professor Britton he had difficulty understanding the Code of
Behaviour, because he did not have any accommodations at that meeting for his
then-undiagnosed learning disabilities. Professor Britton did not recall the Student
struggling to understand the Code at the meeting, or the Student requesting any
form of academic accommodation during the meeting. We note that the Student
received the warnings in writing as well as orally during the meeting, and that he
could have, but did not, seek clarification or explanation after receiving the letters.
We do not accept his arguments that he did not understand the sanction or the
advice given to him by Professor Britton for his two prior offences.

b) The Nature of the Offences Committed
19. The Student committed 6 acts of plagiarism, and two acts of filing a false petition, in
the Fall and Winter of the 2012-2013 academic year.

20. Turning first to the acts of plagiarism, the Student submitted a plagiarized
assignment in UNI 209 on November 5, 2012, a plagiarized Term Paper in New 241
on December 4, 2012, a plagiarized Final Paper, Assignment 3 in UNI 209 on
December 10, 2012, a plagiarized Assignment 1-Abstract in NFS 284 on February
20, 2013, a plagiarized purchased Assignment 2 in NFS 284 on March 13, 2013 and
a plagiarized Event Reflection in NEW 241 on April 2, 2013.

11

21. The Student argued that the Tribunal should not take into account that he had
purchased the essay that he had submitted as Assignment 2 in in NFS284, because
the University "dropped" the purchased essay charge when it withdrew Charge 9
(unauthorized assistance), and only continued with Charge 8 (plagiarism). While he
acknowledges that the ASF admits the facts that he did purchase the essay that he
submitted as his own work as Assignment 2 in NSF284, he submits that admitted
facts surrounding the purchased essay cannot be considered by the Tribunal in
determining sanction.

22. The relevant Charges 8 and 9 and ASF paragraphs are the following:

Charge 8: On or about March 13, 2013, you knowingly represented as
your own an idea or expression of an idea, and/or the work of another in
Assignment 2, which you submitted for academic credit in NFS 284,
contrary to section B.1.1 (d) of the Code.
Charge 9: On or about March 13, 2013, you knowingly obtained
unauthorized assistance in connection with Assignment 2, which you
submitted for academic credit in NFS 284, contrary to section B.1.1 (b) of
the Code.
Agreed Statement of Facts:

55. [The Student] submitted his completed Assignment 2 on March 13, 2013.
A copy of [the Student]'s submission, as graded by Ms. Vien, is included in
the JBD at Tab 25.
56. A printout of the document properties for [the Student]'s short essay for
Assignment 2 is included in the JBD at Tab 16. The name Aamir Iqbal
appears in the Author field of the document properties. The document
properties indicate that the paper was last modified by "[Student's first
name]".
57. A copy of the Liveperson profile for Muhammad Aamir Iqbal is included in
the JBD at Tab 27. Mr. Iqbal's profile states that he is a "PhD scholar and I
offer my proficiencies to provide assistance in your studies at reasonable
price." [sic] Mr. Iqbal's profile represents that he is a "qualified nutritionist" with
"experience as a Nutritionist at a reputable hospital." He also states that he is
12

"available to assist students of numerous disciplines who pursue [his] service,
and you will obtain admirable plagiarism free piece of work in reasonable
price." [sic]
58. [The Student] admits that he paid Mr. Iqbal to write the short essay that
Mr. K■ submitted in his own name as part of Assignment 2. Mr. ~admits
that he did no meaningful academic work on the short essay before
submitting it.
59. [The Student] admits that in the short essay component of Assignment 2
for NFS284, he knowingly
(a)

represented in his essay the ideas of another person, the
expression of the ideas of another person, or the work of
another person as his own; and

(b)

committed plagiarism, contrary to section B.l.1(d) of the
Code.

23. In support of his argument, the Student provided the Tribunal with a copy of an
email dated November 1, 2016 from the law student who formerly represented him.
The law student's email states:
[... ]

Originally, the charges on this assignment were two fold:
(1) a charge for a purchased essay
(2) a charge for plagiarism
Due to your guilty plea, the first charge, which is regarded as more serious, was
dropped. I explained during our meeting that in the ASF, the facts would still
state that you purchased your essay, but the charge would be solely for
plagiarism.
[... ]

24. Counsel for the University objected to the introduction of this email, arguing that this
was new hearsay evidence submitted after the evidence was supposed to be
completed, and further that he had no opportunity to obtain the law student's file or
question her about her advice. The Tribunal agreed to admit the email, but a number
of factors, in addition to the concerns raised by the University, limit the weight we
13

give to it, and significantly qualify the extent to which it supports the Student's
argument that we not consider the fact that the essay was purchased.

25. The law student did not testify, so the email is unverified and untested. We were not
provided with the Student's questions to the law student which prompted this email.
We do not know what she reviewed, whether she understood the context in which
the question was asked, or how the email would be relied on. The email incorrectly
states that the withdrawn charge 9 was for a "purchased essay", whereas the
withdrawn charge was actually for "unauthorized assistance", so her understanding
of the original charges is not accurate. Further, the email confirms that the law
student had explained to the Student that the ASF would still include the admitted
facts that he had purchased the essay. The email is silent as to what these
explanations were as to the implications of including in the ASF the admitted facts of
purchasing an essay in determining penalty for the remaining charge of plagiarism.

26. In the Tribunal's view, the withdrawal of Charge 9 by the Provost does not have the
effect of preventing the Tribunal from taking into account the admitted facts in the
ASF regarding the purchase of the essay. These facts support the Charge 8 of
plagiarism to which the Student pleaded guilty. The ASF sets out 4 detailed
paragraphs of admitted facts that establish that the Student purchased an essay that
he submitted for credit as his own. The Student admitted that he paid Mr. Iqbal to
write Assignment 2 in NFS 284, that the Student submitted the purchased essay in
his own name, and that he did n,o meaningful academic work on it. The Student did
not dispute or withdraw any of these factual admissions. The Student received an
explanation from the law student that the facts admitting that he purchased the
essay would remain in the ASF. Inclusion of these facts in the ASF in relation to the
plagiarism charge for this assignment is not consistent with the Student's argument
that the Tribunal cannot consider those facts in determining sanction. The argument
that "plagiarism" is a different charge than "purchasing an essay" is also not
consistent with Tribunal jurisprudence, which commonly considers purchased
essays as a form of "plagiarism" under the Code. While we do not have specific
14

evidence before us from the University as to why it withdrew Charge 9, we note that
both Charge 8 re plagiarism and Charge 9 re unauthorized assistance relate to
same incident and arise from the same facts, and proceeding with both could
possibly have raised concerns about duplicity of charges.

27. While not raised as an issue by the Student, we have also considered whether his
submissions bring into question the voluntariness and informed nature of his guilty
plea with respect to Charge 8. We conclude that it does not. There is no question
that the Student knew that that the ASF included 4 paragraphs of facts admitting that
he had purchased the essay that he submitted in NFS 284. He knew that those
facts were admitted in relation to plagiarism under Charge 8. He acknowledged in
the ASF that the Provost had made no representations as to the sanction to be
sought.

He has not sought to resile from his guilty plea, or to deny the facts

underlying the plea. His arguments relate solely to sanction, and in particular that
the withdrawal of Charge 9 indicates that the nature of his misconduct should be
considered to be "less serious". While we do not accept that argument, there is in
our view no basis to find that the guilty plea to Charge 8 was not informed.

28.AII plagiarism is serious misconduct, as it undermines the fundamental academic
relationship of credibility, honesty and trust between a student and the University. It
strikes at the core of academic integrity. Knowingly representing the work of another
as one's own is a breach of that trust and evinces an intention to obtain academic
credit on false pretences. The Preamble to the Code states:

The concern of the Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters is with the
responsibilities of all parties to the integrity of the teaching and learning
relationship. Honesty and fairness must inform this relationship, whose basis
remains one of mutual respect for the aims of education and for those ethical
principles which must characterize the pursuit and transmission of knowledge
in the University ...
Such cooperation is threatened when teacher or student forsakes respect for
the other - and for others involved in learning - in favour of self-interest,
15

when truth becomes a hostage of expediency. On behalf of teacher and
student an in fulfillment of its own principles and ideals, the University has a
responsibility to ensure that academic achievement is not obscured or
undermined by cheating or misrepresentation, that the evaluative process
meets the highest standards of fairness and honesty, and that malevolent or
even mischievous disruption is not allowed to threaten the educational
process.
29. Plagiarism that relates to a purchased piece of academic work is among the most
egregious of academic offences. As noted by the Discipline Appeal Board in the
2011 C., H. and K. (Case No. 596, 597, 598, November 23, 2011) decision, it
involves intention, planning and deliberate deception. It is often more difficult than
other types of plagiarism to detect. It introduces a 3rd party commercial element into
the academic relationship between professor and student which should be governed
by individual effort, thought and hard work, and it strikes deeply at the core values of
the institution of the University.

30. The University argues that this Tribunal should consider the plagiarism charge with
respect to the purchased essay in NFS 284 to be the most serious of the six
plagiarism charges, and one that in and of itself would warrant the sanction of a
recommended expulsion, particularly with two prior offences. We are also informed
by the Provost's Guidelines which suggest that the recommended sanction for
submitting purchased work is expulsion from the University.

31. Here, all of these elements underlining the seriousness of the offence of plagiarism
are present. With respect to the purchased essay in NFS 284, the Student sought
out and hired a person who advertised online as an expert nutritionist who provided
assistance to students and "you will obtain admirable plagiarism free piece of work in
reasonable price" [sic]. The Student paid Mr. Iqbal to write the short essay
component of Assignment 2 that he submitted in his own name. This deception was
only uncovered through an examination of the metadata "Author" field of the
document properties. His actions were planned and deliberate, and intended to

16

deceive the University.

32. With respect to the other 5 charges, the Student plagiarized from lecture slides, from
the "Ask Me Anything" on-line forum on Reddit, from assigned course readings, and
from academic articles. The plagiarised material was a significant portion of the
submitted essay or assignment in most of these instances.

33. Turning next to the offences relating to the submission of false information in
personal statements, the Student submitted a Petition to request late withdrawal
from CHM 139 without financial penalty on approximately September 17, 2017. The
ASF contains the following admitted facts about this Petition:

15. [The Student] included a personal statement in his Petition. In the personal
statement, [the Student] stated that his family knew personally the grandfather
who collapsed and asserted a more personal connection to that grandfather.
[The Student] also explained that his request for a late withdrawal from CHM 139
was related to concerns about his cousin, who did not live in Canada, and who
had been having mental health problems as a result of his parents' divorce. [The
Student] admits that these statements were not true.
34. After the Committee on Standing denied the petition for late withdrawal, the Student
appealed. The Student again submitted a second personal statement. The ASF
contains the following admitted facts about this appeal:

18. [ ... ] In support of his Appeal, [the Student] submitted a personal statement.
He stated that he was seeking a late withdrawal in CHM 139 because of the
death of one of his relatives. He stated that after hearing about the death of his
relative, "I was unable to concentrate on my studies and had a mental
breakdown". [The Student] admits that these statements were not true.
19. On December 4, 2012, Mr. Russell emailed [the Student] requesting that he
provide original documentation confirming the death of his relative .... [The
Student] never provided any such documentation because no relative of his died
prior to the examination in CHM 139.

17

20. [The Student] admits that he knowingly submitted documents, including the
personal statements in the Petition and the Appeal, that contained false
information[ ... ]
35. The Student admitted in the ASF that he submitted false statements about the
collapse of a grandfather, concerns about mental health problems of his cousin, and
the death of a relative, which caused him to be unable to study for the examination
in CHM 139. He provided this false information in order to gain an academic
advantage - late withdrawal without penalty from CHM 139 - that he otherwise
would not be entitled to receive. He provided false information twice - both on the
original petition, and then again when he appealed the decision to refuse the
petition.

36. Falsification of information in a petition is a very serious offence. The Student
deceived the University in order to take advantage of the University's petition system
which is intended to provide students who experience genuine personal difficulties or
circumstances with a means to obtain extraordinary relief from academic
requirements and deadlines. The petition system relies on students providing
truthful statements about their personal circumstances, as it is not possible for the
University to investigate all of these statements. By submitting false information in
his personal statements, the Student breached his relationship of trust with the
University and undermined the integrity of the petition system.

37. The Tribunal heard a great deal from both the Student and the University regarding
a subsequent statement he made to Dr. Ford in 2015 that "I found out sometime
before August 15, 2012 that one of my cousins died due to family problems. I was
unable to concentrate and study for the CHM 139 exam on August 15 and had a
mental breakdown". The Student adamantly denied that his statement to Dr. Ford
was false or that it was inconsistent with the statements in his ASF. On the final day
of the hearing, the Student sought to admit in evidence an email from his previous
law student representative dated November 3, 2017 containing her opinion as to
whether the ASF stated that the Student lied as to whether his cousin had died. The
18

Tribunal did not admit this email into evidence. The Tribunal held it was improper
opinion on an issue of marginal relevance, was filed too late, was unverified, and
referred to only part of the ASF. The Student did not accept the Tribunal's ruling and
left the Hearing without making any further submissions shortly thereafter.

38. The Student's testimony on this issue was very difficult to follow, self-contradictory,
and did not make logical sense. However, this entire line of evidence is also largely
irrelevant to our decision on sanction. Whether or not the Student subsequently lied
to Dr. Ford about the reasons he sought the petition, or whether there is an
inconsistency between the ASF and the statement to Dr. Ford, is not the issue in this
proceeding. What is at issue is that he lied to the University in his personal
statements about the reasons for seeking the petition and appeal, and that is not in
dispute. He has admitted to those false statements in the ASF.

39. The Student also submitted to us that the offences were less serious because he did
not commit them intentionally. He stated that the fact that he disputed the grades
given on a number of the plagiarized essays before the plagiarism was discovered
showed that he did not appreciate that the essays contained plagiarism. He also
argued that the withdrawal of certain charges by the University which included
allegations of "knowingly" committing offences meant that he had not committed the
remaining charges intentionally.

40. The Tribunal does not accept these arguments. "Knowing" under the Code of
Behaviour in connection with an offence means either that the Student knew or that
he ought reasonably to have known something. Here, the Student admitted in the
ASF that he "knowingly" committed the offences to which he pied guilty, and the
charges to which he pied guilty all indicate that they were "knowingly" committed.
The withdrawal of other charges is irrelevant. The evidence before us also
demonstrates that he knew or ought to have known that his conduct constituted an
offence. He received general warnings about plagiarism in his courses. In addition,
he received individual warnings and advice from Professor Britton after his prior
19

offences about avoiding plagiarism and the need to submit accurate information to
obtain relief from academic requirements. It is evident that the Student either knew
or ought reasonably to have known the facts underlying all of the offences to which
he pleaded guilty. Finally, while it is true that the Student appealed the grades he
had received in connection with certain of the plagiarized essays, thereby bringing
additional scrutiny to those essays, this fact does not in our view contradict the
admitted facts in the ASF or indicate that he did not "knowingly" plagiarise. The
evidence and submissions before us indicated that the Student repeatedly and
persistently disputed grades that he felt were too low or unfair, including raising this
before the Tribunal, even after being advised that grade disputes were not relevant
to this proceeding. We do not think that undiscovered plagiarism would have
necessarily deterred the Student from appealing a grade where he was unhappy
with the grade received.

c) Detriment to the University Occasioned by the Offences

41. Honesty and fairness are at the core of the teaching and learning relationship
between student and University. Cheating, dishonesty and misrepresentation by a
student in relation to academic work submitted for credit, or in relation to personal
statements submitted to obtain relief from academic requirements, undermine the
University's ability to ensure that academic achievement is based on respect for the
aims of education, and are contrary to fundamental ethical principles that
characterize the pursuit and transmission of knowledge in the University. This
misconduct causes harm to the entire University community, including other
students of the University whose academic achievements are premised on the
fairness of evaluations and who may need to rely on a fair petition system.

d) The Need to Deter Others

20

42. It is important to deter other students from committing offences like those committed
by the Student. Plagiarism is a widespread concern for the University. The
University community should know that plagiarism is subject to a strong sanction, in
order to deter others from seeking to gain an academic advantage through
presenting the work of others as their own. Where the plagiarism involves a
purchased essay, the need to deter others is even more acute: there are many
commercial services available to students of the University, like that provided by Mr.
Iqbal, that sell individual, tailored essays and advertise that they can be passed off
as the student's own work with little chance of detection.

43. It is similarly important to deter students from submitting false information in
personal statements accompanying petitions and appeals for relief from academic
requirements. Petitions are widely relied on by many students with genuine needs.
Petitions are largely based on the "honour system", and therefore a strong sanction
is required where dishonesty has been found so that all students are aware that
there will be serious consequences for undermining the integrity of this system.

e) Likelihood of a Repetition of the Offence

44. The large number of incidents of misconduct, the fact that these incidents were
committed shortly after the Student had already been warned and disciplined for
prior offences of plagiarism and that they were committed while the Student was
under a transcript notation for the prior offences, are strong factors which indicate
that there is a significant likelihood that the Student is likely to repeat the offences.

45. Particularly relevant is the fact that the Student submitted a falsified personal
statement in his petition (Charge 1) on September 17, 2012, which is only ten days
after his meeting with Professor Britten to discuss these prior offences and only five
days after receiving two disciplinary letters with strong warnings about this prior
academic misconduct. So the Student not only ignored general information about
plagiarism through course material and syllabuses and lectures, he also ignored
21

specific advice and warnings from Professor Britton, including advice about the
supporting documentation necessary for medical illness notes. The fact that the
Student submitted false personal information to the University such a short time after
this prior disciplinary action, and committed new acts of plagiarism in the two
academic terms that followed, indicates that the Student did not learn from his past
mistakes, did not take advantage of any of the warnings or minor sanctions he had
previously received and instead was prepared to continue to breach the University's
Code of Behavior to obtain academic advantage.

46.Also relevant is the fact that the Student committed two prior offences and eight
additional offences in rapid succession over the course of 3 academic terms. This is
a very large number of offences in a short period of time.

47. On the other hand, the Student points out that he has not committed any further
offences since April 2, 2013. He has completed a total of 8 credits since that date as
of Winter 2016 and currently has a total of 10.5 credits. The Student states that now
that he is receiving appropriate accommodations for his learning disabilities, he is no
longer committing misconduct, and there is no likelihood that he will do so in the
future.

48. We do not accept that the Student's misconduct relates to the absence of
accommodations by the University. As outlined in further detail below, the Student's
educational psychologist Dr. Ford did not think there was any connection between
the Student's learning disabilities and his acts of misconduct. The fact that the
Student currently has certain accommodations does not therefore make it less likely
that he will commit offences in the future. We further note that the Student has been
subject to this Tribunal process since July 2013, and this may be an alternative
reason for him not committing further offences since April 2013.

49. On balance, the fact that the Student has completed eight credits over four years
without further academic misconduct is a factor that points away from the likelihood
22

of repetition, although we do not consider it a strong countervailing factor compared
to the other factors that point to a real risk that the Student will continue to disregard
the University's rules in the future.

f) Extenuating Factors Surrounding the Commission of the Offence - Mitigating
Factors

50. The Student advanced a number of mitigating factors that he urged this Tribunal to
consider in determining the appropriate sanction for the offences he committed. The
most significant mitigating factor that he relied on related to his mental health
conditions and learning disabilities. The Student's overall argument can be
summarized as follows: He suffered from mental health and learning disabilities
during the 2012-2013 period when he committed these acts of misconduct. These
disabilities were at that time undiagnosed and untreated. Because the University
failed to provide him with accommodations for his learning disabilities during this
period, his unaddressed learning disabilities caused him to be "at a disadvantage"
academically during these first two years, and he did not therefore have a fair and
equal opportunity for academic success. This explains why he committed the
misconduct. He submits that sanctioning him for misconduct would "indirectly be
punishing me for the symptoms of my disabilities".

i) Medical and Psychiatric Evidence re Mental Health Disabilities
51. The Student submitted a Consultation Note dated April 22, 2016 from Dr. Leah
Smith, on behalf of Dr. Daniel Greben and an Emergency Multi-disciplinary
Assessment Note dated April 13, 2016 by Dr. Kathleen Broad of CAMH. These
doctors saw the Student in April, 2016. None of the physicians referred to in these
documents testified at the hearing.

52. The Student relied on these documents as a basis for the Tribunal to take into
account as a mitigating factor that he has a number of mental health conditions,

23

including bipolar disorder, major depressive disorder and anxiety, and that these
were untreated and operating at the time of the misconduct, and resulted in him
being unable to manage anxiety and depression in an academic setting.

53.As the Tribunal did not hear from any of the physicians referred to in these
documents and there was no opportunity to question the authors, we approach this
evidence with caution. We note that the April 22, 2016 Note reports that the Student
was previously diagnosed with bipolar disorder (February 24, 2016) and a learning
disability including symptoms of ADHD and anxiety (October 2015). The
Consultation Note gives a provisional diagnosis of major depressive disorder ("long
standing untreated depression with comorbid symptoms of anxiety") and disagrees
with the earlier diagnosis of bipolar disorder.

54. We accept that the Student received this provisional diagnosis in April 2016, and
that depression can be a chronic condition, but the evidence before us is insufficient
to conclude that the Student was therefore suffering from depression and anxiety at
the time of the commission of the offences in 2012 and 2013. The Student testified
that he was depressed and anxious during this period, and the 2016 Notes record
that the Student reported to the CAMH physicians in 2016 that his symptoms of
depression either began or worsened when he started University. There are no
contemporaneous medical records to support the timing of the onset of these
symptoms. However, the Student has provided his Student Medical Certificates for
the period of 2012-2013 which do not indicate that the Student sought assistance
during this period for symptoms of anxiety or depression. The Certificates are for
illnesses such as colds and stomach flu. The Certificates we have reviewed record
complaints of anxiety and /or depression starting in 2014, one year after the
commission of the offences.

55. We also have a concern about the reliability of the Student's statement to the CAMH
physicians in 2016 regarding the timing of the onset of his symptoms. The 2016
Consultation Note reports that the Student planned to use the physician's
24

assessment note as evidence before this Tribunal. The Student's April 2016 CAMH
assessment resulted from the Student's behaviour after he called 911 from outside
the hearing room when he was denied an adjournment by this Tribunal. The notes
of the April 13, 2016 assessment state that the Student wanted "a copy of this
assessment as he 'wants to be taken seriously' by staff at University of Toronto".
While this does not mean that the Student misrepresented the timing of the onset of
his symptoms when speaking to the doctors, it does mean that the Student was
aware that he was creating evidence for this proceeding when he provided
information to them, and we therefore give this evidence less weight.

56. In the end, the evidence before us does not establish that the mental health issues
the Student was diagnosed with in 2016 were also present in 2012-2013 when the
offences were committed. In any event, even if the Student were suffering from
anxiety and depression at the time, there is no evidence before us that would link the
Student's mental health circumstances at that time with the commission of the
offences. There is, for example, no evidence that would suggest that the Student's
anxiety or depression is an explanation or excuse for purchasing an essay, for
submitting other plagiarized course work or for making falsified personal statements.

ii) Psychological Evidence Regarding Learning Disabilities

57. The Student was diagnosed with Specific Learning Disorders (i.e. learning
disabilities) in late 2015 by Dr. William Ford, an educational psychologist who
testified at this hearing. The Student was originally referred to Dr. Ford by the Office
of Accessibility Services. Dr. Ford conducted a Psychoeducational Assessment in
August and September, 2015, and prepared a Diagnostic Report dated October 20,
2015, for the purpose of determining the Student's eligibility for Accessibility
Services at the University. The Diagnostic Report stated that the Student had
"specific learning disorders" comprised of a "moderate impairment in reading speed
for comprehension under timed conditions" and a "mild impairment in the clarity and

25

organization of written expression".

58. Dr. Ford confirmed in his testimony that the Background section of the Report, which
states that the Student had episodes of anxiety and depression since starting his
university studies, was based solely on information from the Student. Again,
because this is unverified information from the Student after these proceedings were
underway, and because Dr. Ford was not assessing or treating the Student for
anxiety or depression, we give it little weight.

59. In addition to the Report, Dr. Ford wrote a letter dated September 24, 2015, at the
Student's request, for use in evidence in this proceeding. The letter stated that "In
my professional opinion, the cumulative impact of [the Student's] learning challenges
appear to be the source of his ongoing struggle maintaining his course work and the
academic challenges which have resulted [sic] the issues leading to the current
appeal."

60. In his testimony before us, Dr. Ford significantly qualified this statement, and
clarified that in his opinion there is no causal link between the Student's learning
difficulties and his admitted academic misconduct.

61. What became clear during the cross-examination is that Dr. Ford had a very limited
and in some respects erroneous understanding of the Student's circumstances. He
relied on unverified statements made to him by the Student, and had no knowledge
of many of the facts the Student has admitted to in these proceedings. He did not
see the Student during the relevant period of time during which the offences
occurred.

62. Dr. Ford acknowledged that he did not have any information at the time he prepared
the Psychological Assessment of the charges facing the Student or any of the
evidence relied on by the University in support of those charges. The Student had
advised Dr. Ford that he failed two courses in the Fall of 2011 but did not tell him
26

that his failing mark reflected the fact that he had received a zero in an assignment
in each of those courses for plagiarism. The Student also did not explain to Dr. Ford
that the three classes in 2012-2013 for which he had a "GWR" notation on his
transcript were subject to allegations of academic misconduct. In fact, Dr. Ford
confirmed that the Student did not give him any indication that there were allegations
against him in the 2012-2013 year regarding plagiarism or purchase of an essay.

63. When asked whether there was anything about the Student's learning difficulties that
would relate to submitting a purchased essay, Dr. Ford stated it "would be a very
difficult connection to make". He agreed that neither he nor any professional would
recommend that the rules and standards regarding academic integrity not apply as
an accommodation for the Student's learning difficulties. He further stated "I do not
believe he did this because of any learning disability".

64. In our view, Dr. Ford clearly wished to provide support to the Student who was his
client. He nevertheless also sought to give accurate evidence to the Tribunal on the
issues before it. He forthrightly contradicted propositions put to him by the Student
where he disagreed with them. The Tribunal accords very significant weight to his
testimony before us discounting any link between the Student's learning disabilities
and the academic offences the Student committed.

65. The Student also presented documentary evidence from the Office of Accessibility
Services and from a Speech Language Pathologist describing the academic
accommodations and strategies he currently receives to assist him to study
effectively and efficiently at the University. It is clear that the Student does have
learning disabilities and that he receives accommodations for them. This evidence
does not, however, provide any link between the learning disabilities and the
commission of the offences in 2012-2103.

66. The Tribunal has very carefully considered the evidence and the Student's
submissions regarding whether his disabilities should be considered a mitigating
27

factor in the sanction for the offences before us. The Tribunal accepts that the
Student suffers from anxiety, depression and learning disabilities, and is sympathetic
to the challenges he faces as a result of these conditions. He testified that he is now
regularly seeing health professionals and is working on addressing his anxiety and
learning disabilities. While we encourage the Student in continuing to pursue
appropriate treatment and supports, we have concluded that we do not consider his
disabilities to be a mitigating factor relating to the commission of the academic
offences for the purposes of determining sanction. What is lacking in the evidence
before us is, first, evidence of whether and to what extent the Student suffered from
these conditions at the relevant time in 2012-2013, and second, evidence of any
linkage between the disability and the misconduct that would give a reasonable
explanation of why he did what he did, or make him somehow less culpable for his
conduct.

67. To the extent that the Student suggested that his misconduct was justified because
the University did not provide him with accommodations for his learning disability in
2012-2013, we reject that argument. A lack of accommodations is not a reasonable
excuse for plagiarism, purchasing essays, or falsifying information submitted for
academic advantage. As Dr. Ford said in his testimony, it is not an appropriate
accommodation of a learning disability to recommend that a Student not be required
to meet the standards in the Code.

68. Other mitigating factors identified by the Student were that he signed the ASF (which
is discussed below) and that he has participated in two student volunteer activities at
the University. We do not consider either of these factors to be sufficiently mitigating
to warrant a departure from the normal principles of sanction.

g) Aggravating Factor - Conduct at the Hearing

69. The Tribunal considers as an aggravating factor in this case the manner in which the
Student has conducted himself in this hearing. In a number of instances, the
28

Student failed to treat the process, or this Tribunal, with appropriate respect and
courtesy:

•

on four of the six hearing dates, the Student arrived at the hearing 30
minutes to one hour late, blaming the weather conditions, the transit
system or traffic, or offering no reason;

•

on two hearing dates, the Student arrived unprepared, without hard copies
of his documentary evidence, blaming a broken printer, necessitating a
lengthy break while the Office of Appeals staff photocopied and collated
his evidence;

•

the Student filed a written submission containing inflammatory and
unfounded allegations of "perjury" and "defamation" against discipline
counsel for the University;

•

after persisting in disagreeing with an evidentiary ruling made by the
Tribunal on the final day of the hearing, the Student stated that the
Tribunal was "not honest" and was "rigged".

70. We understand that the hearing process is stressful for the Student and that he may
well have been unfamiliar and frustrated with aspects of the process. However, the
lateness and lack of preparation persisted even after the Student was warned not to
repeat the behaviour. The inflammatory accusations against counsel and the
Tribunal are improper and unacceptable. In our view, these incidents are an
aggravating factor as they demonstrate a lack of respect for the University and its
discipline process and raise a serious concern about the Student's continued
inability to govern himself in accordance with the University's standards, rules and
responsibilities.

29

h) Character of the Person Charged

71. Through the evidence in this proceeding, and through his interactions with the
University and this Tribunal, the Student has been shown to be a person who does
not accept responsibility for his conduct, who deflects blame on others when his
behaviour is challenged, and who has not demonstrated any meaningful insight,
remorse or regret for the offences that are the subject of this proceeding.

72.As examples of his failure to take responsibility and instead blame others, the
Student blamed the University for not referring him earlier to Accessibility Services,
and stated that the lack of accommodation is what resulted in him committing these
academic offences. The Student also blamed the University for not counselling him
to reduce his course load in 2012-2013, and that it was therefore the University's
fault that he was overwhelmed by academic requirements when he committed these
offences. He submitted "the university failed to give me, as a student with
disabilities, the opportunity to succeed. The grades that I received are not an
accurate reflection of my academic abilities because I have always been at a
disadvantage due to the lack of accommodations".

73. The University countered with evidence that the Student had not disclosed any
disability or requested accommodations in 2012-2013 and was in fact resistant to the
Registrar's office's attempts at that time to counsel him to reduce his course load
and drop upper year courses (he initially declined to drop any courses, then
eventually did so but too late to assist him in reducing his workload). To the
University Registrar, the Student's academic difficulties during this period were
explicable by his inappropriate workload for most of the term, his course selection,
and the effects of penalties for his prior offences. In the circumstances, we view the
University's actions as reasonable.

74. The Student also suggested that any inconsistencies between his testimony and the
ASF were result of the fact that he was not provided with accommodations when he
30

signed the ASF in 2016 with his legal representative. However, he had
acknowledged that the legal representative explained the ASF to him verbally, and
that he has had access to accommodation software technology on his computer
since 2015. Further, he did not raise this as an issue until confronted with alleged
inconsistent statements made to Dr. Ford. There is no basis in the evidence before
us to indicate that the Student did not have a reasonable opportunity to review the
ASF due to a lack of accommodation.

75.As one last example, the Student blamed the University for his anxiety because he
was "not being assessed fairly" and was "mistreated" by the professor in NEW 241
Y1 - one of the courses in which he committed misconduct. He told the Tribunal
that another student received a higher participation mark than him although the
Student had received a higher group presentation mark. The Student suggested
that the charges in this course were a "reprisal" for challenging the TA's comments
on the paper. At a meeting with Professor Britton on May 24, 2013, the Student also
suggested that the professor in the course may have changed some of his Event
Reflection. No other evidence was led to support the Student's allegations of
reprisal and falsification by the University, and we consider those allegations to be
unfounded.

76. The Student pointed to signing the ASF as an expression of his insight and remorse,
because he stated that it showed that he was attempting to repair his relationship
with the University. We agree that generally entering into an ASF and plea
agreement can be important signs of insight and responsibility, and of attempting to
reduce the time and expense of a full hearing. However, the ASF and plea
agreement in this case were signed three years after the charges were filed, and
after more than 10 interim orders and five adjournments. Moreover, as set out in
these reasons, during the sanction hearing, the Student sought to qualify and
distance himself from some of the statements he had made in the ASF. His conduct
both before and after the signing of the ASF therefore undermines his argument that
by admitting the facts underlying the offences he appreciated the gravity of his
31

conduct or was seeking to repair his relationship with the University.

77. The Student also pointed to the following statement in his written submission as an
example of remorse: "I am not perfect. I will sometimes make mistakes by accident,
but those mistakes will be more prevalent especially when I was not being
accommodated for my disabilities ... ". This statement is not a genuine expression of
remorse. To the contrary, it negates the intentional conduct that the Student
admitted to by calling it an "accident". It also shifts blame for his conduct to the
University's alleged failure to accommodate.

78. The Student in his oral submissions stated "And I'm clearly, obviously very sorry for
the fact that these offences happened. And of course we know that the charges for
any intentionality or academic advantage were dropped ... " This is the only
expression of apology the Student made in this hearing, and it was attached to a
statement incorrectly asserting that the University withdrew allegations that he
"intentionally" committed the offences.

79. The Tribunal concludes that the Student has not demonstrated any genuine insight,
regret or remorse about the offences that are the subject of this proceeding.

i) Relevant Cases Regarding Sanction

80. The University relied on the Discipline Appeals Board decision in C., H. and K.
(Case No. 596, 597, 598, November 23, 2011) which dealt with the appropriate
sanction for a purchased essay. In that case, all three students pleaded guilty to
plagiarism. They all admitted that they submitted a purchased essay for academic
credit. They also signed an ASF that admitted that they had previously committed
two prior academic offences. One of the students also admitted to a third prior
offence, which was that she had previously submitted a purchased essay. The
Appeals Board overturned the Tribunal's sanction of a 5 year suspension and

32

instead recommended expulsion.

81. In that case, the Appeals Board indicated that, as a starting point and working
assumption, expulsion is the sanction that is best commensurate with the gravity of
the offence of a purchased plagiarized essay. Two of the sentencing principles detriment the University occasioned by the offence of purchasing essays, and the
need to deter others from committing a similar offence - should be paramount over
all others. If expulsion is not the result in a particular case then it would be in the
"rarest of alternatives that something less than a five year suspension would be
imposed" . There is no rule, however, and a consideration of all the facts and the
other criteria will determine whether expulsion is appropriate in the particular case:

Under what circumstance was the essay purchased and submitted. What
degree of intent and deliberation was involved. What recognition that the
conduct was grave and wrong can be seen in the student. Was anyone else
involved. Were there influences that can legitimately influence the penalty.
What were the subsequent events - did the student admit guilt or attempt to
continue the fraud. Is there anything particularly egregious or saving about
the case or are there other facts that may ameliorate what is otherwise
conduct to be condemned .... Has the student learned anything from the
entire matter. Are there true expressions of remorse, regret and apology,
although these even if accepted will rarely blunt the force of the offence itself,
Are there extenuating circumstances and can these be seen to be relevant to
the ultimate sanction .... Of course, there is the issue of previous academic
offences. If there is none, and an otherwise positive record, perhaps
expulsion will not be the result, as it was not in P[.] and H[.]. If there are one
or more, then, whatever their nature, this is a powerful indication that
expulsion may well be warranted.

82. C., H., K. relied on the earlier cases of P. (Case No. 601, March 8, 2011) and H.
(Case No. 602, May 6, 2011), in which the students pied guilty to submitting a
purchased essay but had no prior offences. In both of these cases, the panel
ordered a five year suspension. In both, the panels of the Tribunal indicated that had
there been evidence of prior offences, the panel would have recommended

33

expulsion.

83. The University also brought to our attention the S.K (Case No. 732, March 11, 2014)
decision, in which a student's proven longstanding anxiety and depression, her
seeking of treatment after the offence, her complete cooperation with the University
and her genuine remorse were all found to relevant in determining that a lesser
penalty was appropriate. However, the Tribunal also found that her medical
condition neither excused nor justified her unacceptable conduct. In our view, the
circumstances before us are quite different than in S.K. As set out above, we do
not have evidence of a temporal or a causal link between the disability and the
misconduct. The Student has only cooperated with the University to a limited extent.
He has not shown genuine insight, responsibility or remorse. In addition, there are a
number of aggravating factors in the case before us.
C. Decision On Sanction
84. We have carefully reviewed the evidence, weighed the factors, and considered the
approach taken in other cases. We have come to the determination that the
appropriate sanction in the all of the individual circumstances of this case includes a
recommendation that the Student be expelled from the University.

85. In coming to this determination, we consider of paramount importance the deliberate
and extremely serious nature of the multiple acts of misconduct before us including a
purchased essay, the harm to the University and the need to deter others. Our
determination of the appropriate sanction does not turn, however only on the facts of
the purchased essay. Even without considering the particularly egregious nature of
a purchased essay, we consider expulsion to be appropriate for the eight serious
offences before us.

86. We find that there are insufficient mitigating factors in this case that would make a
lesser sanction appropriate for the Student. While we acknowledge that the Student
has been diagnosed with mental health conditions and learning disabilities, and that
34

in some circumstances this could be a mitigating factor on sanction, we conclude it
is not so in this case for the reasons set out above. The evidence before us has
failed to establish that these disabilities had any temporal or causal link to or were a
justification, explanation or excuse for the commission by the Student of the
offences.

87. Given the serious impact on a student of the sanction of expulsion, we have
considered whether a suspension of 5 years in lieu of expulsion would be an
appropriate sanction, but have concluded that it would not. A suspension would not
sufficiently address the seriousness of the offences, the need for deterrence and the
harm occasioned to the University. It would continue the relationship between the
Student and the University where the Student has repeatedly breached the trust
inherent in that relationship, has persisted in his misconduct despite prior warnings,
and has ignored the rules and processes of the University where he disagrees with
them. We also consider to be important to the question of sanction that the Student
has failed to demonstrate genuine insight or remorse, and continues to deflect
responsibility and blame the University and others for his misconduct.

D. Order

88. We therefore Order:

(a) That the Student is guilty of two counts of the academic offence of providing
falsified evidence, contrary to Section B.1.1 (a) of the Code

(b) That the Student is guilty of six counts of the academic offence of plagiarism,
contrary to section B.I.1 (d) of the Code

(c) That the following sanctions shall be imposed on the Student:

35

(i)

final grade of zero in each of the courses CHM 139, NEW 241, NFS 284
and UNI 209

(ii)

an order that the Student be immediately suspended from the University
for up to 5 years from the date of this Decision,

(iii)

an order that the Tribunal recommend to the President of the University
that he recommend to the Governing Council that the Student be expelled
from the University, and

(iv)

an order that the case be reported to the Provost for publication with the
Student's name withheld.

Dated at Toronto, this

/ / n,

day of

Q t(r'. ( , 2017
I

Sarah Kraii)e(, Co-Chair

36

APPENDIX A
UNIVERSITY O~ ~
RE: ~ · -

CHARG ES

Note: Wherever in the Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters, 1995 ("Code") an offence is
described as depending on "knowing", the offence shall likewise be deemed to have been
committed if the person ought reasonably to have known .

A.

CHM 139 - Charges and parlicu/ars

1.

On or about September 17, 2012, you knowingly falsified evidence required by the

University of Toronto, namely, a Personal Statement, which you submitted to the Committee
on Standing of the Faculty of Arts and Science ("Committee") in support of a request for
academic accommodation, in course CHM 139, contrary to Section B.1.1 (a) of the Code.
2.

On or about December 2, 2012 , you knowingly falsified evidence required by the

University of Toronto, namely, a Personal Statement, which you submitted in support of an
appeal from the decision denying your request for academic accommodation in course CHM
139, contrary to Section B.1.1 (a) of the Code .
3.

In addition to or in the alternative to each of the charges above, you knowingly engaged

in a form of cheating , academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or misrepresentation not
otherwise described in order to obtain academic credit or other academic advantage of any
kind by submitting false information to the University of Toronto in support of various forms of
academic accommodation or relief, contrary to Section B.l.3(b) of the Code.
The particulars for these charges are as follows :
(a)

At all material times you were a student at the University of Toronto.

2

(b)

In September 2012, you submitted a petition seeking late withdrawal from CHM
139. In support of this petition you submitted a Personal Statement of the
Committee on Standing. You knew that the Personal Statement that you
submitted contained false statements.

(c)

This petition was denied and, on December 2, 2012, you appealed this decision.
You provided a personal statement in support of your appeal. You knew that this
statement contained false statements, including that one of your relatives had
died before you wrote your exam on August 15, 2012.

(d)

You knowingly submitted all of the statements described above understanding
that the University of Toronto required such statements to be presented in order
to obtain the academic accommodation you sought.

(e)

You knowingly submitted all of the statements described above with the intention
that the University of Toronto rely on them in considering whether or not to
provide you with the academic accommodations you requested.

(f)

You knowingly submitted these falsified documents and other false information in
an attempt to obtain an academic advantage.

B.

NEW 241 - Charges and particulars

4.

On or about December 4, 2012, you knowingly represented as your own an idea or

expression of an idea, and/or the work of another in an essay, which you submitted for
academic credit in NEW 241, contrary to section B.1.1 (d) of the Code.

3

5.

On or about April 2, 2013, you knowingly represented as your own an idea or

expression of an idea, and/or the work of another in an Event Reflection, which you submitted
for academic credit in NEW 241, contrary to section B.1.1 (d) of the Code.
6.

In the alternative, on or about December 4, 2012 and April 2, 2013, you knowingly

engaged in a form of cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or misrepresentation
not otherwise described in the Code in order to obtain academic credit or other academic
advantage of any kind in connection with the essay and the Event Reflection, which you
submitted for academic credit in the Course, contrary to section B.l.3(b) of the Code.
Particulars of these charges are as follows:
(a)

In Fall 2012, you registered in Introduction to Disability Studies (NEW 241 ),
which was taught by Eliza Chandler and Anne McGuire.

(b)

On December 4, 2012, you submitted an essay titled "Claiming Disability as an
Identity is Important to Disrupt Notions of Normalcy and Abnormalcy." Portions of
this essay were taken verbatim or nearly verbatim from other sources. You did
not properly attribute or reference these passages. You did not include the
source of one of these passages in the bibliography for this essay.

(c)

You were also required to attend a disability community cultural event and to
submit a short reflection on the event that drew on and engaged with one or
more of the themes discussed in the class. On or about April 2, 2013 , you
submitted your event reflection, which was titled "Open Talk about Students" A
significant part of your event reflection was taken verbatim or nearly verbatim

4

from an editorial written by Eliza Chandler. You did not properly reference these
passages. You did not include Ms. Chandler's article in the bibliography for your
event recollection.
(d)

With respect to both submissions described above, you knowingly represented
the work of another as your own work. You knowingly included in each
submission ideas and expressions that were not your own, but were the ideas
and expressions of others, which you did not acknowledge.

(e)

For the purposes of obtaining academic credit and/or other academic advantage,
you knowingly committed plagiarism in the assignment.

C.

NFS 28~ Charges and particulars

7.

On or about February 20, 2013, you knowingly represented as your own an idea or

expression of an idea, and/or the work of another in Assignment 1, which you submitted for
academic credit in NFS 284 Basic Human Nutrition, contrary to section B.1.1 (d) of the Code.
8.

On or about March 13, 2013, you knowingly represented as your own an idea or

expression of an idea, and/or the work of another in Assignment 2, which you submitted for
academic credit in NFS 284, contrary to section B.1.1 (d) of the Code.
9.

On or about March 13, 2013, you knowingly obtained unauthorized assistance in

connection with Assignment 2, which you submitted for academic credit in NFS 284, contrary
to section B.1.1 (b) of the Code .
10.

In the alternative to each of charges 7 to 9, you knowingly eng aged in a form of

cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or misrepresentation not otherwise

5

described in the Code in order to obtain academic credit or other academic advantage of any
kind in connection with the assignments you submitted for academic credit in NFS 284,
contrary to section B.l.3(b) of the Code.
Particulars of these charges are as follows
(a)

Students in NFS 284 were required to submit several assignments, including
Assignment 1, of which was worth 19% of the final grade in the course, and
Assignment 2, which was worth 18% of the final grade.

(b)

On or about February 20, 2013, you submitted Assignment 1. Portions of this
essay were taken verbatim or nearly verbatim from other sources. You did not
properly attribute or reference these passages. You did not include the source of
some or all of these passages in the bibliography for Assignment 1.

(c)

On or about March 13, 2013, you submitted Assignment 2. You knowingly
received unauthorized assistance from Muhamed Aamir Iqbal, or other persons
unknown, when the assignment was written.

(d)

You purchased the document you submitted as Assignment 2 from Mr. Iqbal, or
persons unknown, and submitted it without doing any meaningful academic work
on it.

(e)

With respect to both submissions described above, you knowingly represented
the work of another as your own work. You knowingly included ideas and
expressions that were not your own, but were the ideas and expressions of
others, which you did not acknowledge. For the purposes of obtaining academic

6

credit and/or other academic advantage, you knowing ly committed plagiarism in
each assignment.

D.

UNI 209 - Charges and particulars

11.

On or about November 5, 2012, you knowingly represented as your own an idea or

expression of an idea, and/or the work of another in "Assignment 2," which you submitted for
academic credit in UNI 209 Introduction to Health: Determinants of Health & Health Care,
contrary to section B.1.1 (d) of the Code.

12.

On or about December 10, 2012, you knowingly represented as your own an idea or

expression of an idea, and/or the work of another in "Assignment 3," which you submitted for
academic credit in UNI 209, contrary to section B.1.1 (d) of the Code.

13.

In the alternative to each of charges 11 and 12, you knowingly engaged in a form of

cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or misrepresentation not otherwise
described in the Code in order to obtain academic credit or other academic advantage of any
kind in connection an essay you submitted for academic credit in UNI 209, contrary to section
B.l.3(b) of the Code.

Particulars of these charges are as follows :

(a)

Students in UNI 209 were required to submit several assignments including
Assignment 2, which was worth 35% of the final grade in the course, and
Assignment 3, which was worth 50% of the final grade.

7

(b)

On or about November 5, 2012, you submitted Assignment 2. Portions of your
submission were taken verbatim or nearly verbatim from other sources. You did
not properly attribute or reference these passages.

(c)

On or about December 10, 2012, you submitted Assignment 3. Portions of your
submission were taken verbatim or nearly verbatim from other sources. You did
not properly attribute or reference these passages at least one of, which you did
not include in the bibliography for this essay.

(d)

With respect to both assignments, you knowingly represented the work of
another as your own work. You knowingly included ideas and expressions that
were not your own, but were the ideas and expressions of others, which you did
not acknowledge. For the purposes of obtaining academic credit and/or other
academic advantage, you knowingly committed plagiarism in each assignment.

