Case 1391

DATE:

   December 16, 2022

PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v. M.T. ("the Student")

HEARING DATE:

   October 25, 2022, via Zoom

PANEL MEMBERS:

   Ira Parghi, Chair
   Professor Seamus Ross, Faculty Panel Member
   Sterling Mancuso, Student Panel Member

APPEARANCES:

   William Webb, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg
   Rothstein LLP
   Justin Nathens, Downtown Legal Services
   The Student

HEARING SECRETARY:

   Christopher Lang, Director, Office of Appeals, Discipline and Faculty
   Grievances

   The Student was charged under section B.i.1(d) of the Code with three
   counts of knowingly representing as their own an idea or expression of
   an idea or the work of another in relation to two midterm tests and one
   final exam. In the alternative, the Student was also charged under
   section B.i.1(b) of the Code with three counts of knowingly possessing
   an aid or aids or obtaining unauthorized assistance. In the further
   alternative, the Student was charged with three counts of knowingly
   engaging in a form of cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct,
   fraud or misrepresentation not otherwise described in the Code to
   obtain academic credit or other academic advantage of any kind, under
   section B.i.3(b) of the Code.

   The parties submitted a Joint Book of Documents, which included an
   Agreed Statement of Facts (‚ASF‚) containing the Student‚s admission
   that they had plagiarized and obtained unauthorized assistance in
   relation to the midterm tests and final exam in two different courses.
   The Panel, therefore, accepted the Student‚s guilty plea in respect of
   the three counts of the offence under section B.i.1(d) of the Code. The
   University withdrew the remaining charges.

   In determining sanction, the Panel considered the parties‚ Agreed
   Statement of Facts on Penalty, which included evidence regarding the
   Student‚s prior offence for which they had received a warning. The
   Panel stated that the Student‚s plagiarism was deliberate and
   extensive. It observed that this type of offence poses a grave threat
   to the integrity of the University‚s processes for evaluating students,
   is profoundly unfair to other students, and jeopardizes the
   University‚s reputation. The Panel raised concerns about possible
   future repetition. In its view, a significant period of suspension was,
   therefore, appropriate. The Panel also noted mitigating factors against
   a more severe penalty. The Student had accepted responsibility for, and
   demonstrated insight into, their behaviour by pleading guilty early in
   the process. They had cooperated with the University‚s academic
   discipline process, including by attending the hearing. Their affidavit
   evidence articulated their regret and remorse for their actions and
   indicated that they had been seeking help for their mental health
   issues. At the time they committed the offences, the Student was
   experiencing personal difficulties due to the COVID pandemic, including
   mental health issues. The Panel determined that the proposed JSP fell
   within the well-defined range of penalties established by the
   jurisprudence for similar cases. The Panel also determined that, in all
   of the circumstances, the appropriate penalty was the one submitted by
   the parties in the JSP.

   The Panel imposed the following sanctions: a grade of zero in two
   courses; a suspension of three years and eight months; a five-year
   notation on the Student's transcript; and a report to the Provost for
   publication .
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/30827
