Cases 596, 597 & 598 - Appeal

   [1]Cases 596, 596, 598

DATE:

   November 23, 2011

PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v C., H., and K.

Hearing Date(s):

   October 24, 2011

Panel Members:

   Ronald G. Slaght, Chair
   Elizabeth Peter, Faculty Member
   Kenneth Davy, Student Member
   Sabrina Tang, Student Member

Appearances:

   Robert Centa for the Appellant
   Joy-Ann Cohen for the Respondents, C. and K.
   Philip Trotter for the Respondent, H.
   Appeal by the University from a Tribunal decision in which the Students
   were each found guilty of purchasing an essay, contrary to s. B.i.1(d)
   of the Code, and sentenced to a five-year suspension. The University
   sought a recommendation that each Student be expelled. The Board
   started the analysis by stating that expulsion should be considered as
   a likely, or the most likely, sanction in purchased essay cases. On the
   issue of deference, the Board stated that although the language of s.
   E.7(c) of the Code allowed it to simply substitute its own view of the
   sanction for whatever reason, the Board in previous decisions showed
   some deference, basing determinations on a principled analysis. The
   Board stated that its role would involve a two-step process: (1)
   determining whether the Panel has made a reversible errors of law or
   fact; and (2) if so, whether those errors should result in a variation
   of the penalty imposed.
   (1) The Board held that the majority of the Panel made significant
   errors in material findings of fact and characterization of the
   evidence in concluding that the Students were victims of commercial
   companies such as the Essay Place. The Board stated that the Students
   did not portray themselves as victims and the evidence showed rather
   that their concerns were more with the high dollar cost of purchasing
   the essays. In addressing the majorityâs finding that the Students
   purchased the essays as a last resort, the Board stated that it could
   not endorse any suggestion that purchasing essays could be justified.
   The Board also found that the majority erred in taking a benign view of
   the previous offences committed by the Students: the majority failed to
   appreciate that within two months of their meeting with the Dean
   regarding their previous offence, the Students were conspiring together
   to commit much more serious offences, in the full realization that what
   they were doing was wrong. This was inconsistent with the majorityâs
   finding that there was a continuum of expression of remorse. It should
   count that the Students committed a further offence after cheating,
   being caught, expressing remorse and apologizing. However, the fact
   that the earlier offences were not identical to the last offence should
   have no bearing in trying to measure their importance in the overall
   context of deciding a sanction for the last offence. The Board further
   found that the majority erred by giving too much weight in the
   Studentsâ demeanor during the hearing and their expressions of shame,
   regret, and remorse. The demeanor and such expressions should not be
   elevated to that degree of significance when measured against other
   sentencing factors.
   (2) The Board stated that while the Tribunal should approach sentencing
   in purchased essay cases with a working assumption that expulsion was
   the sanction best commensurate with the gravity of the offence, the
   result in each case would depend on multitude of factors. These factors
   include the circumstances under which the essay was purchased and
   submitted; the degree of intent and deliberation; recognition by the
   student that the conduct was grave and wrong; involvement of other
   people; influences that can legitimately influence the penalty;
   subsequent events; and egregious or ameliorating factors. Although
   whether the student learned from the entire matter or true expressions
   of remorse are relevant, these will rarely blunt the force of the
   offence. On the issue of previous offences, the Board stated that when
   there was none, expulsion may not be the result. When there were one or
   more, whatever their nature, it would be a powerful indication that
   expulsion may be warranted. Moreover, when the previous offence
   involved purchasing and submitted an essay, it would be most unusual
   for the student to escape expulsion. The Board emphasized, however,
   that previous offences did not have to be similar; they served as
   indications of continuing dishonest motive and a failure to recognize
   and adhere to core University values. The Board further stated that in
   balancing the factors in purchased essay cases, two sentencing
   principles should be paramount over the others: the detriment to the
   University and the need for deterrence. Accordingly, the Board
   concluded that expulsion was the appropriate penalty for the Students.
   On the issue of the new affidavit submitted by H., the Board stated
   that it was not much different from her earlier expressions of regret
   and there would need to have been something materially more dramatic to
   overcome the overwhelming facts that otherwise point to expulsion.
   Appeal allowed.
   [2]View Case

References

   1. https://live-the-office-of-the-governing-council.pantheonsite.io/media/12919
   2. file:///media/13026
