THE DISCIPLINE APPEALS BOARD OF THE UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
IN THE MATTER OF charges of academic dishonesty
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic
Matters, 1995
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Act, 1971 1 S.O. 197 l, C.56 as amended
S.O. 1978, C.88
BETWEEN:
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
-AND-

Hearing Date: October 24, 2011
Members of the Panel:
Ronald G. Slaght, Q.C., Chair

Elizabeth Peter, Faculty Panel Member
Kenneth Davy, Student Panel Member
Sabrina Tang, Student Panel Member
Counsel:
Robert Centa for the Appellant, Provost of the University of Toronto

Joy-Ann Cohen for the Respondents, SIIIIII
Philip Trottel' for the Respondent,

ca and !vii KIii KIii

1111~~

REASONS ON APPEAL
INTRODUCTION

1.

This matter comes before this panel of the Discipline Appeals Board of the University

Tribunal on appeal by the Provost from the penalty imposed by a majority of a panel of the
Tribunal, at a hearing held on June 14, 2010.

2.

On consent of the students, Ms.

ell Ms. KIi and Ms. i-a, their cases had been heard

together on that date and also by agreement the Tribunal was pennitted to admit the evidence
heard in one proceeding in the other two proceedings. 1
3.

At the hearing, each of the students pleaded guilty to having conunitted plagiarism,

contrary to s. B. l . l (d) of the Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters ("the Code").
4.

Each student admitted that the three had planned together to purchase essays and then

submit the purchased essays in a course in which they were all enrolled, EAS 333 Modernism
and Colonial Korea, taught by Professol' Janet Poole ("the Course"). The students each admitted
to having purchased an essay which each did submit on March 3, 2010 for academic credit in the
Course.
5.

The hearing proceeded on an Agreed Statement of Facts. Each student was represented

by a member of Downtown Legal Services. The students were convicted of the offences on the

basis of the admissions in the Agreed Statement of Facts and an Agreed Joint Book of
Documents.
6.

The hearing was therefore mostly concerned with the penalty phase. There was an

Agreed Statement of Facts on Penalty in which each student agreed that she had previously
committed two earlier academic offences. Ms. HIii also admitted that she had purchased and
submitted an essay in a University course in October 2009. All the students gave evidence on
the penalty hearing.

1

Exhibit I, para. 3, Appeal Book, Tab D, pg. 47

-37.

The panel below was divided on the penalty. The majority, Professor Andrea Litvack

and the student member> Sybil Den-ible, imposed a final grade of zero in the course, a five year
suspension, and a notation on the student's academic record and transcript to remain until
graduation. The third member, Chair Julie Hannaford, dissented, and would have recommended
to the President of the University that he reconune1id to Governing Council that the students be
expelled.

8.

The Provost brings this appeal pursuant to section E. 4 (c) o~ the Code and asks this

Appeals Board panel to vary and modify the sanction imposed below and that the Appeals Board

recommend to the President of the University that the President recommend to the Goveming
Council that each student be expelled from the University.
9.

l.

Present in the hearing room for this Appeal were this Appeals Board panel, and counsel

for the parties. Ms.

ell Ms. KIi and Ms.

pm1icipated via video link from South Korea.

JURISDICTION AND PRELIMINARY MATTERS
10.

The Code provides a right of appeal from a sanction decision of a Tribunal Panel to the

Discipline Appeals Board:
An appeal to the Discipline Appeals Board may be taken in the following cases only:

(c)
l l.

by the accused or the Provost, from a sanction imposed at triat.2

The Discipline Appeals Board has wide powers to modify a sanction imposed and may

impose any sanction that it sees fit that the Tribunal panel may have imposed:
2

Code, Section E.4

-4The Discipline Appeals Board shall have power,

(c)

in any other case, to affirm, reverse, quash, vary or modify the verdict, penalty or
sanction appealed from and substitute any verdict penalty or sanction that could
have been given or imposed at trial. 3

12.

Thus the Appeals Board has a very broad jurisdiction. While an appeal does not proceed

as a hearing de novo, as no evidence is led in lhe usual course, the expansive language of this
section of the Code, as has been recognized in Appeals Board decisions over the years, means
the Appeals Board has very broad powers and little obligation to show deference to the Tribunal
below.
13.

CIII, a decision of the Appeals Board in 1976, and long recognized as the leading

decision on sentencing principles, holds that it is appropriate for an Appeals Board panel to vary
a sanction if it believes the sanction imposed below to be wrong.4 Other statements have been
made in the cases over the years. For example, i n ~ the Appeals Board held that a panel
has authority to quash or modify a Tdbunal decision where there are errors of law and significant

enors of fact. 5
14.

A review of Appeals Board cases demonstrates as well that the Board has concern in its

decisions to ensure that there is some order of consistency in sanctions and that like penalties are
imposed for like offences, and that direction is given in that respect.

3

Code, Section E.7

4

call, Provost Book of Authorities, Tab 2, pg. 3

5

. ~ , Provost Book of Authorities, Tab I, para. JO

-515.

In . - , the Board stated that it would modify a sanction if it "concluded that the

sanction imposed in this case is materially inconsistent with the weight of other Tribunal ,md
appeal decisions". 6
MOTIONS

16.

We heard three motions at the outset of this appeal. Mr. Trotter moved on behalf of his

client, Ms. ~ ' for the admission of his client's affidavit, sworn October 6, 2011. The gist of
the affidavit is that, after the events in question, Ms.

I-tll returned to Korea and found

employment. She has attained new levels of maturity and confidence and now understands the
true value of a university education, rather than just responding to parental pressure to obtain a
degree.

She suggests this new level of understanding will stand her well and rule out the

prospect of fttrther cheating, if she is permitted to continue at the University at some point.
17.

Although we had serious doubts about the admissibility of this affidavit, within the test

for the admissibility of new evidence, we did admit the affidavit with the caveat that we expected
the evidence would have little weight in our deliberations.
18.

Ms. Cohen brought two ad hoc motions on behalf of her clients. First, she sought to

introduce evidence from her clients at this hearing about their current circumstances including
their employment, and to have them describe their current states of mind. We dismissed that
motion although, on consent, we agreed to take into our consideration the fact that the two
students are now employed. Jn our view, the time for the presentation of evidence had long

6

Sm•ovic, Provost Book of Authorities, Tab 1, para. 48

-6-

passed, and the marginal relevance of this evidence combined with the late application for its
admissibility were both elements leading to our decision.
19.

Ms. Cohen also sought to have the final submissions at the Tribunal level, which had

been recorded in the transcripts, added to the material before us on this appeal. Ms. Cohen
submitted that it would be of value for us to review the questions and answers that had been
posed and responded to during the course of the argument below. Ms. Cohen disavowed any
suggestion that anything inappropriate had occurred during the course of that argument. We
dismissed that motion.

Argument is not usually received in appeals of administrative law

matters, and we saw no reason to depart from that principle in this case. The appeal is from the
sanction order itself, which was supp01ted by lengthy reasons from both the majority and
minority members, We saw nothing to be gained by adding the submissions to this record.

THE FACTS
20.

The facts giving rise to these offences can be easily stated, and were concisely described

in the two Agreed Statements of Fact put before the Tribunal below.
21.

Each of the respondents enrolled in the Course in the Winter 2010 term. Professor Poole,

in the Course syllabus, clearly described her expectations with respect to plagiarism, and that any
such case would be referred to the authorities in accordance with the Code. The syllabus set out
in some detail particulars of plagiarism. These included the following:
"It is ... an offence if the student knowingly;

-7-

represents as one's own any idea or- expression of an idea or work of another in
any academic work, i.e. to commit plagiarism" 7
22.

The Course required submission of an 8-10 page paper, worth 30% of the final grnde.

The tlu·ee respondents discussed this assignment among themselves in February, 2010, and
decided they would each purchase an essay from an entity called The Essay Place. Internet
advertising from The Essay Place was before the Tribunal. The Essay Place writes custom
essays, among its broad range of services, with prices starting at $28.00 per page. Rush jobs
begin at $32.00 per page.
23.

The Essay Place, without any apparent hint of irony, advises that it takes plagiarism very

seriously, and assures students that plagiarism has no place in its business. Every order from The
Essay Place is 100% original and will never appear anywhel'e else. 8
24.

Each of the students purchased and submitted a purchased essay in satisfaction of the

assignment, each seeking academic credit for these works.

Each admitted that she did 110

meaningful academic work on the essay and the essays were submitted in the same form
received by them from The Essay Place.
25.

We reviewed the papers. Ms. (al submitted a 9 page paper, with her name on the front

page, entitled "Depiction of the City in 1930s Korean Fiction". Ms.

HII submitted a 9 page

paper, under her name, entitled "Nostalgia and Modernity in Korean Fiction of the 1930s", and
Ms. KIii, under her name submitted a 9 page paper, "The city in 1930s Fiction".

7

Syllabus excerpt, Appeal Book, Tab E-8

8

Appeal Book, Tab E-12

-826.

Professor Poole suspected plagiarism and referred the students to the authorities. Ms.

ca

was the first to meet with Professor John Browne, the Dean's Designate for academic

integrity at the Faculty. Ms.

Cal first told Professor Browne that she had written this essay

herself. Ms. (ai was confronted with the metadata embedded in the essay, which revealed that
Michael Thompson, the owne1· of The Essay Place, was listed in the author field of the
document. She then admitted to having purchased the essay.

27.

Ms.~ and Ms. K■ met with Professor Browne on the same day, December 2, 2010,

but after Ms. C - meeting. They admitted they had purchased their essays from The Essay
Place.

28.

All the students expressed remorse and shame throughout the discipline process,

including to Professor Browne and in their evidence at the penalty phase of the hearing. Each
offered explanations and justifications for her motivations and all described the influences that
had led to these purchases.

29.

A good deal of the controversy about the majority decision in this matter arises from the

question: what effect on penalty should flow from the admitted facts that each of the students had
committed two previous academic offences (and Ms. • had admitted to a third, the
previously purchased essay in 2009).
30.

The particulars of each student's two previous offences were contained in the Agreed

Statement of Facts on Penalty. Of note, each student had committed her first offence separately,
but they had committed their second offences together, as with the third.

31.

It is necessary to set out in some detail the nature of the previous offences.

-9-

THE FIRST OFFENCES
32.

Ms.

CIII first offence consisted of her providing, to her then boyfriend, an electronic

copy of another friend's essay which had been submitted in a course, PHY 205, in 2008. Ms.

CIII boyfriend then submitted that essay in virtually unaltered fonn, in the same course, PHY
205, but in 2009.
33.

Ms. Cal admitted to the academic offence of knowingly providing unauthorized

assistance to a student, contrary to section B .1.1 (d) of the Code. She received a censure notation
on her academic record and transcript for a two year period, to end March 24, 201 l. She also
received a letter from Professor Britton, then the Dean's Designate. The letter contained a
warning that Ms.

CIII future academic work must be conducted in accordance with the rules

and regulations of the University, and that "a second offence will be treated more severely".
34.

As to Ms,

HII, in summer 2008 she had been enrolled in ECO 200, and had obtained a

deferral of the first term test, wo11h 25% of the grade, to June 23, 2008.
35.

A fe,,, days before that date, Ms.

J-:al rnquested a further deferral due to a family

emergency and provided the instrnctor with a screen shot of her eTicket, showing her flying from
Toronto to London, England at 11 :00 a.m. on June 23, 2008.
36.

Investigation revealed that the flight was actually scheduled to depart at 11: IO p.m., not

a.m., as the screen shot had shown.
37.

In August 2008, Ms.

BIi admitted to violating the Code by altering the time of the

flight on the electronic itinerary, because she was not prepared to write the test on June 23.

- 10 38.

The Dean's Designate, Professor Solecki, suspended Ms.

I-tlll for six months, from July

1, 2008 until December 31, 2008 and her transcript was mmotated until May 31, 2010. Professor
Solecki's letter to Ms.

I-tlll contained the warning that her future academic work must be

conducted in accordance with the rules and regulations of the University and that " ... any forther
oftence will be treated more severely."

KIi, in fall 2005 Ms. KIi was enrolled in AST 101. In November, she wrote
a mid term exa1nination, wo1th 25% of the final mark. Following an investigation, Ms. Kiili
39.

As for Ms.

admitted that she had permitted a friend to copy her examination answer and that she had
provided her friend with unauthorized assistance during the niid term. The Dean's Designate,
Professor Browne, gave Ms.

KIii a grade of zero on the question she allowed her friend to copy,

and a two year annotation was placed on her academic record, expiring on Octobel' 31, 2007.
40.

Professor Browne's letter to Ms.

KIi contained a warning that" ... a second offence will

be treated more severely."
41.

All the students expressed regret for their actions in committing these first offences.

TI-IB SECOND OFFENCES

42.

In Fall 2009, the respondents were all enrolled in ES 209, a foll year course. In October

they wrote a term test, worth approximately 2% of the final grade in the Course. The three
students, and a fourth, submitted virtually identical answers to the term test.
43.

Investigation ensued and in December 2009, each of the students admitted that she had

committed a second academic offence by copying from each other during the test and they had
each knowingly received unauthorized aid during the test, contrary to section B.1.1 (b) of the

• 11 Code. On December 3, 2009 Professor John Browne, the Dean}s Designate, wrote to each
student to advise each would receive a final grade of zero in ES 209 and a notation on her
academic record and transcript until graduation from the University.
44.

Ms. HIii received an additional penalty, a four month suspension which Professor

Browne agreed to defer until May 1, 2010 to permit Ms. HIii to complete the courses in which
she was then emolled.
45.

Professor Browne wrote to all three students by letters dated December 3, 2009, imposing

these penalties. In each of the letters Professor Browne recorded that the st11dents had regretted
their actions, and had apologized.
46.

Each letter contained the following warning:
Academic offences constitute unacceptable behaviour in the University. This letter also
serves as a warning to you that all of your future academic work must be conducted in
accordance with the rules and regulations of the University, with which, as a senior
student, you should be fully familiar. l remain troubled by the fact that you committed
this offence so late in your academic career, especially when you had been previously
sanctioned by this office. I strongly suggest that you reflect on your academic integrity
goals and how best to achieve them while adhering to the highest standards of academic
integrity.
Finally, while I hope that you have learned from this experience, I must warn you that a
third offence will be treated very severely.9

47.

These offences were dealt with in December 2009. The students were all given fair

warning over the possible consequences of any third offence. The students all expressed regret,

and vowed there would be no repetition. Ms.

HII was vvaiting for the commencement of her

suspension> to begin in May 2010. Ms. CIII had an existing censure still on her academic record

9

Appeal Book, Tabs E-16, E-17 and E-18

- 12 -

from her first offence. All had existing notations on their academic records from the second
offencys.

Notwithstanding all of this, three months to the day from Professor Browne's

December 3, 2009 letters, the students each submitted, on March 3, 20 IO, a purchased. essay for
credit in Professor Poole's Course, following the plan they had hatched together in February,
2010.
EVIDENCE AT THE HEARING

48.

l1i their evidence at the hearing, it was clear that all the students had understood from the

letters they had received and the discussions they had had with the Dean's Designate after the
second offence, the seriousness of the waming they had been given about the consequences of
any third offence. 10
49.

Each of the students gave some troubling evidence at the hearing about their views of the

earlier offences that each had committed. Ms.

ell advised the panel that she had decided it

would be okay to give unauthorized assistance to hei· friends and to receive unauthorized
assistance from them because the test did not seem like a big part of the grade and did not seem
important at the time. 11

10

Transcrip~( p. 59 l.9top. 61, 1.7

Transcript (
Transcript (
11

Transcript,

), p. 74, 1.21-24
), p. 74, 1.21-24

(cal p. 55, 1.25 top. 56, 1.17

- 13 -

50.

Ms. ~ admitted 011 cross-examination that she had cheated on the test because she

didn't think she was going to do very well) because the test was not worth very much and
because she did not think "it was a very big dea1n 12
51.

Ms. KIii admitted that she had done exactly the same thing in the second offence that she

had done on the first: let a friend copy her answers during a test. 13
52.

All agreed that they had expressed remorse, shame and regret for having committed these

second offences.
MAJORITY DECISION ON PENALTY

53.

A review of the majority reasons discloses that the majority fully understood the history

of the students' prior clashes with the principles of honesty and integrity and the core

relationship of trust that exists between students and the University. Fo1· example, the majority
did not miss) and specifically commented upon) the fact that within a couple of months of Ms.

<as meeting with the Dean over her second offence in December 2009, she was meeting with
her fellow students and planning to pmchase an essay, to be delivered on its due date in March
2010. 14
54.

The majority recorded that Ms.

I-.,

for example, had not thought cheating on a test

worth only 2% was a "big deaP' but she had come out of her meeting with the Dean on
December 2, 2009 with the realization that it was a big deal. Notwithstanding all of that, in that

12

Transcript (Itll), p. 74, 1.11 to 1.20

13

Transcript (KIii), p. 87, l. 9 top. 88, I. 8

14

ca - Majorily Reasons, paras. 41-42

- 14 -

same tenn) in October 2009 Ms. I - had submit1ed a purchased essay, and as lo thatt

responded to one of Mr. Centa's questions, that she had "hesitated over the price being charged
for the-essay" but then went ahead and purchased it. 15
55.

As for Ms.

KIi, the majority recited her admission in cross-examination that she had told

the Dean she hadn,t really learned from her first offence and for that reason she committed the
second (cheating on the 2% test); and that she had told the Dean's Designate then that she was
truly sorry and was not going to commit another offence, just what she told the panel at this
hearing. 16
56.

The majority noted in some detail that in the pla1ming stages of their essay purchasing

scheme not only did the students coordinate this together but they admitted to each other that
each of them had two prior offences and that each one of them knew that what they were doing
was wrong. Ms.

KIi had considered her earlier conversations with the Dean's Designate and

only after considering those discussions did she decide to purchase her essay. 17
57.

At the same time, the majority was much impressed with the demeanor of the students at

the hearing, and the manner in which they gave their evidence and explanations. There was
audible weeping, the students were apparently traumatized by the seriousness of what they were
facing. As they gave their evidence they needed moments to compose themselves. 18

15

H•- Majority Reasons, paras. 37-38

16

KIi- Majorily Reasons, paras. 46-47

17

KIi- Majority Reasons, para. 48

18

Majority Reasons, para. 32

- 15 58.

The majority also noted that each of the students again expressed regret for their actions,

and noted their evidence that if given another chance they would not commit yet another
"mistake", The panel recited in some detail Ms.

<=.al explanation of family difficulties and

pressures and the isolation of her pai1icular circumstances. 19
59.

Similarly Ms.

l-9 had similar family pressures, and lacked confidence. She had

purchased the essay in order to deal with family issues, her own insec\U'ities and doubts and
constant inquiries from home about her grades. 20

60.

The majority recorded that Ms.

<Ill and Ms. KIi had received counselling but this was

for anxiety, distress and confusion about the impending hearing, 21
61.

In approaching its findings and conclusions on penalty, the majority recited the

sentencing principles laid down in

ctlll, They understood they were dealing with a choice

between a five year suspension, the submission made on behalf of all the students, and a
recommendation for expulsion, the penalty sought by the Provost. The majority recorded that
the offences were "egregious, offensive, and made all the more invidious because of their
connection to an industry that capitalizes on cheating". 22
62.

The majority chose suspension, and expressed their rationale in a number of ways. To us,

overall, it is evident that the majority put most of its emphasis on the expressions of remorse that

19

Majority Reasons, paras. 33-36

20

Majority Reasons, paras. 40-41

21

Majority Reasons, paras. 39-40

22

Majority Reasons, paras. 39-40

- 16 came from the students during the hearing, and the significant recognition of their dishonesty
that had been brought home to them as a result of the proceedings. The panel observed that the
very process of the trial and the requirement of the students being publicly confronted with their
misdeeds was the thing that brought home the need for change to each of the students. The
discipline process, from the time the charges were read to the conclusion of the hearing
galvanized the students by terror, remorse, sadness, self-pity, and profound fear. 23

63.

More specifically, the majority made a series of findings that the Provost argues on this

appeal were unsupported by the case authorities, were errors of fact or were simply unsupported
by any evidence at all.

64.

These findings and conclusions of the majority included their describing the students'

res01i to The Essay Place as a last resort - one unde11aken to salvage each of them from the
prospect of coming home to the disapproval of their family in shame and humiliation. Moreover,
the majority found that the three students were victims at the hands of The Essay Place, just as
much as the University was.

65.

24

In the same vein, the majority deconstmcted the previous offences in a manner that

shifted responsibilities from the students to those the students had advantaged by their actions.
Thus, for example, the majority characterized Ms.

23

Majority Reasons, para. 59

24

Majority Reasons, para. 52

C.il giving her boyfriend a copy of a term

- 17 -

paper as, from her perspective, an act of "misguided collegiality" but characterized the actions of
the boyfriend as "the commission of an offence". 25
66.

The majority also pul some emphasis in analyzing the previous offences, that they were

not the same as each other and not the same as offences that had been committed by the other
students. Thus, in Ms. ~ s case, for example, the majority thought Ms. ~ s admission to
the Dea11 about why she tried to avoid taking her test, to them an action borne out of desperation
to avoid confronting her lack of preparedness, was so difforent from her other offences that it
should not be seen as a continuum of planned and deliberate dishonesty. 26
67.

As to the collective cheating on the 2% quiz, the majority placed great emphasis, as some

of the students had in their explanations, that the course was worth only 2%, as a reason to reject
the conclusion that this particular act of dishonesty meant that there would be additional
dishonest activity from the students. The majority expressed some sympathy with the students'
position, that they did not believe that cheating on a 2% test was such a grave offence. 27
68.

The majority made reforence to the cases (without referring to any particular case name)

and concluded that cases where expulsion was wan-anted were in respect of a series of incidents
greater in number and more serious in kind than the pattern evinced by these three students. 28

25

Majority Reasons, para. 53

26

Majority Reasons, para. 53

27

Majority Reasons, para 54

28

Majority Reasons, para. 58

- 18 69.

More impo1tantly, the majority concluded that a five year suspension rather than

expulsion was warranted in this case from the "clear and unwavering expression of remorse by
each of the students ... ". The majority found that each of the students were well and truly afraid
and panicked by the thought of being expelled and afraid for the reactions of their parents. They
were appalled by their own actions and by their fundamental failure to heed the prior warnings of
the Dean when they were caught cheating on two previous occasions. It appeared to the majority
that these students were deeply shamed and profoundly ashamed of what they had done. The
majority found that it was this process of trial that had brought home to the students the need for
change. 29

THE DISSENT
70.

In expressing the reasons for her dissent from the majority opinion, in that Ms. Hannaford

would have called for expulsion of the three students, Ms. Hannaford spent some time reviewing
the facts of the offences in question and the earlier offences committed by these students. She
did not see the previous offences in as benign a light as had the majority. Whatever their nature,
she saw the prior offences as breaches of trust, but also an opportunity to learn from these
incidents, and when they did not, as evidence that these students are all likely to continue to
offend. The best evidence of this is the clear descriptions of their dishonest conduct provided to
them by the Dean's Designate each time and also their expressions of regret and remorse
returned by them to the Dean, none of which had any effect upon their subsequent conduct. 30

29

Majority Reasons, para. 59

30

Minority Dissent, paras. 11, 26

~ l9 -

71.

Ms. Hannaford reviewed in close detail, the explanations which the students had provided

by way of justification or extenuating circumstances. Ms. <1111111 mother's illness, Ms.
lack of confidence in her ability and parents' expectations and Ms.

J-9s

Kif s subsequent family

upsets were not temporally related to the third offences. In any event, as Ms. Hannaford saw it,
these narratives cannot be elevated in the case of these students to a degree that it could be said
they caused the students to act as they did.

The fact these offences were committed, the

warnings given and the subsequent dishonest acts are the important facts and the rest is
secondary, and cannot be permitted to detract from the clear and admitted intention of the
students to cheat, time and again. 31

72.

Ms. Haimaford also saw the expressions of remorse and regret in a different light. Ms.

Hannaford did not doubt that the expressions of remorse and regret were genuine.

Ms.

Hannaford's view was that such after the fact regret, while relevant and admissible, cannot in a
case like this mitigate the penalty that must flow from this level of academic dishonesty. The
earlier offences also brought with them the same expressions of remorse and regret, together
with clear statements that dishonest conduct would not be repeated and an acknowledgement that
severe consequences will be visited if it is. The students carmot then blunt those consequences,
by repeating and reiterating the same expressions of remorse and regret, one more time. 32

73.

Finally, Ms. Hannaford stressed the nature of the offence - purchasing essays -as the

most serious of academic offences that can be committed, particularly with the difficulty in
detecting such dishonesty. Therefore these offences call for, as a matter of general deterrence, a

31

Minority Dissent, paras. 18, 20-25

32

Minority Dissent, paras, 17-18

~ 20-

penalty that is proportional to the severity of the offence, and which, in this case is more than
supp01ied on the fact of this agreement among the students; even the discussion among them
about their past offences and how they knew this was wrong, yet nonetheless they did proceed to
purchase and submit false work as their own. 33
74.

Ms. Hannaford would thus have recommended that steps be taken leading to the

expulsion of the students from the University.
l>OSITION OF THE PROVOST ON THE APPEAL

75.

The Pmvost makes a number of arguments in support of the University's position that we

ought to vary the sanction below and substitute a rec01nmendation for expulsion in this case.
76.

The first of these is that the decision by the majority is inconsistent with other recent

Tribunal decisions in similar cases.
77.

In ,111-.ztl

z:a the Tribunal panel dealt with a matter where Mr. • in the very

course with which we are concerned in this appeal, had also purchased an essay and submitted
that purchased essay, also on March 3, 2010 for academic credit in the course.
78.

Mr. ral had no prior convictions and testified to a number of similar circumstances as

did the three students in this case, including separation from family, family business difficulties
and depression. Mr. • had also initially put up a spirited defence to the suggestion that he had
purchased the essay and, among other things had fabricated documents purporting to be
preliminary drafts. He eventually pleaded guilty.

33

Minority Dissenl, paras. 34, 39, 42

- 21 -

79.

The issue in i:alwas whether Mr. • should be suspended for a lengthy period or

expelled, as the Provost sought. The panel in
the cases before us. The panel in

1111 expressed its disagreement with the panel in

JII imposed a five year suspension upon Mr. •

and

commented that it preferred the position of the minority, Ms. Hannaford, because upon a proper
calibration of the various cases, the respondents before us ought to have been expelled rather
than suspended for five years because of the prior offences which were absent in Mr. 19's case
and the heavy emphasis the

1111 panel thought should have been placed on the conspiracy

among the students to commit their third offences, after two prior offences.
80.

The Provost points to a second case, that of Aal J:111 ~. again remarkably similar to

the facts here and in • · Mr. Itl\l, once again in the very course with which we are

concerned, EAS 331, purchased an essay from The Essay Place and submitted the essay for
academic credit in EAS 331.
81.

Mr.

1-.

had initially denied these facts but ultimately admitted in the Dean's meeting

that he had done so and pleaded guilty to the offence. Mr. iaJI, on his penalty hearing, put
forward a number of reasons in explanation for bis actions including that he had learned he
would have to e11ter the South Korean Military and was concerned that he would not be able to
complete his degree and pass EAS 331. His lack of confidence led him to purchase the essay.
82.

Mr. ~ had no prior acts of academic misconduct.

83.

Mr.

I--

sought a two or tlu-ee year suspension from the Tl'ibunal. Again, the Provost

requested that the Tribunal recommend expulsion.

-22 -

84.

The panel in

J-11 opted for a five year suspension. The panel emphasized the need for

deterrence as it noted that five students in one term in EAS 33 l had purchased and submitted
essays from The Essay Place, Again, the panel reviewed the Tribunal decision in the case before
us and noted that each of the respondents here had been convicted of serious academic

misconduct on two prior occasions and that if Mr.

J9 had been in that position the panel

would have recommended expulsion.

85.

Because Mr. i--a had no prior convictions the panel imposed a five year suspension.

86.

The Provost points to other authorities - essay purchase cases - and suggests there is no

case where students with two prior convictions received just a five year suspension for a third
offence involving a purchased essay.
87.

The Provost also submits that the majority below minimized the seriousness of the

offence these students had admitted and made findings in that respect for which there was no
evidence before them.
88.

These include characterizing the students as victims, as we have set out above in

paragraph 64. Related to that finding of the majority, the Provost submits there is no evidence to
support the majority's view that The Essay Place "preyed upon" the students or that the students
considered that that had been the case. The Provost quarrels with the majority finding that
students resort to The Essay Place was as a "last res011" and suggests rathe1· that the evidence
supp011s only a finding that the students went to The Essay Place as a conscious decision to
avoid doing their own work and with a view to subverting the principles they already understood
were pru.t of their relationship with the University.

- 23 -

89.

The Provost also argues there was no evidence to support the Tribunal's sympathetic

view of the students' failure to attend counselling (other than for the expected trauma to be
experienced in these hearings) and argues that these were conscious choices, and there was no
evidence from the students themselves that their failure to attend or continue counselling was
because of the lack of time or resources.
90.

The Provost also submits that the majority erred as a matter of principle in its treatment

of the prior offences both in making the distinctions among the various offences that we have
outlined in paragraph 66 above and pa11icularly that the majority erred by discounting the effect
of the prior offences on a theory that, because they were not identical, they ought not to be
considered very important when looking at the third offence.
91.

Finally the Provost contends that the majority erred by placing too much emphasis on the

students' demeanor observed at the hearing itself, and that the manner in which students react to
the bringing forward of charges based on their own academic dishonesty cannot be a mitigating
factor on the question of penalty.
92.

As to the emphasis placed by the panel on the students' expressions of remorse and

regret, the Provost argues these were repeated after each offence just as were the students'
promises not to reoffend. Such expressions, genuine or not, when measured against the other
important sentencing principles in a case like this, cannot be relied upon, as each hearing would
become a drama in itself with demeanor overriding facts and objective analysis.
93.

For these reasons the Provost seeks a variation in the sanction.

24 ~
POSITION OF THE RESPONDENTS ON THE APPEAL

94.

Mr. Trotter fol' the respondent, Ms. H■ and Ms. Cohen for the respondents, Ms. Cal

and Ms.
95.

KIi, take similar positions on the issues arising in this appeal.

Mr. Trottel', for his part, takes no serious issue with the statements of fact set out in the

ProvosCs Factum. Ms. Cohen asserts some mild disagreements with some elements of the
Provost's characterization of the majority's findings.

96.

Both counsel however stake the foundation of their defence of the decision below, on

principles of deference and that the majority made no e1rnrs in stating the relevant sentencing
principles, taken mostly from

CIIII- They argue that the majority's decision, including its

characterizations of conduct, the priol' offences, and the emphasis placed on the expressions of
remorse and regret and the clear benefit the majority had from observing the students, are all
matters of discretion, a discretion which the majority was entitled to exercise and with which this
Board ought not to interfere.
97.

Counsel acknowledges that while Ms. Hannaford may have seen the issues differently

and characterized elements of the offences and the students conduct differently, that is of no
moment, as the majority made no error in principle in reaching its decisions and there is no basis
for this Appeals Board to interfore.
98.

In an effective submission, Ms. Cohen also took serious issue with Mr. Centa's al'gument

that the majority decision was out of sync with other decisions of the University Tribunal in
purchased essay cases. She and Mr. Trotter urge this Board to take cognizance of the fact that
while the Provost may seek expulsion in all cases of purchased essays, as was the case in 11111

- 25 and

Jtll, the panels had not followed that approach but rather had made discretionary decisions

depending on the facts and the panels' views of the overall circumstances in each case, and this
is how it should be.

99.

Ms. Cohen had prepared a chart, detailing a summaty of purchased essay cases, with

which Mr. Centa took no serious disagreement, showing the sanction in 14 cases with the

aggravating and mitigating factors taken into account. There are 4 expulsions, 8 five year
suspensions (including the three here), I three year suspension and l two year suspension in
those cases.

100.

Among the cases that Ms. Cohen discussed is that of

Provost's Book of Authorities.

1:al ~ . contained in the

Mr. ~ was expelled for purchasing essays, but he had

purchased two and had also committed tlu·ee earlier academic offences all directly related to
plagiarism. Ms. Cohen submits that while

JIii is a proper case for expulsion on its facts, the

majority below made distinctions about the prior offences of the three students here, that they
were not as serious nor the same as the third offence, as pmt of its rationale to distinguish the
instant case from that of

fllll and thus impose a proper, lesser penalty than that correctly

imposed in .,,..

l O1.

Ms. Cohen suggests, again, this is simply the proper and permitted exercise of discretion

of a Tribunal panel to measure the circumstances of the case before them against those of other
cases and impose penalties, in their discretion.

102.
Ms.

Finally, Ms. Cohen submits that, if distinctions are to be drawn, her clients Ms.

CIII and

KIi are less culpable than Ms. ~ both in the nature of their prior offences, and the

mitigating circumstances which surrounded their acts.

103.

For his part, Mr. Trotter referred us to his client's affidavit, suggesting that, whatever had

gone on in the past, a new leaf had turned, and we should give effect to Ms. l-.'s present
expressions of new insight into her past behaviom.
ANALYSIS
NATURE OF THE OFFENCE

104.

We begin our analysis by explaining our views about the nature of the offence in this

case. As previous decisions of this Board make clear, purchasing academic work for a fee and
then submitting that work with a view to securing academic credit, has always been considered
among the very most, to use the majority's description, "egregious" offences a student can
commit in the University environment. There are a number of reasons for this. First, in taking
these steps, there is clear evidence of intention, deliberation and knowing deception, both in the
planning, managing and completion of the offence, all of which occurs over a period of time, as
in this case. As well, the act of paying for the services of another in this context, introduces a
commercial element into the relationshi1, of a student with the University, a factor very distant
from the core values of an academic institution, where individual effort, intellectual thought and
hard work are the hallmarks.
105.

Moreover, this particular variety of plagiarism is quite different and more severe than the

usual appropriation of the work of another through internet sources or the many ways that

existing work can be commandeered. With purchased work, as the adve1iising of The Essay
Place makes clear, the student buys an original work, tailored to the specific subject and which

will not be fo\lnd through the increasing sophisticated antennae of professors and their electrnnic
helpers.

- 27 l 06.

But for the trail of metadata left in this case, these frauds may well have gone undetected,

or come up short against student denials.
107.

Here, Ms.

ca first denied the allegation and confessed only when faced with the

embedded data showing the owner of The Essay Place as the author of the paper. Ms. I--•s

purchase and submission of an essay in 2009 did go undetected.
108.

There is every reason therefore that, once detected, these offences must be dealt with at

the serious end of the sanction spectrum. This is consistent with the Provost's Guidelines for
Sanction, which form part of the Code and which recommend expulsion as the appropriate
sanction for submitting purchased work.
109.

This Appeals Board panel then starts its consideration of this matter from this assumption

-- expulsion should be considered as a likely, perhaps the most likely, sanction in cases of
students purchasing and submitting purchased essays as their own work, for academic credit.

DEFERENCE
110.

We return to this issue, now in the context of this specific decision. There is no doubt

this Board has very wide latitude in substituting its views, if warranted, for those expressed
below by the majority. There are a number of different grounds upon which an appellant body
can vary or set aside an order made by a trial panel below. These always include errors of Jaw,
(this expression in University Tribunal cases means both errors of general administrative law and
errors in interpreting and applying that large body of University Tribunal and Appeals Board
cases relevant to the particular charges in a given case), significant errors of fact finding,
particularly if findings are made for which there is no evidence. It is likely however that,

- 28 -

because of the language of section E. 7 (c) of the Code, Appeals Board jurisdiction is even
broader than these well understood principles, and may well extend to simply substituting its
own view of the sanction in any case where it believes the panel below reached the wrong result,
for whatever reason.
111.

Our view of the Appeals Board cases however shows that the Board has been reluctant to

embrace the broadest view of its powers, and has generally analyzed a decision under appeal
within the appellant principles that I described just above. The practical effect is often therefore
that some deference is shown to the result below, in that Appeals Boards generally make specific
determinations based on a principled analysis, rather than simply a "you think the result should
be X, but we think the result should be Y" approach, which nonetheless in principle may well be
authorized by the Code.
112.

As well, in our view, the Appeals Board must give some effect to the major advantage

that any trial forum has over any appeal forum, and that is in relation to credibility issues, the
opportunity for the triers of fact to observe the witnesses and the accused, measure their
demeanor, make findings of credibility about witnesses and, when necessary, among various
witnesses. We recognize that this factor does constrain any Appeals Board in approaching an
appeal from a decision of a trial panel of the University Tribunal.
113.

Where then does this leave us in this paiiicular appeal?

I 14.

We see our role in this case to involve a two step process. First, we need to examine the

decision below within the bounds that we have set out above, to determine whether the trial
panel has made reversible errors of law or fact. Second, if that is the case, we then need to

- 29 -

decide whether those errors should result in a variation of the penalty that was imposed by the
panel.
115.

Cetiainly not every error would necessarily result in setting aside the ultimate decision on

penalty made by a trial panel.

DECISION
116.

In this case, reluctantly, we have come to the conclusion that the majority below made

significant errors in its findings of fact and in its characterization of the evidence, which are
material, and which if permitted to stand tmc01Tected, would detrimentally affect the University's
reasonable and long-standing position that students must take individual and primary
responsibility for their actions themselves.
117.

We have examined the record below, and considered the submissions of counsel, but we

can find no support in the evidence for the majority's finding that, in any respect, the three
students were victims in the circumstances of this tableau. We, as a matter of first impression,
would have some difficulty with that proposition even as a matter of theory - that is, how could
it be that three students, meeting to decide that they would together purchase essays for
submission in their course, reviewing among themselves their previous history of offences,
knowing that they all had remaining indices of their past indiscretions on their records, making
conscious decisions to nonetheless proceed, knowing what they were doing was wrong, and then
approaching The Essay Place, could ever result in a characterization that they were victims of
The Essay Place, or even victims of their circumstances in the broader sense.

- 30 118.

On the facts here, however, the students did not portray themselves as victims. We can

find no evidence that supports any finding that they thought of themselves in this light, or
suffered what might be seen as some form of duress from anyone. Rather, they patronized The
Essay Place in order to accomplish their goals, which were to pass the Course, by whatever
means, and thereby avoid doing work which they had little confidence they could successfully
produce, and to satisfy those external pressure which they all felt.

119.

The evidence shows their concerns were more with the high dollar cost of cheating.

Their insight went only to the point of a purchase of essays to help them secure a pass in the
Course.

i-a of course had already successfully achieved that on a prior occasion.

120.

Ms.

121.

None of this is to say that the majority is not right in condemning the role of The Essay

Place, and finding that the University is a victim in these circumstances. Both v,rere worthy
conclusions.

122.

Nonetheless, this Appeals panel is concerned that both as a matter of approach, and as a

matter of the evidence in this case, the reasonable expectations that the University has of its
students, does not permit this conduct to be characterized as the majority did. As a matter of
principle we are not prepared to endorse the availability of that line of defence in these cases.

123.

Related to this, are our concerns with other elements of the majoritfs view of the

evidence. For example, we can see nothing in the evidence that supports a finding that these
students' approach to The Essay Place was as a last reso1i. Rather, we see the evidence revealing
a decision by these students to make that approach rather than just doing the work themselves.

- 31 The students sought no additional help from Professor Poole, they did not ask for an extension,
nor did they seek other help from the University.

124.

From our perspective, this Board cannot endorse any suggestion that would justify

purchasing an essay in a commercial transaction, because a student may have doubts about his or
her ability to otherwise meet the requirements of the course. Surely, most students feel in that
particular boat from time to time, and it is pm1 of the obligation of the University to offer
assistance and support, as it may, but ultimately the University must maintain its standards, and
these include conveying the message as clearly and loudly as possible, that purchasing essays is
no substitution in any circumstance for approaching difficult assignments on their own terms.

125.

In the same vein, we cannot agree with the rather benign view the majority took of the

earlier offences. The earlier offences were of course not identical, not as serious in their own
terms, as the third offence, which was the ultimate in a University setting. The impo1tance of
these earlier offences however lies not just in their commission and in that regard the second
involved the same joint agreement among the students as did the third, but also in what occmTed
in their contacts with University principles over these occasions.

126.

One specific example of why we have difficulty with the majority approach to the earlier

offences and their meaning for the third, can be seen in paragraph 54 of the majority reasons.
There, in assessing the aftermath of the 2% test debacle, the majority wrote:

It was our view that the students' understanding of the gravity of what they were
doing - and that it evolved after meeting with the Dean, is an important
consideration in the continuum of their expression of remorse.
127.

What we see missing from this analysis, is any appreciation that, whatever the students

took from their meeting with the Dean in 2009, within two months they were conspiring together

- 32 -

to commit much more serious offences, in the full realization that what they were doing was
wrong.
128.

The students cheated. The students were caught. The students admitted and understood

that they offended the Code and the larger interests of maintaining academic and moral integrity
in the University setting.

The students were sanctioned. The students were warned about

subsequent offences. The students expressed their regret, shame and remorse. The students
understood why and what they had offended. The students apologized. And then the students
committed other offences, with their third coming before they were out of the shadows of the
second. These matters count, when it comes time to deal with the last of the offences and the
fact that the earlier offences were not identical to the last or to each other is of no moment in
trying to measure their importance in the overall context of deciding a sanction for these third
offences.
129.

To us, these are fundamental issues arising from the majority decision which we are

unable to let stand by reason of their implications for future cases that may come before the
Tribunal for decision in purchased essay cases.
130.

There is one further issue that we have anxiously considered.

The majority placed

considerable emphasis on the way the students presented at the hearing and gave their evidence,
explaining the various factors and influences that had led them to the sorry state of affairs in
which they found themselves.

The students expressed shame, remorse and regret and the

majority, indeed Ms. Hannaford as well, generally accepted these expressions as genuine and
sincere. It would not be appropriate for us to interfere with those findings (although we do
observe that the same expressions were made at each of the other junctures). The difference this

- 33 time of course was that this was a live hearing and obviously laid additional stress upon these
students.
131.

The issue for us however is what effect should be given to these findings, of which there

are really two. The first being the demeanor and manner in which the students actually appeared
during the hearing and the second being their expressions of shame, regret and remorse. The
majority took both these into account in ameliorating the penalty and imposing a five year

suspension rather than expulsion.
132.

In our view, these findings, in this case, cannot be elevated to that degree of significance

when measured against the other principles of sentencing laid down in C... In our view,
while such evidence is always of importance, it cannot stand equally or take on more
significance than that of deterrence. In our view with the seriousness of the offences at issue, the
majority erred in placing the emphasis it did on this subjective component and we would not do
so.

THE I>ENALTY
133.

This then b1'ings us to the second element. We have found that the majority below made

errors of the nature that permit us to interfere with its conclusion. Should we do so, set aside the
penalty imposed below and substitute another.
134.

In approaching that issue, it might be helpful, in light of our function to decide appeals in

a manner that will assist in ensuring consistency and the fair application of principle to matters
like this coming before trial panels of the University Tribunal, to set out what we consider to be
the appropriate approach to sentencing in purchased essay cases.

- 34 135.

While we can accept the general point of Ms. Cohen and Mr. Trotter's submissions, that

each case needs to be decided on its own peculiar set of facts and that there should be no
absolute rule, contended for by the Provost, that every case of a purchased essay should result in
expulsion, we believe there should be at least a broad set of factors for panels to make reference
to for guidance.

136.

As we stated in paragraph 108 above, and for the reasons we have expressed, in our view

purchased essay offences are about as serious as can be committed in a University setting. The
Tribunal should therefore approach sentencing in such cases with the working assumption that
expulsion from the institution is the sanction that is best commensurate with the gravity of the
offence. There is no absolute rule, however, and whether or not expulsion results will depend
upon many factors, as revealed in the particular case. Prime among these will be to analyze and
understand the facts of that particular case. Under what circumstances was the essay purchased
and submitted. What degree of intent and deliberation was involved. What recognition that the
conduct was grave and wrong can be seen in the student. Was anyone else involved. Were there
influences that can legitimately influence the penalty. What were the subsequent events - did the
student admit guilt or attempt to continue the fraud. Is there anything particularly egregious or
saving about the case or are there other facts that may ameliorate what is otherwise conduct to be
condemned.

137.

Has the student learned anything from the entire matter. Are there true expressions of

remorse, regret and apology, although these even if accepted, will rarely blunt the force of the
offence itself. Are there extenuating circumstances and can these be seen to be relevant to the
ultimate sanction.

- 35 -

138.

The answers to these questions, even if positive in many respects, may not blunt the

presumption of expulsion, but they may, and each review will produce its own result.
139.

Of course, there is the issue of previous academic offences. If there is none, and an

othe1wise positive record, perhaps expulsion will not be the result, as it was not in ~ and

i:a. If there are one or more, then, whatever their 11att1re, this is a powerful indication that
expulsion may well be warranted. If the offence in issue, purchasing and submitting a bought
essay, has been the subject of a previous discipline process, then it would be most unusual for
that student to escape expulsion for a second such offence.

140.

But previous academic offences do not have to be identical or similar to have that same

result.

Previous offences are indications of continuing dishonest motive and a failure to

recognize and adhere to core University values, particularly if remorse and regret were pleaded
earlier in mitigation, All of this will be important when measuring the degree of sanction in such
a setting.

141.

Finally, a balancing of all the factors involved in sentencing must occur and be seen to

occur as the Tribunal reaches an ultimate conclusion, In our view, the need for deterrence in
respect of purchased essay cases is very high in the spectrnm of those factors.
142.

This analysis is not intended to be exhaustive because other elements will emerge in

particular cases but it is imp01tant to set down at least an approach that should be followed
consistently when trial panels are faced with fixing an app1·opriate penalty in a purchased essay
case.

- 36 143.

lt should also be said that if expulsion is not the result in a particular case then it would

be the rarest of altematives that something less than a five year suspension would be imposed.

144.

In our judgment, in this case, moving through this cascade of factors, and having regard

to the views \Ve have earlier expressed, we reach the conclusion that expulsion was and is the
appropriate penalty for the students in this matter.

145.

We are unable to give any effect to Ms. ~ ' s affidavit in ameliorating that result in her

case. Ms.

HIii's evidence was not much different than her earlier expressions of regret and

there would need to have been something materiaHy more dramatic to overcome the

ovenvhelming facts that otherwise point to expulsion in her particular case.
146.

In our judgment, sentencing in purchased essay cases, and certainly in this one, must

consider two of the CJlllllllsentencing principles to be paramount over all the others. These are
the detriment to the University occasioned by the offence of purchasing essays, and the need lo
deter others from committing a similar offence. These offences strike deeply at the roots of the
institution, and must be deterred with an emphasis on these objective elements of the sentencing
matrix.

147.

While we sympathize with the students in this case and, again, take no issue with the

findings made by the Tribunal below about their states of mind and expressions of regret, their

actions in the end are what must dictate the appropriate sentences in these cases.

ORDER
148.

The majority decision, that the students are to be suspended for a period of five years

from the University from June 14, 2010 until June 13, 2015 is to be set aside and varied such that

- 37 ~

ca 1'111 Ri l-1. and rvtll KIii Kii shall be suspended immediately, and we

recommend to the President of the University that he recommend to the Governing Council that
each student be expelled from the University.
149.

We are grateful to all counsel for their valued assistance in this difficult matter.

November 23, 2011

Rona~ ~~gh(

J,

~h:t /

I

on behalf of the Appeals Board Panel

