Case 1570

   DATE:

   May 22, 2024

   PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v. L.H. ("the Student")

   HEARING DATE:

   February 20, 2024, via Zoom

   PANEL MEMBERS:

   Seumas M. Woods, Chair
   Professor Marvin Zuker, Faculty Panel Member
   Konrad Samsel, Student Panel Member

   APPEARANCES:
   Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg
   Rothstein LLP
   Sonia Patel, Co-Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg Rothstein LLP

   IN ATTENDANCE:

   The Student

   HEARING SECRETARY:

   Christopher Lang, Director, Office of Appeals, Discipline and Faculty
   Grievances

   The Student was charged with one count of knowingly having another
   person personate the Student at a final exam, contrary to section
   B.i.1(c) of the Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters, 2019 (the
   ‚Code‚). In the alternative, the Student was charged with one knowingly
   obtaining unauthorized assistance in connection with a final exam,
   contrary to section B.i.1(b) of the Code. In the further alternative,
   the Student was charged with one count knowingly engaging in a form of
   cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or misrepresentation
   not otherwise described in the Code in order to obtain academic credit
   or other academic advantage of any kind in connection with a final
   exam, contrary to section B.1.3(b) of the Code. Prior to the hearing,
   the Charges were amended to correct an inconsistency in the dates that
   the offence occurred. The Student indicated that they were aware of the
   amendments and the Tribunal concluded that the hearing could proceed on
   the basis of the amended charges.

   The hearing proceeded on the basis of an Agreed Statement of Facts
   (‚ASF‚) and joint book of documents submitted by the Student and the
   University. The ASF detailed how the Student was enrolled in a
   full-year course that, among other things, required the student to
   write a final exam worth 30% of their final grade. During the exam, one
   of the exam invigilators requested to see the person who was writing
   the Student‚s exam‚s TCard, and upon inspection by the Chief Presiding
   Officer (‚CPO‚), the CPO concluded that the individual writing the exam
   did not resemble the individual photographed on the TCard. Another
   back-up CPO arrived at the same conclusion and asked the individual to
   exit the exam room. The CPO contacted the Officer of the Registrar at
   the University for instructions on how to proceed, and two reports
   documenting the observations of the CPO and back-up CPO were filed. The
   Student subsequently attended a meeting with the Dean‚s Designate to
   discuss the allegation of personation, and during the meeting, admitted
   to committing the alleged academic offence by having another individual
   write the exam in their place. In the ASF, the Student admitted to all
   of the charges. Based on the facts set out in the ASF, the Panel
   accepted the Student‚s guilty plea with respect to the personation
   charge under s. B.i.1(c) of the Code . The University withdrew the
   other two charges.

   In determining the appropriate sanction, the Panel considered an Agreed
   Statement of Facts on Penalty (‚ASFP‚) which included text
   correspondence between the Student and their parents and a doctor‚s
   letter from a psychological clinic (the ‚Contested Documents‚). The
   text messages between the Student and their father detailed how the
   Father had arranged for an individual to the Student‚s door to pick up
   their TCard. The University did not agree to the authenticity or truth
   of the contents of the Contested Documents and stated that for the
   Panel to give the Contested Documents any weight, the Student had to
   testify about them and be cross-examined on that evidence. The Student
   subsequently testified that their father was unhappy with the Student‚s
   grades, and that the father decided to find someone else to write the
   final exam. The Panel accepted that the text messages were genuine, and
   accepted the Student‚s evidence that their father pressured them into
   having someone write the final exam instead of them.

   The Panel considered the sanctioning factors set out in the case of
   University of Toronto v Mr. C. (Case No. 1976/1977-3, November 5,
   1976). With respect to the Student‚s character, the Panel acknowledged
   that the Student had succumbed to pressure placed upon them by their
   father to allow someone to impersonate them, as well as the fact that
   the Student had no prior academic offences and concluded that the
   Student‚s character was not a negative factor in this case. The Panel
   similarly concluded that, based on the evidence, the Student was not
   likely to re-offend in the future. The Panel found the fact that the
   Student‚s father had devised the impersonation scheme, and that the
   Student was under a high degree of stress at the time of the offence to
   be extenuating circumstances. With respect to the nature of the
   offence, the Panel noted that impersonation is a serious offence
   meriting a severe sanction. The Panel noted that in prior impersonation
   cases, it could not find any decision where the student received a
   suspension of less than five years. The Panel further noted that the
   detriment to the University occasioned by impersonation offences and
   corresponding need for general deterrence, merited a serious sanction,
   consistent with those imposed by past Tribunals. Taking each of the Mr.
   C factors into consideration, the Panel found that the penalty
   requested by the University was the appropriate sanction in this case.

   Accordingly, the Panel imposed the following sanction: a final grade of
   zero in the Course, a suspension from the University for a period of
   four years and eight months; a notation on the Student‚s academic
   record and transcript for a period of five years and eight months; and
   a report to the Provost.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/31753
