THE UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
IN THE MATTER OF charges of academic dishonesty filed on March 10, 2016,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters, 1995,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Act, 1971, S.O. 1971, c. 56 as amended S.O. 1978,
C. 88

BETWEEN:
UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO

-and -

REASONS FOR DECISION

Hearing Date: July 8, 2016
Members of the Panel:
Ms. Johanna Braden, Barrister and Solicitor, Chair
Professor Michael Evans, Faculty Panel Member
Ms. Yusra Qazi, Student Panel Member
Appearances:
Ms. Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland, Barristers
Mr. Peter Wuebbolt, Barrister and Solicitor, Counsel for the Student
Dr. Martha Harris, Academic Integrity Officer, Office of Student Academic Integrity,
Facuity of Arts and Science
Dr. Kieran Furlong, Sessional Lecturer, Department of Economics, University of Toronto
Mr. Mathieu Gilbert-Gonthier, Invigilator of ECO1 00Y Exam
Mr. Remi Daviet, Invigilator of ECO100Y Exam
Ms. Tanya Battersby, Chief Presiding Officer of ECO1 00Y Exam
Ms. -.,.._-.,.._ , the Student
In Attendance:
Ms. Krista Osborne, Administrative Assistant, Office of Appeals, Discipline and Faculty
Grievances
Mr. Simon Raposo (Observer)
Ms.
(Mother of the Student)

"'II 2111111

2

1.

The Trial Division of the University Tribunal was convened on July 8, 2016, to
consider charges brought by the University of Toronto ("the University") against
Ms.

VIII VIII ("the Student") under the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour

on Academic Matters, 1995 ("the Code").

The Charges and Particulars

2.

The Charges and Particulars alleged against the Student are as follows.
A.

Charges

1.

On or about August 11, 2015, you knowingly obtained unauthorized

assistance to complete the final deferred examination (the "Exam") for
academic credit in ECO1 00Y1: Introduction to Economics (the "Course"),
contrary to section B.1.1 (b) of the Code.
2.

In the alternative, on or about August 11, 2015, you knowingly engaged

in a form

of cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or

misrepresentation not otherwise described in the Code in connection with
the Exam in order to obtain an academic advantage in the Course, contrary
to section B.l.3(b) of the Code.
B.

Particulars

The particulars of these charges are as follows:
(a)

At all material times, you were a registered student at the
University of Toronto, Faculty of Arts and Science.

(b)

In the Winter 2014-2015 term, you enrolled in the Course, which was
taught by Professor Kieran Furlong.

3

(c)

Students

in

the

Course

were

required

to

complete

a final

examination for academic credit in the Course. On or about August
11, 2015, you attended

and wrote the Exam to satisfy this

requirement.
(d)

You knowingly received unauthorized assistance to complete the
multiple choice portion of the Exam by viewing and/or copying
answers from the student sitting next to you.

(e)

You knew, or ought to have known, that you were not permitted to
view and/or copy the answers of the student sitting next to you, or to
otherwise receive unauthorized assistance to complete the Exam.

(f)

By viewing and/or copying answers from the student sitting next to you,
you

knowingly

engaged

in

a

form

of

cheating,

academic

dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or misrepresentation in order to
obtain an academic advantage in the Course.
The Student's Position
3.

The Student was present and represented by counsel. The Student denied the
charges.

The hearing proceeded on the basis that the University bore the

burden of proving the charges on the balance of probabilities.
Overview
4.

The Student was writing a deferred final exam for her Introduction to Economics
course.

The exam was invigilated by PhD students.

examination asked 50 multiple choice questions.
possible responses.

The first part of the

Each question had five

4

5.

One exam invigilator noticed the Student looking at the exam of the student next
to her, M.W.. He asked another invigilator to keep an eye out for suspicious
behavior. The second invigilator saw the Student moving her eyes so as to look
at M.W.'s exam. The two invigilators reported their concerns to the exam's Chief
Presiding Officer. The Chief Presiding Officer moved the Student to a different
desk to finish writing her examination. When she was moved, the Student had
completed about 25-30 of the exam's 50 multiple choice questions.

6.

When the Student's finished examination was marked and compared with the
examination of M.W., there was a marked similarity between the answers given
for the first 30 multiple choice questions. They gave the same answer for 25 of
the first 30 questions. Of these 25 same answers, 13 were the correct answer.
The Student and M.W. both gave the same incorrect answer 12 times.

7.

For questions 30 - 50 (answered by the Student after she'd been separated from
M.W.), the Student and M.W. answered only two questions the same way. Both
answers were incorrect.

8.

The University says the evidence proves that the Student obtained unauthorized
assistance by copying M.W.'s exam. The Student testified on her own behalf
and denied that she copied. Having deliberated carefully, and having considered
all the evidence, the Tribunal finds that the evidence is sufficiently clear, cogent
and convincing to discharge the burden of proof on the University. It is more
likely than not that the Student copied the examination answers of M.W. and
thereby knowingly obtained unauthorized assistance to complete the exam .

The Evidence

9.

The University called four witnesses: Dr. Kieran Furlong, who taught the course
in question; the two invigilators who witnessed the Student's behavior during the
exam, Mathieu Gilbert-Gonthier and Remi Daviet; and the Chief Presiding Officer

5

at the exam, Tanya Battersby.

The Student testified on her own behalf.

A

summary of the evidence is as follows.
(a)
10.

Writing The Exam

The Student is in her third year at the University, and Introduction to Economics
is a required course for her. She was unable to write the second term test and
the final exam because of illness. She received permission from the University to
write the deferred examination in place of both missed tests, and the deferred
examination would then account for 62.5% of her final grade for the course.

11 .

The deferred exam took place on August 11, 2015 at the University's Exam
Centre. The examination room was the largest exam room on campus, with a
capacity to seat at least 300 students. Individual desks were arranged in rows,
all facing the front of the room. There was at least one clock in the room, but the
clock or clocks could be hard for some students to see, as there were columns
blocking the view.

Accordingly, the exam invigilators would write down the

amount of time remaining in the exam on the boards at the front of the room,
updating the time at least every 15-20 minutes during the 3-hour exam.
12.

The examination on August 11 was a final examination for students who had
taken the summer session of Introduction to Economics, and a deferred final
examination for students who had taken the winter session of Introduction to
Economics. The course instructor for both the winter and summer sessions was
Dr. Furlong. He was at the exam for the first 10-15 minutes, but then left. The
exam was invigilated by PhD students who had been his Teaching Assistants.

13.

The Student claims she arrived at the exam a little late, as she hadn't known
where it was. Everyone else was seated when she arrived and there were not
many desks left. She says she asked an invigilator where to sit, and he pointed
her to the section of the room for students taking the Introduction to Economics
exam. She sat at one of the few empty seats. At the time she did not know the

6

person sitting next to her. She says she never met M.W. before these events.
M.W. was a student in the summer session of Introduction to Economics,
meaning that she and the Student had taken the course at different times.
14.

The exam began at 7 pm. One invigilator, Mr. Gilbert-Gonthier, testified that he
walked up and down the aisles, looking at students as he did so. Neither the
Student nor M.W. were known to him before this event, and he had no reason to
single them out or notice them particularly.

15.

About 50 minutes after the exam started, Mr. Gilbert-Gonthier was walking slowly
from the front of the room to the back of the room between two rows of desks
when he noticed one student look straight at the exam of the student next to her.
The student who "peeked" was on his right, and the student whose exam was
being peeked at was on his left. At the hearing, he was able to identify the
peeking

student

as

the

Student.

He

testified

that

it

was

"pretty obvious" to him at the time that the Student was looking at M.W.'s desk,
rather than up or down at something different. He said he could see her eyes
and face very clearly. M.W.'s examination was placed in a way that would have
made it easy for the Student to see it. The "peek" was not a quick one, and
lasted 3-4 seconds.
16.

Mr. Gilbert-Gonthier continued to walk slowly toward the back of the room.
Consistent with his invigilator training, he did not interact with the students as he
did not want them to know that he'd seen something suspicious. At the back of
the room he spoke with another invigilator, Mr. Daviet. Mr. Gilbert-Gonthier told
Mr. Daviet that there were two students acting suspiciously, and asked Mr.
Daviet to see if he could spot anything. He says he witnessed Mr. Daviet move
forward and set up watch slightly behind the students. After a few minutes, Mr.
Daviet went to Mr. Gilbert-Gonthier and said he had witnessed one student
looking at her neighbour's exam. The two invigilators went to the Chief Presiding
Officer at the exam and told her what they had seen. The Chief Presiding Officer
separated the students by moving one of them.

7

17.

After the exam was over, Mr. Gilbert-Gonthier filled out an Alleged Academic
Misconduct Report Form. His report includes a diagram that is consistent with
his oral evidence in that it identifies the Student as sitting to his right, and M.W.
as sitting to his left. However, in his report he writes that he saw M.W. slightly
lean toward and peek at the Student's exam, which is the opposite of his
evidence at the hearing.

In his testimony, Mr. Gilbert-Gonthier said that he

mixed-up the two students' names in the written portion of his report. He had not
known their names prior to the exam, this was his first time filling out this kind of
report, and he made a mistake. He testified that the Student and M.W. do not
look alike, and that the Student (whom he identified at the hearing) was the one
he saw peeking.
18.

Mr. Daviet also testified.

Like Mr. Gilbert-Gonthier, he was a PhD student in

Economics and a Teaching Assistant for Dr. Furlong.

He is an experienced

exam invigilator.
19.

Mr. Daviet recalled that during the exam, he was approached by Mr. GilbertGonthier, who said that he'd seen something suspicious, and who asked Mr.
Daviet to keep an eye on two students. He said he walked to a spot about two
tables in front of the two students, so that he was in front of one of the students
and diagonally across from the other student. He had not known either student
prior to this episode.

20.

Mr. Daviet testified that the student in front of him made eye movements, looking
toward the paper of the student next to her. The student who was peeking kept
her head fixed, moving only her eyes.

Each eye movement lasted about two

seconds. He witnessed this eye movement several times. The first time he saw
it, he wasn't sure of what he had seen and he kept observing. After witnessing
the same eye movement two or three more times in the next five to ten minutes,
he concluded that the student was looking at her neighbor's exam. In between
the eye movements, the student would write on her exam paper.

8

21.

Mr. Daviet testified he did not think it was possible that the student was looking
up, or that she was looking down at the floor. Her head was not moving, only her
eyes. It was very clear to Mr. Daviet that she was looking at the other student's
paper.

22.

Mr. Daviet reported his concerns to the exam's Chief Presiding Officer.

The

Chief Presiding Officer asked Mr. Daviet to identify which student was the one he
saw cheating. He pointed at the student he'd seen looking at the other's exam,
and that student was then moved by the Chief Presiding Officer.
23.

At the hearing, Mr. Daviet was unable to identify the Student. He said that today,
all this time later, he would not be able to recognize the person he saw looking.
However, he was confident that the person he identified as the cheater was the
student who was moved during the exam, and after the student was moved he
saw her student card which identified her as the Student. He looked at her exam
paper, and believes the Student had completed somewhere between 20 and 35
of the multiple choice questions at the time she was moved.

24.

After the exam, Mr. Daviet also filled out an Alleged Academic Misconduct Form.
At the time he wrote his report, he had seen the students' identification cards and
could put names to them. He wrote that he clearly saw the Student looking at
M.W.'s sheet before writing each answer.

His report includes a diagram.

According to Mr. Daviet's diagram, if one were to look at the two students from
the front of the room (which he says he did), the Student would be on the left,
and M.W. would be on the right. This is the opposite of Mr. Gilbert-Gonthier's
diagram.
25.

Tanya Battersby was the Chief Presiding Officer at the exam. At approximately
8:15, she was advised by an exam invigilator that he and another invigilator had
suspicions of misconduct involving two students.

Her Alleged Academic

Misconduct Report Form indicates she was told that the two students were
"looking at one another's exams."

9

26.

Ms. Battersby asked the Student to move.

At the hearing, she could not

specifically recall why she asked the Student to move, rather than M.W. She
testified that the protocol was to move the student suspected to be involved in
cheating, so she assumed that she moved the Student because the invigilators
had identified her as the one they had concerns about. Ms. Battersby did not
identify the Student at the hearing.
27.

The final witness to testify about the writing of the exam was the Student. She
testified that she sat at a desk as directed by one of the exam invigilators. To her
left side there was a pillar, and to her right side was another student. She did not
know the other student.

28.

The Student admitted she was asked by Ms. Battersby to move desks about an
hour after the exam started, when the Student had completed about half of the
multiple choice questions. She did not know why she was asked to move. She
denied having looked at any one else's exam. She said she did raise her head to
look for a clock a few times.
(b)

29.

The Exam Results

Dr. Furlong was the course instructor. He knew the Student was in the Winter
session of the Introduction to Economics course, and M.W. was in the Summer
session, but he did not personally know either student.

30.

He left the exam after the first 10 or 15 minutes. He was asked afterwards to
mark and compare the exams of the Student and M.W.

A summary of his

analysis is as follows.
(a)

For questions 1-10, M.W. and the Student gave the same answer for all
ten questions. Six of these answers were correct, four were incorrect. For
the four incorrect answers given by both the Student and M.W., the

10

percentage of other students who wrote the exam and gave the same
incorrect answer ranged from 5.8% to 28.29%.
(b)

For questions 11-20, M.W. and the Student gave the same answer for five
of the ten questions. Only one of these answers was correct. For the four
incorrect answers given by both the Student and M.W., the percentage of
other students who wrote the exam and gave the same incorrect answer
ranged from 4.4% to 19.0%.

(c)

For questions 21-30, M.W. and the Student gave the same answer for all
ten of the questions.

Only one was correct.

For the nine incorrect

answers given by both the Student and M.W., the percentage of other
students who wrote the exam and gave the same incorrect answer ranged
from 12.4% to 64.2%.
(d)

For questions 31-40, M.W. and the Student gave the same answer for
only one of the ten questions. It was incorrect. 26.3% of other students
gave that same incorrect answer.

(e)

For questions 41-50, M.W. and the Student gave the same answer for
only one of the ten questions. It was incorrect. 33.5% of other students
gave that same incorrect answer.

31.

Dr. Furlong testified that the pattern of similar wrong answers for the first 30
questions was concerning.

He described the probability of two students

generating this number of same wrong answers as very unusual, and the
chances of this occurring randomly as "vanishingly small."
32 .

Dr. Furlong also testified as to his observations about the Student's exam booklet
more generally. The students were encouraged to show their work on their exam
paper. For the multiple choice portion of the exam, Dr. Furlong could see that
some of the Student's diagrams and calculations showed her trying to work the

11

problems out in a productive and meaningful way. However, for other multiple
choice questions, the Student's explanatory diagrams were generic and
unhelpful, revealing no real understanding of the question asked or how to solve
it.
33.

In cross-examination, Dr. Furlong acknowledged that the Student's grade for the
multiple choice portion of the exam was higher than M.W.'s grade.

For the

second portion of the exam, the Student's exam appeared to show more detail
than M.W.'s exam did.
34.

The Student testified that she performed her own, similar analysis of the two
exams. She noted the same pattern identified by Dr. Furlong, and agreed that it
was a very strange similarity.
(c)

35.

The Aftermath of the Exam

The Student testified that she was shocked and saddened by the accusations of
academic misconduct. She set about to try and determine how this could have
happened. She confided in a friend, who said that they knew of someone else in
a similar situation. That "someone else" turned out to be M.W.

36.

The Student then met with M.W. to see if there was some explanation for the two
of them coming up with such similar answers. There was no overlap in their
experience that might explain the exam results. M.W. had taken the course in
the summer session, and the Student had taken it in the winter session. The
Student had taken a number of preparation sessions through a paid tutoring
service, but M.W. had not.

37.

The Student suggested that the similar exam results might have been influenced
by the fact that the first 30 multiple choice questions were about microeconomics, and the next 20 were about macroeconomics (unfortunately, this
suggestion had not been put to Dr. Furlong in cross-examination, so the Tribunal

12

had little basis for assessing its truth or relevance). The Student also suggested
that perhaps M.W. might have copied from the Student, without the Student
realizing it. The Student testified that she did not copy from M.W., or anyone
else.
Decision and Reasons for Decision of the Tribunal on the Charges

38.

The onus is on the University to establish on the balance of probabilities, using
clear and convincing evidence, that one or more of the academic offences
charged has been committed by the Student.

Counsel for the University

submitted that there was ample evidence for the Tribunal to find that the Student
had copied M.W.'s answers on the exam. Counsel for the Student submitted that
the evidence was simply insufficient to sustain such a serious allegation,
particularly given the Student's denial and the inconsistencies in the evidence of
the two invigilators.
39 .

The Tribunal considered two questions: first, was there sufficient evidence of
copying between the Student and M.W.; and, if so, was there sufficient evidence
that the Student had copied M.W., rather than M.W. copying the Student's exam
unbeknownst to the Student.

40.

Dr. Furlong's chart showing the similarities and differences between the two
examinations was helpful. Dr. Furlong was not tendered as an expert witness,
and the Tribunal was not able to simply rely on his opinion that the chance of any
two students having the same pattern of answers through coincidence was
"vanishingly small". However, there is a striking similarity of not only correct
answers (which would be the hoped-for result) but of incorrect answers. This
striking similarity seems to have stopped when the Student was moved and
separated from M.W. When this evidence is combined with the evidence of the
witnesses to the exam, it is as a whole sufficiently compelling to prove the
University's case.

13

41.

The evidence of the invigilators was not perfect, and there were some troubling
inconsistencies. For example:
(a)

Mr. Gilbert-Gonthier testified that, looking at the two students from the
front of the room, the Student was sitting to the left of M.W.
consistent with the Student's own evidence.

This is

However, Mr. Daviet's

diagram drawn on the evening of the exam indicates that the Student was
sitting to the right of M.W.
(b)

Mr. Gilbert-Gonthier testified that Mr. Daviet observed the students from
behind, while Mr. Daviet testified he observed them from in front.

(c)

Mr. Daviet was not able to identify the Student at the hearing, which made
the inconsistencies with his evidence somewhat more troubling.

42.

Despite these inconsistencies, the Tribunal accepts that both invigilators
observed the Student looking at the exam of M.W. Mr. Gilbert-Gonthier identified
the Student in person at the hearing as the student he saw peeking.

His

explanation for the discrepancy in his written report - that he made an error - is
understandable.

Mr. Daviet testified with certainty that the student who was

moved during the exam was the student he saw peeking. There is no doubt that
the Student was the one who was moved during the exam.
43.

Both invigilators recalled the incident with a degree of detail that was persuasive.
There was no suggestion that they had colluded, in fact, the discrepancies
between their accounts suggests they did not. Considering the evidence in its
totality, the Tribunal finds that the differences in their recollections of events are
the normal byproduct of memories fading over time, and do not undermine the
credibility of reliability of their evidence on the crucial issue of whether they saw
the Student look at M.W.'s paper while writing her exam.

14

44 .

There was no reason for the invigilators to not be truthful. Mr. Gilbert-Gonthier
testified that he was aware that allegations of cheating were serious, with severe
implications, and that he would not report suspected cheating unless he was very
confident.

45.

The Tribunal notes that the burden of proof is on the University, not the Student,
and there is no obligation for the Student to prove that she didn't copy from M.W.
However, the Student's own evidence discounted the possibility that there were
any other rational explanations for the similarities between her exam and M.W.'s
exam. In the face of all the evidence against her, the Student's denial lacked
plausibility.

46 .

The Student submits that she couldn't have cheated, because she didn't know
who she was going to sit next to at the deferred exam, and in fact she didn't even
choose her seat. She sat where the exam invigilator told her to. She claims to
have never met M.W. before.

On this point, the University submits that the

Student's claim that she only met M.W. after the exam is not believable, and that
it strains credulity to imagine that the Student just happened to confide in
someone who just happened to know M.W. The University suggests that this
"coincidence" is as fanciful as the "coincidence" of the exam results.
47.

There is not sufficient evidence for the Tribunal to conclude it is more likely than
not that the Student had colluded with M.W. in advance of the exam, or that the
Student went into the examination with a specific plan to copy M.W.'s exam. It is
just as likely that this was a crime of opportunity, and that once the Student
realized she could see M.W.'s exam, she decided to copy from it. While this
does not affect the Student's liability on the charges, it may be a relevant factor
for penalty.

15

Conclusion

48.

The Tribunal finds that, on or about August 11, 2015, the Student knowingly
obtained unauthorized assistance to complete the final deferred examination in
Introduction to Economics, contrary to section B.1.1 (b) of the Code, as alleged in
Charge 1. In light of the Tribunal's finding, it is expected that Charge 2 will be
withdrawn by the University.

49.

The Tribunal will convene as soon as reasonably possible for the penalty
hearing.

Dated at Toronto this l't-t\iay of Q<.#OA/' , 2016

~

------

