Case 851 - Finding

   [1]Case 851 - Sanction

DATE:

   October 15, 2016

PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v. Y.Y. (âthe Studentâ)

Hearing Date(s):

   July 8, 2016

Panel Members:

   Ms. Johanna Braden, Barrister and Solicitor, Chair
   Professor Michael Evans, Faculty Panel Member
   Ms. Yusra Qazi, Student Panel Member

Appearances:

   Ms. Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland,
   Barristers
   Mr. Peter Wuebbolt, Barrister and Solicitor, Counsel for the Student
   Dr. Martha Harris, Academic Integrity Officer, Office of Student
   Academic Integrity, Faculty of Arts and Science
   Dr. Kieran Furlong, Sessional Lecturer, Department of Economics,
   University of Toronto
   Mr. Mathieu Gilbert-Gonthier, Invigilator of ECOI OOY Exam
   Mr. Remi Daviet, Invigilator of ECOIOOY Exam
   Ms. Tanya Battersby, Chief Presiding Officer of ECOIOOY Exam
   YY., the Student

In Attendance:

   Mr. Simon Raposo (Observer)
   W.Z. (Mother of the Student)
   Ms. Krista Osborne, Administrative Assistant, Office of Appeals,
   Discipline and Faculty Grievances

   Student charged with one offence of unauthorized assistance under s.
   B.i.1(b) the Code . Student charged in the alternative under s.
   B.i.3(b) .Â  The Student was present and represented by counsel. The
   Student denied the charges.

   The charges related to allegations that the Student copied answers to
   the multiple choice component of her final examination off of the
   person sitting next to her in the exam room, M.W.Â Â  Part way through
   the exam, the exam invigilator noticed the Student looking M.W.âs
   answers and asked the Student to move across the room. After the exam,
   the Studentâs answers were compared to M.W.âs, and their responses were
   overwhelmingly similar (they gave the same answer in 25/30 questions)
   until part way through the exam (when the Student was moved) at which
   point they were entirely different (only two of 20 responses were the
   same). There were also eyewitness accounts by the exam invigilators,
   which were imperfect, however the Tribunal found that, considering the
   evidence in its totality, the differences in their recollections of
   events are the normal by product of memories fading over time, and do
   not undermine the credibility of reliability of their evidence on the
   crucial issue of whether they saw the Student look at M.W.'s paper
   while writing her exam.Â  The Panel found the evidence of similarity in
   the responses, coupled with the eyewitness accounts of the exam
   invigilators was sufficiently clear, cogent and convincing to discharge
   the burden of proof on the University.Â  The Student was guilty of the
   first count of unauthorized assistance; it was expected that the
   University would withdraw the alternative charge of academic dishonesty
   under s. B.i.3(b) .Â  Penalty to be determined at a later hearing.
   [2]View Case

References

   1. http://live-the-office-of-the-governing-council.pantheonsite.io/media/13073
   2. file:///media/12922
