Case 1446

FILE:

   Case # 1446 (2023-2024)

DATE:

   July 12, 2023

PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v. H.C. (‚the Student‚)

HEARING DATE(S):

   April 13, 2023, via Zoom

PANEL MEMBERS:

   Michelle S. Henry, Chair

   Professor Vivienne Luk, Faculty Panel Member

   Sterling Mancuso, Student Panel Member

APPEARANCES:

   Tina Lie, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg
   Rothstein LLP

   Janet Song, Co-Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg Rothstein LLP

   Anja Kohlman Sawa, Representative for the Student, Downtown Legal
   Services

   The Student

HEARING SECRETARY:

   Samanthe Huang, Coordinator & Hearing Secretary, Office of Appeals,
   Discipline and Faculty Grievances

   The Student was charged with separate offences related to two different
   courses. The charges under the first course (‚MAT224‚) are as follows.
   The Student was charged with three counts under s. B.i.1(b) of the Code
   for knowingly obtaining unauthorized assistance in connection Term Test
   1 (‚TT1‚), Term Test 2 (‚TT2‚), and the final assessment in MAT224. In
   the alternative to the above charges, the Student was charged with
   three counts under s. B.i.1(d) of the Code for knowingly representing
   as their own an idea or expression of an idea or work of another. In
   the further alternative, the Student was charged under s. B.i.3(b) with
   knowingly engaging in a form of cheating, academic dishonesty or
   misconduct, fraud, or misrepresentation not otherwise described in the
   Code to obtain academic credit or advantage in connection with TT1,
   TT2, and the final exam in MAT224.

   With respect to the second course (‚PHL245‚), the Student was charged
   with knowingly obtaining unauthorized assistance in connection with the
   final exam in PHL245 contrary to s. B.i.1(b) of the Code. In the
   alternative, the Student was charged with knowingly engaging in a form
   of cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud, or
   misrepresentation not otherwise described in the Code to obtain
   academic credit or advantage in connection with the final exam in
   PHL245 contrary to s. B.i.3(b) of the Code.

   The hearing proceeded based on an Agreed Statement of Facts. The Panel
   also received a Joint Book of Documents. The Student attended the
   hearing and was represented by counsel. In Winter 2021 the Student was
   enrolled in MAT224. TT1 was administered remotely and students were
   required to sign an academic integrity statement agreeing they had not
   received aid in the test. The Student submitted his test. When the
   instructors reviewed TT1, they found that virtually the entire test had
   answers similar to solutions posted on Chegg.com. TT2 was similarly
   administered, and the Student signed an academic integrity statement.
   When the Student‚s TT2 was reviewed by instructors, they found that the
   test had answers with substantial similarities to answers posted on
   Chegg.com. The final assessment in MAT224 also required students to
   sign an academic integrity statement. When the instructors reviewed the
   Student‚s submission, they found substantial similarities between the
   Student‚s answers to certain questions and answers posted on Chegg.com.
   The Instructors noted that students could have answered questions in
   all three of the assessments in various ways. The fact that the Student
   had the same steps and omitted the same steps as the answers on
   Chegg.com was unlikely to have occurred by coincidence.

   In Fall 2021 the Student was enrolled in PHL245. The final exam in
   PHL245 was administered remotely and students were not permitted to
   consult outside sources. Each question on the final exam had two
   versions. When grading the Student‚s exam, the instructor noted that
   the Student‚s answers to one of the questions contained the variant
   used in an alternative version of the question that the Student had not
   received.

   In August 2022, the Student met with the Dean‚s Designate. During the
   meeting the Student admitted to using Chegg.com in TT1, TT2, and the
   final assessment in MAT224, and that he discussed the questions with
   other students in the final exam in PHL245.

   After deliberation and consideration of the ASF and the JBD, the Panel
   accepted the Student‚s guilty pleas. The Panel found the Student guilty
   of knowingly obtaining unauthorized assistance in connection with TT1,
   TT2, and the final exam in MAT224 contrary to s. B.i.1(b) of the Code.
   The Panel also found the Student guilty of knowingly obtaining
   unauthorized assistance in connection with the final exam in PHL245
   under s. B.i.3(b) of the Code.

   The University and the Student submitted a Joint Submission on Penalty
   (‚JSP‚). The Panel heard submissions on the appropriateness of the
   penalty and reviewed relevant prior decisions submitted by the
   University. The Panel considered the likelihood of repetition of the
   offence, the serious nature of the offence, and the detriment to the
   University. The Panel noted that this was not the Student‚s first
   offence and that he had four prior offences but noted that the
   incidents had occurred around the same time. The University stressed
   the seriousness of the offence, especially during the height of the
   pandemic, and stressed the need for deterrence to communicate the
   seriousness of the offences. After considering the evidence and the
   similar cases provided by the University, the Panel accepted the JSP.

   The Panel imposed the following sanctions: a final grade of zero in
   both courses; a suspension from the University for a period of five
   years; a corresponding notation on the Student‚s academic record and
   transcript until graduation; and a report to Provost for publication.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/31259
