Case 1107

   [1]Case 1107 - Appeal

   DATE: March 19, 2021

   PARTIES:Â University of Toronto v. D.B.

   HEARING DATE: January 11, 2021, via Zoom

   Panel Members:
   Mr. Simon Clements, Chair
   Dr. Chris Koenig-Woodyard, Faculty Panel Member
   Ms. Alena Zelinka, Student Panel Member

   Appearances:
   Mr. Robert Centa, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland
   Rosenberg Rothstein LLP
   Ms. Sonia Patel, Articling Student, Paliare Roland Rosenberg Rothstein
   LLP

   In Attendance:
   Mr. Christopher Lang, Director, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty
   Grievances

   Not in Attendance: The Student

   The Student was charged underâ¯s. B.i.1(d) of theâ¯Code of Behaviour on
   Academic Matters, 1995â¯(theÂ âCodeâ) on the basis that heâ¯knowingly
   represented an idea or expression of an idea or work of another
   asâ¯hisâ¯own in an assignmentâ¯to obtain an academic credit. In the
   alternative, the Student was charged underâ¯s.Â B.i.3(b)â¯of
   theâ¯Codeâ¯on the basis that the Studentâ¯knowingly engaged in a form
   of cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or
   misrepresentation in order to obtain academic credit or other academic
   advantage.

   Neither the Student nor a legal representative of the Student appeared
   at the hearing. The UniversityâsÂ Policy on Official Correspondence
   with StudentsÂ provides that students enrolled at the UniversityÂ are
   responsible for maintaining a current and valid postal address and
   email account on ROSI. Students are expected to monitor and retrieve
   all mail, including emails, on a frequent and consistent basis.Â Rule
   9Â (c)Â of theÂ RulesÂ provides thatÂ the Notice of Hearing can be
   servedÂ via email to the studentâs email address in ROSI. The
   University provided evidence that the Student had been served at his
   ROSI-listed email address with theâ¯chargesâ¯andÂ Notice
   ofÂ ElectronicÂ Hearing. The Panel noted that there was evidence that
   the StudentâsÂ emailÂ accountÂ had beenÂ accessed after service of
   theâ¯chargesÂ and theÂ NoticeÂ ofÂ ElectronicÂ Hearing, however, there
   was no evidence that the Student had read the communication. The
   Student was subsequently provided an opportunity to provide submissions
   in relation to the request of theÂ UniversityÂ for the hearing to
   proceed electronically due to the COVID-19 pandemic. The Student did
   not respond to this request and the hearing was ordered to proceed
   electronically.Â Further, CounselÂ for theÂ UniversityÂ attempted to
   reach the student via telephone on the morning of theÂ hearing,
   however, the telephone number listed in ROSI was not in
   service.Â Relying onÂ rulesÂ 9 andÂ 17 of theÂ RulesÂ and ss. 6Â andÂ 7
   of theÂ SPPA, the Panel ordered that the hearing proceedÂ to be heard
   on its meritsÂ in the Studentâs absence as they found that reasonable
   noticeÂ of the charges and hearingÂ had been provided to the Student.

   The Panel noted that pursuant to Rule 61 of the Rules, affidavits may
   be received by the Tribunal as good evidence andÂ that the affidavit
   evidence was served in accordance with Rule 72(b).Â Regarding the
   charges laid under s. B.i.1(d) of theâ¯Code, the
   Panelâ¯receivedÂ andÂ examined theÂ affidavitÂ evidence ofâ¯the
   Professor who taughtâ¯the course for which the assignment in question
   was submitted.â¯The Professor indicated in herâ¯evidence thatâ¯the
   course syllabusÂ contained a warning about plagiarism. The Professor
   further provided evidence thatÂ she used the âTurnitinâ softwareÂ to
   accept assignments for the course. TheÂ softwareÂ flagsâ¯any areas of
   potential plagiarism inÂ the submittedÂ written work. The âTurnitinâ
   softwareâ¯generated a report thatÂ indicated a 22% similarity index.
   ItÂ was the Professorâs evidence thatÂ upon receiving the report she
   reviewed the assignment and discovered that the Student had
   copiedÂ full sentences verbatim from outside sources without placing
   quotationÂ marks on those sentences, as required.Â After reviewing the
   assignment and the sources, the Professor concluded that theÂ Student
   included verbatim, and nearly verbatim, text in his assignment without
   appropriate attribution.Â After reviewingÂ the Professorâs evidence and
   a copyÂ of the Studentâs assignment, the Panel foundÂ that
   theâ¯Studentâ¯was guilty of oneâ¯count ofÂ plagiarismÂ contrary to
   section B.i.1(d) of theâ¯Code.â¯Given the Panelâs finding, the
   University withdrew theÂ alternateÂ charge underâ¯s.Â B.i.3(b)Â of
   theÂ Code.

   In determining sanction,â¯the Panelâ¯was asked by the University
   toÂ considerâ¯the principles and factors relevant to
   sanctionâ¯discussed inâ¯University of Toronto and Mr.
   C.,â¯namely,Â theâ¯Studentâsâ¯character, likelihood ofâ¯repetition of
   the offence, the nature of the offence,Â any extenuating circumstances
   surrounding the commission of the offence, theÂ detriment to the
   University and theâ¯need toÂ deter others from committing a similar
   offence. In addition to these, the University asked the Panel
   toÂ consider the need for some measure of uniformity in theÂ sentencing
   processes so that like cases are treated alike.Â Without the Studentâs
   participation, the Panel found no evidence of mitigatingÂ or
   extenuatingÂ circumstances, good character,Â remorseÂ or insightÂ that
   would prevent the Panel from imposing a serious penalty.Â Having regard
   to all the circumstances of the offence,Â and the need to achieve a
   degree of consistency in imposing sanctions, the PanelÂ accepted the
   UniversityâsÂ recommendation on sanction.Â Theâ¯Panel imposedâ¯the
   following sanctions:â¯a final grade of zero in theÂ course; aÂ two-year
   suspension;â¯a three-yearÂ a notation of the sanction
   onÂ theâ¯transcript;Â andâ¯aâ¯report to the Provost for
   aÂ publicationÂ â¯with theâ¯Studentâsâ¯name withheld.
   [2]View Case

References

   1. https://governingcouncil.utoronto.ca/system/files/university-tribunal-decisions/Case%201107%20%28Appeal%29.pdf
   2. file:///media/29747
