UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
IN THE MATTER of charges of academic dishonesty made on March 9, 2011
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters, 1995,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Act, 1971, S.O. 1971, c. 56 as amended S.O.
1978,c. 88
BETWEEN:
UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
- andA

M

and N

B

REASONS FOR DECISION ON SANCTION
Hearing Date: January 26, 2015
Panel Members:
Mr. Paul Schabas, Barrister and Solicitor, Chair
Professor Gabriele D'Eleuterio, Faculty of Applied Science and Engineering, Faculty Panel
Member
Mr. Christopher Tsui, Student Panel Member
Appearances:
Ms. Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel for University, Paliare Roland Barristers
In Attendance:
Ms. Lucy Gaspini, Manager, Academic Integrity and Affairs, University of Toronto Mississauga
Ms. Sinead Cutt, Administrative Assistant, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances

[1] We found the students had committed academic misconduct in our reasons released in
December. We described them as two different counts of academic misconduct and we
in
understand the University's position. It is seeking a mark of zero for Ms. M
and Ms. B
in SOC 307 H5S.
FSC 239Y5Y and a mark of zero for Ms. M
[2] The University has also asked that they be suspended for four years starting on
September 1st 2014 with a notation to continue for five years from that date.
[3] We appreciate the review of the authorities which has been very helpful to us and we
appreciate that the general rule of thumb is that the starting point of these types of cases
is a two year suspension and the matter goes up or down depending on various
aggravating and mitigating factors.
[4] We are in agreement that the closest case on point is the M
H
case
(Case No. 521; January 12, 2009). This is perhaps the closest because this case involves a
student who did not appear and he had no prior findings of guilt. So in our view, that is
the most instructive having regard to the factors that we ought to be considering, as they
did in Hanif and the factors that are set out in Mr. Sopinka's old decision of Mr. C. (Case
No. 1976177-3; November 5, 1976).
[5] In our view, the cases that the University took us to where students received a four-year
suspension or more all involved situations where the student had a prior record and in our
view, while we recognize that reasonable people could differ, in our view that is a
compelling factor which drives us to find that the suspension in this case should be three
years.
[6] As with H
, we did, as our reasons reflect, regard this more as two incidents rather
than three, though we appreciate the point that separate incidents within a course can be
as being the
separate offences. But in our view, that is how we saw it and we see H
closest case on point and are inclined to follow it.
[7] As such, the panel orders:
1.

A final grade of zero (0) in the course SOC307H5S for Ms. B
and Ms.
M
; and, a final grade of zero (0) in the course FSC239Y5Y for Ms.
M
;

2.

That Ms. B
and Ms. M
shall be suspended from the University of
Toronto for a period of 3 years commencing September 1, 2014 and ending on
August 31, 2017;

3.

That the sanction be recorded on Ms. B
' and Ms. M
's academic
record and transcript to the effect that she was sanctioned for academic
misconduct, for a period of 4 years from the date of this Order to August 31,
2018, or until her graduation from the University, whichever is earlier; and

4.

That this case be reported to the Provost, with Ms. B
' and Ms. M
's
name withheld, for publication of a notice of the decision of the Tribunal and the
sanction imposed.

~

Dated at Toronto, this ii day of May, 2015

Paul Schabas, Co-Chair

22732120.1

