Report #339

   DATE: January 8, 2010
   PARTIES: Ms. H. S.Â  (the Student) v. UTSC
   Hearing Date(s): December 1, 2009
   Committee Members:
   Kate Hilton, (Chair)
   Min Hee Margaret Kim
   Dr. Joel Kirsh
   Dr. Chris Koenig-Woodyard
   Professor Louise Lemieux-Charles
   Appearances:
   For the Student Appellant:
   H.S. (the Student)
   For the UTSC:
   Professor John Scherk
   UTSC â appeal of a denial for an extension of time to write deferred
   examination â chronic back pain â medical documentation â previous
   success on examinations written under Accessibility Services â previous
   registration with UTSC Accessibility Office â separate Accessibility
   Services registration â Accessibility Services UTSC â Accessibility
   Services, St. George campus â faxed forms â faxed forms after deadline
   â missed deadline â UTSC policy â severe episode of back pain â UTSC
   Medical Certificate âÂ  irrelevance of Studentâs responsibility of
   notifying Accessibility Services â adequate medical documentation â
   compliance with UTSC policy âÂ  tri-campus Accessibility Services â
   poor integration of Accessibility Services offices â appeal allowed
   Appeal of a decision denying the Student an extension of time to write
   deferred examination in two Winter Session courses. The Student had
   previously experienced serious academic difficulties. The Studentâs
   academic record showed a number of failed courses, numerous petitions
   for deferred examinations and three separate suspensions for failure to
   meet the minimum GPA requirement of her program. The Student suffers
   from severe, chronic back pain, which makes it difficult for her to sit
   for long periods of time. There was significant medical evidence in the
   Studentâs file to indicate her condition had compromised her academic
   performance. The Student had registered with UTSC Accessibility
   Services and wrote some examinations previously with accommodations.
   The Committee noted it appeared that the Student was more successful on
   examinations that she wrote under the supervision of Accessibility
   Services. The Student was scheduled to write two deferred examinations
   in August 2008. Before the examination dates, the Student realized she
   was required to register separately with Accessibility Services on the
   St. George campus to write one of the two deferred examinations with
   accommodation. The Student made two separate trips to the St. George
   Accessibility office, one to obtain information and the other to
   register. On her second visit, the Student arrived and learned it was
   the last possible day to register with the Accessibility Service Office
   for the examination period. The staff member on duty advised the
   Student to take the required forms home and submit them by fax. The
   Student did so and was later informed by another staff member that the
   Accessibility Services Office was not prepared to accept forms filed by
   fax after the deadline and that she was not entitled to accommodation.
   The Student experienced a severe and medically documented flare-up of
   her back condition during the deferred examination period and was
   unable to write her examinations. The Committee referred to UTSCâs
   policy, holding that it clearly states a studentâs petition for an
   extension of time to rewrite a deferred exam will be considered in a
   situation where a student has an experienced documented medical
   emergency. The Committee found, in this case, the Student experienced a
   severe episode of back pain that was different in degree from the
   chronic pain she usually managed. The Student sought medical attention
   and had a doctor complete a UTSC Medical Certificate indicating the
   Student was incapable of writing her examinations. The Committee found
   that the Student did everything the UTSC policy required and that she
   should have been granted an extension to rewrite her deferred
   examinations. The Committee found the lower bodiesâ decisions that the
   Student was appealing turned on the Studentâs responsibility to
   register with Accessibility Services, the Studentâs failure to secure
   the required accommodations, and her failure to notify Accessibility
   Services when she realized she was too sick to write their exams. The
   Committee held that the Studentâs responsibility for registering with
   Accessibility Services or notifying them of an illness was irrelevant
   to the determination of whether she was entitled to an extension of
   time. The Committee found the Student was ill on the date of their
   examinations and provided adequate medical documentation. The Committee
   held that, by denying the petition on the basis of her failure to
   register or communicate with Accessibility Services, UTSC was applying
   a higher standard to the Student than it applies to other UTSC students
   who do not require Accessibility Services. The Committee found this was
   neither appropriate nor fair. The Committee expressed concern with the
   tri-campus procedures involved in the University of Toronto
   Accessibility Services. The Committee found that, as in the Studentâs
   case, the three campus-specific Accessibility Offices appeared to be
   poorly integrated and unnecessarily bureaucratic. The Committee found
   that had it been necessary to consider the question of whether the
   Student had fulfilled her responsibility to register with Accessibility
   Services, the Committee would have found the Student had made the best
   efforts to fulfill her responsibility and should not have been
   penalized for missing the deadline. Appeal granted.
   [1]View Report

References

   1. file:///media/12668
