UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
GOVERNING COUNCIL

Report #339 of the Academic Appeals Committee
January 8, 2010
The Academic Appeals Committee reports that it held a hearing on Tuesday December I,
2009, at which the following were present:
Assistant Dean Kate Hilton, Chair
Ms Min Hee Margaret Kim
Dr. Joel Kirsh
Dr. Chris Koenig-Woodyard
Professor Louise Lemieux-Charles
Ms. Natalie Ramtahal, Coordinator, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances
In Attendance:

Ms H - sa(the "Student")
Professor John Scherk, University of Toronto at Scarborough (UTSC)

I.

The Appeal

The Student is appealing the decision of the UTSC Subcommittee on Academic Appeals
dated November 5, 2008, denying her an extension of time to write deferred
examinations in two 2008 Winter Session courses (EESB03H3 and MAT135Yl).

II.

Facts

The Student enrolled at UTSC in the 2005 Fall Session, in an Honours Bachelor of
Science program. The Student immediately began to experience serious academic
difficulties, such that by the end of her third year of study, she had earned only 3 credits
towards her degree and had a cumulative GPA of 0.59. Her record shows a striking
number of failed courses, numerous petitions for deferred examinations and three
separate suspensions for failure to meet the minimum GP A requirements of her program.
The Student suffers from severe, chronic back pain, which makes it extremely difficult
for her to sit for long periods of time. There is significant medical evidence in the
Student's file to indicate that her condition has compromised her academic performance
throughout her career at UTSC. Although neither the Student nor UTSC could confirm
the date, it appears that the Student registered with UTSC Accessibility Services in the
2007 Winter term, and wrote some of her examinations with accommodations. It also
appears that she was more successful on examinations that she wrote under the
supervision of Accessibility Services than she was under normal examination conditions.

I

At the end of the 2008 Winter term, the Student was scheduled to write examinations in
EESB03H3 (a one-term course at UTSC) and MA Tl35Yl (a full-year course at St.
George). The Student was unable to write the examinations at the scheduled times due to
her medical condition. She petitioned to write a deferred examination in EESB03H3 and
MAT135Yl, and these petitions were granted on April 29, 2008 and May 16, 2008
respectively.
The Student was scheduled to write defen-ed examinations in EESB03H3 and
MAT135Yl in August 2008. At some point prior to the examination dates, the Student
realized that she was required to register separately with Accessibility Services on the St.
George campus in order to write MAT135Yl with accommodations. She made two
separate trips to the St. George Accessibility Services Office, one to obtain information
about the registration and accommodations procedures at St. George, and the other to
register. On her second visit, she an-ived at the end of the day and learned that it was the
last possible day to register with the Accessibility Services Office for the upcoming
examination period. Since the office was about to close, the staff member on duty
advised the Student to take her forms home and submit them by fax. She did so.
Subsequently, she was informed by another staff member that the St. George
Accessibility Services Office was not prepared to accept forms filed by fax after the
deadline, and that she was not entitled to access any accommodations with respect to
MAT135Yl.
The Student experienced a severe (and medically documented) flare-up of her back
condition during the period of August 14-19 and was unable to write her examinations in
either EESB03H3 or MA Tl35Yl.
UTSC's calendar states as follows: "If you miss a defen-ed exam, you may petition for an
extension of time to write it; normally no other form of special consideration will be
granted. Such a petition will be considered only if you provide compelling evidence of a
significant medical or other emergency."

III.

Previous Decisions

On August 15, 2008, the Student petitioned for an extension of time to write a defen-ed
examination in MAT135Yl. The Student provided a UTSC Medical Certificate,
completed by her treating physician, which stated that she had been unable to write her
examinations during the period of August 14-19. The Student also provided a letter from
the St. George Accessibility Services Office in support of her petition. The letter
indicated that the Student was registered with Accessibility Services, and that she had
been advised "not to attempt writing her exam without accommodations." The petition
was denied on the basis that the Student had missed the deadline to register for
Accessibility Services, and that it was the Student's responsibility to have
accommodations in place in time to write her examinations.
On October 8, 2008, the Student petitioned for an extension of time to write a defen-ed
examination in EESB03H3. The petition was denied on the basis that the Student had not

2

fulfilled her responsibility to have the appropriate accommodations in place in time to
write her examinations.
On October 16, 2008, the Student again petitioned for an extension of time to write
deferred examinations in EESB03H3 and lv1AT135Yl. The petition was denied.
On October 28, 2008, the Student appealed to the UTSC Subcommittee on Academic
Appeals. The Subcommittee denied the appeal. In its decision, the Subcommittee wrote
the following:
You are apparently registered with Accessibility Services at UTSC and at
St. George, in order to write exams under their supervision. To do so, you
needed to schedule these exams in advance. A letter from St. George
Accessibility indicates that you did not register with them before their
registration deadline.... On the dates of the deferred exams, you
experienced extreme back pain. Without any consultation with either
Accessibility Service, you decided not to write the exams.... The
university expects students to take responsibility for their own well-being
and to make any special arrangements which are necessary to allow them
to complete their academic work. The committee judged that you were
aware of resources available to deal with your condition but that you did
not make appropriate use of these resources. For this reason, your appeal
was denied.
On January 9, 2009, the Student appealed to the Academic Appeals Committee of the
Governing Council.

IV.

Decision

UTSC policy clearly states that a student's petition for an extension of time to rewrite a
deferred exam will be considered in a situation where a student has experienced a
documented medical emergency. In this case, the Student experienced a severe episode
of back pain that was different in degree from the chronic pain she manages on an
ongoing basis. The Student sought medical attention from her doctor on the dates of the
examinations in EESB03H3 and MAT135Yl, and the doctor completed a UTSC Medical
Certificate indicating that the Student was incapable of writing her examinations. This
Committee is of the view that the Student did everything that UTSC policy requires, and
that, in the circumstances, she should have been granted an extension of time to rewrite
her deferred examinations.
The previous decisions in this case turned on the Student's responsibility for registering
with Accessibility Services, her failure to secure the accommodations that she required to
write her examinations and her failure to notify Accessibility Services when she realized
that she was too sick to write her examinations. This Committee is of the view that the
Student's responsibility for registering with Accessibility Services or notifying them of
her illness is irrelevant to the detem1ination of whether or not she should be entitled to an

3

extension of time to rewrite her deferred examinations. The Student was ill on the date of
her examinations and provided adequate medical documentation in support of her
petition. By denying her petition on the basis of her failure to register or communicate
with Accessibility Services, UTSC is applying a higher standard to the Student than it
applies to UTSC students who do not require the assistance of Accessibility Services.
This is neither appropriate nor fair.
This Committee also wishes to note that it was troubled by the po1trait of tri-campus
Accessibility Services that emerged in the course of this hearing. As experienced by the
Student in this case, the three campus-specific Accessibility Offices appear to be poorly
integrated with each other and unnecessarily bureaucratic for students who take courses
on more than one campus. This Committee accepts as true that the Student attempted to
register with the St. George Accessibility Office before the deadline, that she received
conflicting information from staff, and that she was extremely confused about the
registration procedures at St. George despite the fact that she was already registered at the
UTSC Accessibility Office and had written several examinations there. Therefore, had it
been necessary to consider the question of whether or not the Student had fulfilled her
responsibility to register with Accessibility Services, this Committee would have found
that the Student had made best efforts to fulfill her responsibility and should not have
been penalized for missing the registration deadline.
The appeal is allowed.

4

