DISCIPLINE APPEAL BOARD
THE UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO

IN THE MATTER of the University of Toronto Act, 1971, S.O. 1971, c. 56 as amended S.O.
1978,c.88
·
AND IN THE MATTER of the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters,

1995

BETWEEN:
UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO

Appellant

- and-

Respondent
Members of the Discipline Appeal Board Panel:

• Patricia D.S. Jackson
• Aaron Christoff
• Professor Wendy Duff
• Jemy Joseph
Appearances:

• Linda Rothstein; Lily Hanner for the Appellant
• Maurice Vaturi for the Respondent
REASONS FOR DECISION

1.

The University of Toronto (the "University") appeals from the August 11, 2008 decision

of a Ttibunal of the Trial Division of the University Tribunal (the "Tribunal") in which the
Tribunal found the respondent not guilty of two charges under the Code of Behaviour on

-2Academic Matters, 1995 (the "Code"). For the reasons which follow we allow the appeal and
send the matter back to the Trial Division for a new hearing.
2.

Mr. :rv1II was charged with submitting an answer booklet during a term test that was

written prior to rather than during the test. It was alleged that his conduct was contrary to section
B.I. l (b), or alternatively section B.I.3(b) of the Code.
3.

A summary of the Tribunal's factual findings follows.

4.

The tem1 test in question was worth 25% of the final mark in Law and Psychiatry. The

course was taught by Professor William Watson, who testified at the hearing.
5.

In the winter of 2006, a student in the same Law and Psychiatry course had brought a

completed test booklet into the test room and substituted it for a blank test booklet distributed at
the test. 1 As a result of this, Professor Watson testified that he modified his practice and
employed particular diligence in the method used for distributing booklets during the test.
6.

hi particular, the Tribunal noted the practice used by Professor Watson for the

administration of tests as follows:
(a)

To prepare he would retrieve a bundle oftest booklets from the storage area in the
college building. The bundles were in batches of 125 booklets. (The nomrnl class
size for a test was approximately 50.) The booklets came in two different colours:
one was pure white and the other off-white with a shade of green.

(b)

He would take the bundle of 125 booklets and place it on his desk, cleared for the
exercise. He would remove 25 booklets from the pile and put those in a desk
drawer, leaving a hundred booklets on his desk.

(c)

He would then count out 60 booklets.

Leading to earlier proceedings before the University Tribunal: University of Toronto v. ~
October 10, 2007.

Jill,

-3(d)

He would then apply the same random stamp number to each of the 60 booklets.
The random stamp number was different for each test. As he stamped the
booklets, he recounted them. After 60 booklets were stamped and counted, he put
them into a plastic bag, placing the remaining 40 unstamped booklets in a separate
plastic bag together with the stamp marker.

(e)

On this occasion he recalled going to the storage room and obtaining a new batch
of pure white booklets.

7.

As described by the Tribunal, Professor Watson further testified that on the occasion in

issue the stamped booklets were distributed to the students taking the test by himself and a
teaching assistant. Although he did not count the number of students taking the test, there were
approximately 50 from the Tuesday class as well as some students from the Wednesday class
who although scheduled to take the test the following date attended the Tuesday test. He did not
count the number of stamped booklets that were initially distributed to the students. Students
wanting a second booklet during the test would put up their hand and a second booklet was
distributed to them from the remaining stamped 60 booklets. After the 60 booklets were
distributed, he took unstamped booklets from the plastic bag where the 40 booklets had been
placed and stamped them. He did not count the number of books that were distributed or the
total number of unstamped booklets remaining in the bag at the end of the test. Nor did he count
the number of test booklets that were returned at the end of the test.
8.

The Tribunal further described Professor Watson's evidence that when the test booklets

were returned, he noted one test booklet with a slightly different coloration. It was off-white
with a green tint. It did not have a number stamp on it. The ink and the penmanship on page 1
of the booklet were different from the remaining pages. Page 1 was written with a ballpoint pen
and cursive penmanship and the remaining pages of the booklet were written with black felttipped pen and the penmanship was in print form. There were also pencil marks on parts of the
student's test booklet that had been written over in black felt-tipped ink and Professor Watson
inferred that the student had written the answers to the specimen question in the test booklet in
pencil and had used the black felt-tipped marker to write over the pencil marks during the test.

-4-

9.

Professor Watson noticed that the Student had placed a coat on the desk and prior to the

test commencement asked the Student to remove it. The Student then placed it on the chair
beside him. The Tribunal noted that apart from that, Professor Watson did not notice any
unusual behaviour by the Student. Nor wa$ there any direct evidence that the Student brought a
completed test booklet into the test. No one observed the Student switching the test booklet.
And no one found the blank test booklet allegedly handed to the Student at the beginning of the
test.
10.

The Tribunal also noted the testimony of the Student. He denied bringing a completed

test book into the classroom. He testified that he prepared for the test and wrote the answers
during the test period. He testified that he did the appropriate readings, and submitted the
readings with his highlighting and margin notes in evidence. He could not explain why the test
booklet he submitted was of a slightly different colour and did not have a stamp on it.
11.

The Tribunal noted his explanation of the difference in ink and penmanship. He

presented in evidence many examples of other tests which demonstrated that he frequently
switched his penmanship sometimes in the course of a single sentence. The Tribunal found this
explanation credible and accepted his evidence.
12.

He explained the pencil marks, stating he had a practice of writing certain portions of the

test in pencil in order to get it right, after which he would write over the pencil in ink. He
submitted other tests as examples of this practice. The Tribunal found the Student's explanation
on this point credible and accepted his evidence.
13.

On the basis of this evidence, the Tribunal concluded that the Student should be found

not guilty.
14.

The Tribunal noted the onus of proof in section E.4(b) of the Code:
The onus of proof shall be on the prosecutor, who must show on
clear and convincing evidence that the accused has committed the
alleged offence.

15.

The Tribunal observed the serious nature of the allegations and the serious implications

for the Student, including in his intended application to law school. It concluded that in the

-5circumstances, the University had not satisfied the onus of proof. It provided the following
explanation:
34. Although Professor Watson was meticulous in counting and
stamping the 60 booklets, he did not count the total number of
booklets that were distributed and returned. Without such a count
being done, it cannot be determined conclusively or by necessary
inference that the booklet submitted by the Student had not been
handed out by Professor Watson during the test.
35. Professor Watson testified in a clear manner and we do not
question his credibility. However, there is no independent
corroboration of his evidence.
36. Without all the booklets distributed and returned being
counted, there are many possibilities that are inconsistent with an
inference of guilt.
16.

The University submits that the Tribunal erred in three respects:
(a)

by applying a standard of proof which required the University to prove its charges
"conclusively or by necessary inference" and to disprove all possibilities
inconsistent with guilt, rather than prove its case on a balance of probabilities;

(b)

requiring "independent corroboration" of evidence from the University's witness,
Professor Watson, notwithstanding the Tribunal's finding that his evidence was
credible; and

(c)

placing significant reliance on an irrelevant consideration - whether or not the
number of test booklets distributed matched the number retumed - in determining
that there were many possibilities inconsistent with guilt.

17.

We do not think there is any question that the applicable standard of proof for

proceedings under the Code is according to a civil standard - on a balance of probabilities.
Unlike in criminal cases, there is no presumption of innocence. 2 However, the requirement to
prove the case on the balance of probabilities does not detract from the requirement found in the

2

F.H. v. McDougall, 2008 S.C.C. 53, para. 40 and 42.

-6Code and in the common law that the standard must be met by evidence that is clear, convincing
and cogent. 3
18.

The respondent has drawn our attention to cases in which, in the context of proceedings

before this and other tribunals, the issue of whether a defendant has acted "knowingly" and how
that issue is to be addressed has been assessed. 4 While those cases have found criminal
jurisprndence helpful in determining what is meant by the requirement that an action be engaged
in "knowingly", they neither address nor detract from the clear statement of the applicable
burden of proof in civil cases set forth above.
19.

The Tribunal noted the general burden of proof imposed on the University of Toronto in

the Code, and, while it did not expressly refer to the standard of a balance of probabilities, it
would be presumed to apply the colTect standard unless it could be demonstrated by analysis that
the incorrect standard was applied. 5 One of the issues raised by this appeal is whether analysis
demonstrates the application of an incon-ect standard.
20.

The case before the Tribunal involved a conflict between the evidence of the only two

witnesses. Professor Watson's evidence was that the only test booklets that were handed out
were white and stamped. The Student's evidence is that the unstamped green-tinted test booklet
on which he submitted his answers was handed out to him during the test. It is not possible that
the evidence of both witnesses was con·ect, and the task before the Tribunal was to choose one
over the other, on a balance of probabilities.

21.

However, as noted above, the Tribunal both accepted the Student's evidence and did not

question the credibility of the Professor's evidence ..
22.

While not questioning the credibility of the Professor's evidence, the Tribunal concluded

that that evidence did not establish the offence because the offence was not "determined
conclusively or by necessary inference", was not accompanied by "independent co1wboration"
:3

s

Code, section E.4(b); F.H v. McDougall, supra, at para. 45, 46; Stetler v. Ontario [2004], 200
O.A.C. 209 at 79-80.
Shank v. The University of Toronto, [2002] O.J. No. 50 (Div. Ct.); R. v. Zanzibar, (2007] O.J. No.
3381 (O.C.J.)
F.H. v. McDougall, supra, para. 53.

-7and that the evidence had not eliminated the "many possibilities that are inconsistent with an
inference of guilt". These requirements strongly suggest that the Tribunal was requiring the
University to prove the case to a standard higher than a balance of probabilities.
23.

However, we are more troubled by the suggestion that the question of whether the

evidence of the Professor or the evidence of the Student was correct would be resolved by
counting the booklets distributed and returned. The Trib1mal did not explain how it considered
that a count would resolve the disputed issue, nor was the respondent able to do so on appeal.
24.

If the offence was committed, the Student either switched the prepared test booklet he

brought into the exam with a blank one handed out to him, or he returned the prepared booklet
with the blank one. If the Professor brought 100 booklets into the test room, the former
methodology would yield a count of 100 and the latter methodology a count of 101. In other
words, neither count eliminates the possibility of the Student's evidence being in error.
25.

Equally, a count of 100 or 101 could be consistent with the Professor's evidence being

wrong. A count of 100 could be consistent with an error in the evidence that only white booklets
were brought into the examination room and that no unstamped booklets were distributed to
students. A count of 101 could be consistent with an error in the evidence that only white
booklets came into the examination room, that only unstamped booklets were distributed to
students, and that the booklets had been accurately counted before being brought into the test
room. Neither count eliminates the possibility of the Professor's evidence being in error.
26.

A count of the booklets distributed and returned would therefore not resolve the question

of whether the Professor's evidence or the Student's evidence was correct. In focusing on the
failure to count, the Tribunal focused on an issue which we conclude was an hTelevant
consideration. It would not have resolved the conflict in the evidence. That conflict fell to be
resolved by the application of the standard of balance of probabilities, and this the Tribunal did
not do. Moreover, a finding of fact based on an irrelevant consideration is in these circumstances
an error of law. 6

6

R. v. Coy/, [2007] O.N.C.A. 728 at para. 1.

-8-

27.

For the reasons expressed above, we consider the error material. We accordingly would

allow the appeal and direct a new heating on the charges.

Date: March

1,S ,2009

Aaron Christoff

Professor Wendy Duff

Jemy Joseph

-827.

For the reasons expressed above, we consider the error material. We accordingly ,vould

allow the appeal and direct a new healing on the charges.

Date: March

1,'S ,2009

Aaron Christ<}ff

Professor Wendy Duff

Jemy Joseph

- 8·27.

For the reasons expressed ab~ve, we consider the error material. We accordingly would

allow the appeal and direct a new hearing on the charges.

Date: March

, 2009

Patricia D. S. Jackson

Aaron Christoff

JemyJoseph

9381079.1
80000-9999

-827.

For the reasons expressed above, we consider the error material. We accordingly would

allow the appeal and direct a new hearing on the charges.

Date: Marchi,{ , 2009

Aaron Christoff

Professor Wendy Duff

