Case 497 - Appeal

DATE:

   March 25, 2009

PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v. the Student

Hearing Date(s):

   June 21, 2005

Panel Members:

   Patricia D.S. Jackson
   Aaron Christoff
   Professor Wendy Duff
   Jemy Joseph

Appearances:

   Linda Rothstein, for the University
   Lily Harmer, for the University
   Maurice Vaturi, for the Student

   Appeal by the University from a Tribunal decision in which the Student
   was found not guilty of submitting an answer booklet during a term test
   that was written prior to rather than during the test, contrary to s.
   B.i.3(b) of the Code. The University submitted that the Tribunal erred
   in three respects: by applying a standard of proof which required the
   University to prove its charges "conclusively or by necessary
   inference" and to disprove all possibilities inconsistent with guilt,
   rather than prove its case on a balance of probabilities; requiring
   "independent corroboration" of evidence from the University's witness
   notwithstanding the Tribunal's finding that the witnesses evidence was
   credible; and placing significant reliance on an irrelevant
   consideration. The Board stated that the applicable standard of proof
   for proceedings under the Code was according to a civil standard, on a
   balance of probabilities, but that the requirement to prove the case on
   the balance of probabilities did not detract from the Code and common
   law requirement that the standard be met by evidence that is clear,
   convincing and cogent. The Panel found that the case involved a
   conflict between the evidence of the Student and the course Professor,
   and that the Tribunal both accepted the Studentâs evidence and did not
   question the credibility of the Professorâs evidence. The Tribunal had
   concluded that the offence was not "determined conclusively or by
   necessary inference", was not accompanied by "independent
   corroboration" and that the evidence had not eliminated the "many
   possibilities that are inconsistent with an inference of guilt." The
   Board found that the Tribunal, in concluding that the Professor failed
   to establish the offence, was requiring the University to prove the
   case to a standard higher than the balance of probabilities. The Panel
   found that a count of the examination booklets distributed and returned
   would not resolve the question of whether the Professor's evidence or
   the Student's evidence was correct. The Board found that in focusing on
   the failure to count, the Tribunal focused on an irrelevant
   consideration that did not resolve the conflict in the evidence. The
   Board found that the conflict fell to be resolved by the application of
   the standard of balance of probabilities. The Board found the
   Tribunalâs finding of fact based on an irrelevant consideration to be a
   material error of law. Appeal allowed. The Panel ordered that the
   matter be sent back to the Trial Division for a new hearing.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/13069
