UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
GOVERNING COUNCIL
REPORT NUMBER 253 OF THE ACADEMIC APPEALS COMMITTEE
October 30, 2000
To the Academic Board
University of Toronto
Your Committee reports that it held a hearing on Monday, October 30, 2000, at
which the following were present:
Professor Edward Morgan, Acting Chair
Professor Clare Beghtol
Mr. Ljupco Gjorgjinski
Ms Karen Lewis
Professor Kenneth Sevcik
Secretary: Ms Susan Girard
In attendance:
Mr. O., the appellant
For the School of Graduate Studies:
Ms Sari Springer, counsel
Professor Bernard Katz, Associate Dean, Division I
This is a motion brought by the respondent, the School of Graduate Studies ("SGS"), to
quash the appeal on the grounds that the decision under appeal has already been accepted by
the appellant, Mr. O.
The decision under appeal is that of the Graduate Academic Appeals Board (the
"Board") dated February 15, 2000. That decision set aside the student’s termination from the
Ph.D. program in the Department of Slavic Languages and Literatures (the "Department"), and,
in addition, set out procedures for the re-read of his papers in a course entitled SLA 1240S.
Each of these will be addressed in turn.
Termination from the Ph.D. Program
In its decision of February 15, 2000, the Board made it clear that although the
Department has been able to offer a thesis committee for the student, it is impossible for the
University to supply a supervisor for his thesis from within the Department. The Board also
noted that the University is not obliged to supply a supervisor from outside the Department.
Accordingly, the Board ordered the student to be reinstated to the Ph.D. program on condition
that he is willing to proceed without a supervisor. The Board also set out guidelines for the
formation of the thesis committee, for providing the student with notice thereof, and for his
acceptance or rejection of any proposed committee. It indicated that if a committee and/or
supervisor could not be found, the student was free to proceed with his Ph.D. without either a
committee or a supervisor. The Board was quite explicit in stating that the student’s

Report Number 253 of the Academic Appeals Committee

2

reinstatement to the Ph.D. program was conditional on his acceptance of its terms. In the
Board's words (pp. 24, 25):
If [he] accepts the Board's terms, the termination from the Ph.D. programme
will be set aside…
[he] shall have two weeks from the date of this decision to consider his position
and advise the Dean as to whether he wishes to have the Dean proceed to
attempt the formation of a committee on the above basis.
[emphasis added]
The student was, of course, entirely free to reject these terms and pursue an appeal of
the Board's ruling. On February 28, 2000, within two weeks of the Board's decision,
the student wrote to the Dean of SGS stating, among other things, "In line with the decision of
the Board I accept the proposal to start an attempt at constituting a Committee for my Ph.D.
supervision." In the same letter, he complained about various aspects of the Board's decision
with which he did not agree, but indicated that he had in any case decided to accept the Board's
terms regarding supervision by a thesis committee. In his words, "Only an appeal could rectify
the numerous errors of the decision, but now the emergency to finish my Ph.D. overrides such
an option."
On March 28, 2000, the Dean of SGS again wrote to the student in order to update him
on the efforts being made to secure a thesis committee. In this letter, the Dean indicated that
two faculty members had agreed to serve on the thesis committee, and that a supervisor had not
been found. The student responded to the Dean in a letter dated April 14, 2000, in which he
said, “I accept the members of the supervisory committee proposed by Dean Marrus, and I am
grateful to the SGS for its efforts in this regard.” The student then went on in this letter to state
his disappointment that a supervisor had not been found, and he expressed his hope that one
might still be located. He also took the opportunity in this letter to request a tuition adjustment
on the grounds that having been terminated from the Ph.D. program in March 1999 after
paying a full year’s tuition, he should be left with a balance to apply to his current tuition now
that he has been reinstated.
On May 13, 2000, the student submitted his appeal to the Academic Appeals
Committee of Governing Council (the “Committee”). In paragraph 1 of his Statement of
Appeal, the student indicated that he was appealing “the conditions of my reinstatement into
the Ph.D. program and the conditions of my supervision.” These were, of course, the very
conditions to which the student was required to consent in order to be reinstated to the Ph.D.
program. The Committee finds as a fact that the student did consent to the terms set out in the
Board decision of February 15, 2000. It was clear that these terms addressed the questions of a
thesis committee and a supervisor as a single package, and it is equally clear that the student in
his responses to the Dean of SGS accepted these terms as a package. It was not open to
the student to accept the procedures established by the Board for constituting a thesis
committee while not accepting the fact that there may be no thesis supervisor. These two items
unambiguously went together in the Board’s decision, and the student was aware that in
accepting the Board’s terms and becoming reinstated to the Ph.D. program he was accepting
both the procedures for constituting a thesis committee as well as the fact that he might have to
pursue his thesis without a specialist supervisor.
The appeal filed by the student on May 13, 2000 therefore contradicted his previous
explicit acceptance of the Board’s terms. In both his written and his oral submissions to the
Committee, the student made it clear that he considers himself and SGS to have "mutually
accepted" the terms of his reinstatement into the Ph.D. program. The Committee takes him at
his word on this, as his statement does reflect the evidence before it. At the same time he
wishes to revisit the basis on which the February 15, 2000 decision was made and the terms

Report Number 253 of the Academic Appeals Committee

3

which that decision imposed. In other words, having acted on and taken advantage of the
Board's terms by consenting to them, he now wishes to have them reconsidered on appeal.
Counsel for SGS submits that the student is effectively prevented from pursuing an
appeal in the face of his consent to the terms of the decision under appeal. We agree that
he is attempting to do precisely what the Board in its February 15, 2000 decision aimed at
preventing. The Board fashioned terms which would permit him to be reinstated to the Ph.D.
program and would provide a workable solution to his dispute with the Department, on the
condition that he consents to this solution. By consenting to and then challenging those very
conditions, the student is attempting to both exploit and undermine the Board’s solution. As the
Ontario Court of Appeal said in Pigott v. Pigott, [1969] 2 O.R. 427, 428:
From these authorities it is clear that where a proposed appellant has taken steps
and acted under and taken advantage of the judgment which he then tries to
appeal, the Courts will not permit this and will quash the appeal and that is what
will be done in this case.
We therefore agree that the student has by his own conduct and consent barred himself
from pursuing the appeal against the Board’s decision of February 15, 2000.
Re-read of SLA 1240S Papers
The argument of SGS with respect to the re-read of the student’s papers in SLA 1240S
is similar in principle to its argument with respect to his reinstatement in the Ph.D. program.
The Board in its February 15, 2000 decision set out specific procedures for the re-read of the
three papers written by the student in this course. The student could consent to these
procedures and thereby have the re-read take place, or he could oppose these procedures and
the re-read would not take place. If he opposed the procedures for the re-read established by
the Board, he could, of course, appeal the decision of the Board setting out those procedures.
The student has again attempted to do both.
As required in the Board’s decision, the Associate Dean of Humanities wrote to
the student on February 23, 2000 advising him that he had contacted the course instructor for
SLA 1240S, and that the course instructor could not recall the relative weighting of the final
paper and the exam. The Board's ruling had provided that, in such a circumstance, the student
must be permitted to elect between 10 percent and one-third as a weighting for the first of the
three papers to be re-read, with the weight of the other two papers to be adjusted accordingly.
In his letter, the Associate Dean set out this option for the student and invited him to make his
election as to the weighting of the papers. In addition, the Associate Dean provided a list of
eight faculty members who would be qualified to serve as external readers for this course. As
required by the Board, the Associate Dean invited the student to advise him if there were any
names on this list that, in the student’s view, were unsuitable for this task.
On February 28, 2000, the student wrote to the Associate Dean in response to his letter,
advising that he had selected four names from the list of faculty members provided to him by
the Associate Dean who were acceptable to him as external readers. In his letter, the student
also stated that he chooses ten percent as the weighting for the first paper. The Board's
procedures having been complied with, the re-read was therefore done by one of the agreedupon external readers and on April 15, 2000 the Associate Dean wrote to the student to inform
him of the result of the re-read.
On May 13, 2000, the student submitted his appeal of the February 15, 2000 decision of
the Board. In paragraph 2 of the Statement of Appeal, he indicated that he was appealing “the
procedures adopted at the re-read of my papers for SLA 1240S written for Professor Orwin.”

Report Number 253 of the Academic Appeals Committee

4

These were, once again, the very procedures to which he was required to consent in order to
pursue the re-read of the papers for this course. The Committee finds as a fact that
the student did consent to the procedures established by the Board in its February 15, 2000
decision. He exercised the options put to him by the Associate Dean and actively participated in
the process of choosing the potential external readers and in assigning a relative weighting to the
papers to be re-read.
The appeal filed by the student on May 13, 2000 therefore contradicted his consent to
and participation in the re-read process. The Committee is of the view that, having so
consented to the procedures established in the February 15, 2000 decision, and having taken
advantage of that decision by having the re-read done, the student cannot now pursue an appeal
of those very procedures. His actions here are particularly problematic in that he waited until
he received the results of the re-read before submitting his appeal and contending that the
procedures set out by the Board were unacceptable to him.
As an aside, the Committee notes that in his oral submissions the student seemed to
characterize his complaints with respect to the SLA 1240S papers as at least partially directed
toward the results of the re-reading itself, and not toward the procedures adopted for the reread. To the extent that this is the case, such a complaint is not properly the subject of this
appeal. The present proceeding is an appeal of the February 15, 2000 decision of the Board
and the procedures for the re-read established therein. Those procedures were accepted by the
student and formed the basis of the re-read. The Committee is of the view that those
procedures cannot now be contested after the fact.
Conclusion
The Committee unanimously agrees with SGS that the student’s appeal must not
proceed on either of its two grounds. He consented to and accepted the terms of his
reinstatement into the Ph.D. program and cannot now appeal those same terms; and, likewise,
he consented to and accepted the procedures established for the re-read of his papers in SLA
1240S and cannot now appeal those same procedures. The motion by SGS is granted and the
appeal by the student of the Board’s decision of February 15, 2000 is therefore quashed.

December 8, 2000

