Case #253

   DATE: December 8, 2000

   PARTIES: Mr. O. (the âStudentâ) v. School of Graduate Studies

   HEARING DATE:Â October 30, 2000

   Committee Members:
   Professor Edward Morgan, Acting Chair Professor Clare Beghtol
   Mr. Ljupco Gjorgjinski
   Ms Karen Lewis
   Professor Kenneth Sevcik

   Appearances:

   For the Student Appellant:
   Mr. O. (the âStudentâ)

   For the School of Graduate Studies:
   Ms Sari Springer, counsel
   Professor Bernard Katz, Associate Dean, Division I

   Secretary: Ms Susan Girard

   The Student appealed a decision of the Graduate Academic Appeals Board
   (the Board) setting aside the Studentâs termination from the Ph.D.
   program and providing guidelines for the formation of a thesis
   committee, and setting out the procedures for the re-read of the
   Studentâs papers in one of his courses. The School of Graduate Studies
   (SGS) brought a motion before the Academic Appeals Committee (AAC) to
   quash the Studentâs appeal on the basis that the decision under appeal
   had already been accepted by the Student.

   The Board had ordered the Studentâs reinstatement to the Ph.D. program
   on condition that he was willing to proceed without a supervisor and
   indicated that if a committee and/or supervisor could not be found, the
   student was free to proceed with his Ph.D. without either a committee
   or a supervisor. The AAC noted that the Student was entirely free to
   reject those terms and pursue an appeal of the Board's ruling. The AAC
   was satisfied, however, that the Student consented to the terms of the
   decision. The AAC stated that it was clear that the terms that were
   addressed - the questions of a thesis committee and a supervisor â were
   part of a single package, and that the Student accepted those terms as
   a package. The AAC determined that it was not open to the Student to
   accept the procedures established by the Board for constituting a
   thesis committee while not accepting the fact that there may be no
   thesis supervisor. These two items unambiguously went together in the
   Boardâs decision, and the Student was aware that in accepting the
   Boardâs terms and becoming reinstated to the Ph.D. program he was
   accepting both the procedures for constituting a thesis committee as
   well as the fact that he might have to pursue his thesis without a
   specialist supervisor. The AAC therefore decided that the Studentâs
   appeal contradicted his previous explicit acceptance of the Boardâs
   terms. The AAC determined that the Student had, by his own conduct and
   consent, barred himself from pursuing the appeal against the Boardâs
   decision.

   With regard to the re-read of the Studentâs papers, the AAC noted that
   the Board had set out specific procedures for this process. The Student
   could consent to those procedures and thereby have the re-read take
   place, or he could oppose the procedures and the re-read would not take
   place. If he opposed the procedures for the re-read , he could appeal
   the decision of the Board setting out those procedures. The AAC stated
   that the Student was attempting to do both. The Studentâs appeal
   contradicted his consent to and participation in the re-read process.
   The AAC took the view that having consented to the procedures
   established by the Board, and having taken advantage of that decision
   by having the re-read done, the Student could not then pursue an appeal
   of those very procedures.

   The Committee was satisfied that the Studentâs appeal could not proceed
   on either of its two grounds. The Student consented to and accepted the
   terms of his reinstatement into the Ph.D. program and could not
   therefore appeal those same terms; likewise, the Student consented to
   and accepted the procedures established for the re-read of his papers
   and could not therefore appeal those same procedures. The AAC granted
   the motion by SGS and quashed the Studentâs appeal.
   [1]View Report

References

   1. file:///media/12609
