Case #251

   DATE: October 31, 2000

   PARTIES: Ms. R.W. (the âStudentâ) v. University of Toronto at
   Scarborough

   HEARING DATE:Â October 31, 2000

   Committee Members:
   Assistant Dean Bonnie Goldberg, Acting Chairperson
   Professor Christopher Barnes
   Ms Jenny Carson
   Professor Brian Corman
   Professor Emmet Robbins

   Appearances:

   For the Student Appellant:
   Ms. R.W., the Student
   Ms Rebecca Case, Downtown Legal Services
   Ms W., sister of the Student

   For University of Toronto Scarborough:
   Professor Ian McDonald, Associate Dean

   Secretary:
   Ms Susan Girard, Acting Secretary, Academic Appeals Committee

   The Student appealed a decision of the Scarborough Subcommittee on
   Academic Appeals refusing her late withdrawal from a course without
   academic penalty. The Studentâs petition was based on her belief that
   the Teaching Assistantsâ strike that occurred in January 2000 disrupted
   the course to such an extent as to adversely affect her performance and
   her ability to assess her performance by the time of the drop deadline.

   The Academic Appeals Committee (AAC) stated that it respected the
   University's contention that the Studentâs lack of a prerequisite for
   the course placed the Student in a perilous position, and that by the
   time of the drop date, the Student had sufficient indication as to her
   likely academic performance. The Committee stated that in its opinion,
   the Student showed poor judgment in remaining in the course, where she
   knew that she lacked the necessary prerequisite and that she relied
   heavily on tutorials and teaching assistance, both of which were
   unavailable to her during the strike. However, while the Student was
   disadvantaged by these factors, the Committee agreed with her
   contention that she may still have passed the course but for the
   disruption caused by the strike. The AAC noted that the Student re-took
   an equivalent course in the summer and passed, which in its opinion
   offered evidence (admittedly evidence that was not available for the
   Scarborough Subcommittee to consider in its deliberations), that with
   diligence and no unforeseen disruption, the Student could pass such a
   course.

   The AAC stated that it is an important guiding principle that in all
   but the most extraordinary cases, late withdrawals after a failure has
   been recorded should not be granted. Retroactive withdrawals from
   failed courses are an extraordinary remedy. If routinely granted, they
   would undermine the accuracy and validity of university transcripts,
   which are relied upon by employers and universities as an accurate and
   truthful measure of a studentâs performance.

   Nevertheless, in this case, the Committee concluded that the appeal
   should be allowed. The Committee stated that it was difficult to
   quantify the effect of a Teaching Assistantsâ strike on any particular
   student; for the Student, however, it may have proved insurmountable.
   While the Committee concluded that these circumstances were
   extraordinary, it stressed that the particular circumstances were very
   much a function of the Studentâs unique characteristics and not meant
   to diminish the standard by which late withdrawals for academic penalty
   are granted.

   The AAC allowed the appeal.
   [1]View Report

References

   1. file:///media/12676
