UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
GOVERNING COUNCIL

Report #329 of the Academic Appeals Committee
March 18, 2009

The Academic Appeals Committee reports that it held a hearing on Thursday, February
19, 2009, at which the following were present:
Assistant Dean Kate Hilton, Chair
Professor Brian Corman
Professor Elizabeth Cowper
Mr. Kenneth Davy
Professor Michael Marrus
Ms. Mette Mai, Assistant Judicial Affairs Officer
In Attendance:
Mr. G. G (the “Student”)
Professor John Scherk, Vice-Dean, UTSC
The Appeal
The Student is appealing the decision of the UTSC Subcommittee on Academic Appeals,
dated June 10, 2008, which denied the Student’s petition to rewrite the final examination
in ECMA04H3.
Facts
The Student enrolled in an Honours Bachelor of Arts program at UTSC in the Fall 2006
Session. During the Fall 2006 term, he enrolled in four half-credit courses, one of which
was ECMA04H3.
On December 9, 2006, the Student wrote the final examination in ECMA04H3. He was
ill with gastroenteritis at the time and did poorly on the examination (53%). On
December 10, 2006, the Student visited the doctor and obtained a medical note
confirming his illness. The Student petitioned to rewrite the examination, and his petition
was ultimately granted by the Subcommittee on Academic Appeals on June 1, 2007. In
its decision the Subcommittee advised the Student that he should be prepared to rewrite
the exam in the August 2007 examination period and that further opportunities to write
the exam would “be granted only in very exceptional circumstances”.
However, in August 2007, the Student became ill with pneumonia. He visited his doctor
and was advised not to attempt to write any of his examinations. The Student petitioned
to write deferred examinations in three courses, and for an extension of time to rewrite

50254

1

the final exam in ECMA04H3. On September 25, 2007, the Student received a letter
from the Registrar’s Office which granted the petition on the basis of the medical
documentation provided. The Registrar’s letter indicated that the Student would be
required to rewrite ECMA04H3 during the December 2007 examination period. The
letter also stated:
Please also note that the new grade will stand (ECMA04H3) whether it is
higher or lower than the one originally awarded….You are advised to
make every effort to write in the December examination period for it is
very unlikely that a petition for another extension will be granted.
On December 6, 2007, the Student’s uncle attempted suicide. The Student’s uncle had
been struggling with depression and addiction for some period of time, and the Student
and his family were very distressed about the situation. On December 7, the Student
rewrote the examination in ECMA04H3 and obtained a mark of 41%. The Student wrote
final examinations in three other courses on December 11, 13 and 17, with good results.
On January 18, 2008, the Student’s uncle died.
On February 29, 2008, the Student petitioned to rewrite the examination in ECMA04H3
for a second time, on the basis that he had been unable to focus on his examination due to
the suicide attempt of his uncle. The petition was denied on the basis that the Student had
been able to complete three other exams during the same time period and under the same
circumstances.
On March 20, 2008, the Student appealed to the Subcommittee on Academic Appeals.
The Subcommittee denied the Student’s petition on June 10, 2008. In its decision, the
Subcommittee wrote:
While the committee sympathized with the difficulties which this situation
presented to you and your family, it was not clear that these difficulties
significantly impacted your performance in ECMA04 and did not affect
your performance on the other exam dates. The situation of your uncle’s
deteriorating health had been going on for some months. There was no
reason to assume that the events of December 6 were going to be different
from earlier episodes….You did not immediately petition for special
consideration based on the events of December 6. If you had acted before
you knew the outcome of your exam, particularly with some
documentation to confirm events, this might well have been considered a
very exceptional circumstance in which special consideration was merited.
Instead, you decision to petition on January 25, 2008, was based on your
knowledge of your (adjusted) mark in ECMA04.
On September 9, 2008, the Student appealed to the Academic Appeals Committee of
Governing Council, requesting once again that he be allowed to rewrite the final
examination in ECMA04H3.

50254

2

Decision
This Committee was impressed with the sincerity of the Student, and does not doubt that
the Student and his family were greatly distressed by his uncle’s suicide attempt.
The issue before this Committee is whether the Student’s situation on December 7 (the
date of his final examination in ECMA04H3) was substantially different from his
situation on December 11, 13 and 17 (the dates of his three other examinations), such that
he should deemed to have been incapable of writing a successful examination on
December 7, even though he was capable of writing successful examinations on the other
dates.
In making this determination, this Committee must consider the fact that there is no
medical evidence to support the Student’s claim that his mental distress was sufficiently
acute to prevent him from concentrating on his examination in ECMA04H3. This
Committee must also consider the fact that the Student did not petition to rewrite the
examination until January 25, 2008, after he had received his disappointing results. In
light of these circumstances, the majority of this Committee is of the view that there is
insufficient evidence to justify granting another opportunity to rewrite the final
examination in ECMA04H3.
One member of the Committee is of the view that the Student’s situation on December 7
was, in fact, different from his situation on December 11, 13 and 17 because of the
proximity in time to his uncle’s suicide attempt on December 6. This member would
have granted the Student’s petition to rewrite the examination.
The appeal is denied.

50254

3

