Report 329

DATE:

   March 18, 2009

PARTIES:

   Mr. G. G (the Student) v. UTSC

Hearing Date(s):

   February 19, 2009

Committee Members:

   Assistant Dean Kate Hilton, Chair
   Professor Brian Corman
   Professor Elizabeth Cowper
   Mr. Kenneth Davy
   Professor Michael Marrus

In Attendance:

   Ms. Mette Mai, Assistant Judicial Affairs Officer
   Mr. G. G (the ‚Student‚)
   Professor John Scherk, Vice-Dean, UTSC

   Request to re-write a final examination for a second time. The Student
   was ill with gastroenteritis when writing the examination the first
   time and did poorly. The Registrar granted the Student a re-write,
   however he became ill with pneumonia. The Registrar allowed the Student
   to defer the examination. The day before the deferred examination date
   the Student‚s uncle attempted suicide. The Student wrote the exam on
   the deferred date but did poorly. The Student petitioned to re-write
   the examination for a second time, on the grounds that he was unable to
   focus due to the suicide attempt. The petition was denied on the basis
   that the Student had been able to complete three other exams during the
   same time period and under the same circumstances. The Committee
   considered the fact that there was no medical evidence to support the
   Student‚s claim that his mental distress was sufficiently acute to
   prevent him from concentrating on his examination and that the Student
   did not petition to re-write the examination until after he had
   received his results. The majority of the Committee found that there
   was insufficient evidence to grant another opportunity to re-write the
   examination. A minority of the Committee dissented, having found that
   the proximity in time between the uncle‚s suicide attempt and the
   examination in the course made the Student‚s situation different from
   that experienced in his other examinations. That member would have
   granted the Student‚s petition to re-write the examination. Appeal
   dismissed.
   [1]View Report

References

   1. file:///media/12580
