Case No.: 969
THE UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO

IN THE MATTER OF charges of academic dishonesty made on April 9, 2018
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters,
1995,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Act, 1971, S.O. 1971, c. 56 as am. S.O.
B E T W E E N:
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
- and I

R

REASONS FOR DECISION
Hearing Dates: August 16, 2018 and January 28, 2019
Members of the Panel:
Mr. R.S.M. Woods, Chair
Professor Dionne Aleman, Faculty Panel Member
Ms. Natasha Brien, Student Panel Member
Appearances:
Ms. Tina Lie, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg Rothstein LLP
Mr. Hatim Kheir, Representative for the Student, Downtown Legal Services (August 16, 2018
only)
Hearing Secretary:
Ms. Tracey Gameiro, Associate Director, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances
Not in Attendance:
Mr. I
R
, the Student

-2THE CHARGES
1.

On April 9, 2018, the University of Toronto (the “University”) charged I

R

(the

“Student”) with the following offences under the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on
Academic Matters, 1995 (the “Code”):
1.
On or about October 26, 2016, you knowingly represented as your own an
idea or expression of an idea or work of another in an essay that you submitted in
RLG312H5 (Method and Theory in the History of Religions) (“RLG312”),
contrary to section B.i.1(d) of the Code.
2.
In the alternative, on or about October 26, 2016, you knowingly obtained
unauthorized assistance in connection with an essay that you submitted in RLG312,
contrary to section B.i.1(b) of the Code.
3.
In the further alternative, on or about October 26, 2016, you knowingly
engaged in a form of cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or
misrepresentation not otherwise described in the Code in order to obtain academic
credit or other academic advantage of any kind in connection with an essay that you
submitted in RLG312, contrary to section B.i.3(b) of the Code.
4.
On or about December 2, 2016, you knowingly represented as your own an
idea or expression of an idea or work of another in a response (for November 18,
2016) that you submitted in RLG314H5 (Religion and Gender) (“RLG314”),
contrary to section B.i.1(d) of the Code.
5.
In the alternative, on or about December 2, 2016, you knowingly obtained
unauthorized assistance in connection with a response (for November 18, 2016)
that you submitted in RLG314, contrary to section B.i.1(b) of the Code.
6.
In the further alternative, on or about December 2, 2016, you knowingly
engaged in a form of cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or
misrepresentation not otherwise described in the Code in order to obtain academic
credit or other academic advantage of any kind in connection with a response (for
November 18, 2016) that you submitted in RLG314, contrary to section B.i.3(b) of
the Code.
7.
On or about December 2, 2016, you knowingly represented as your own an
idea or expression of an idea or work of another in a response (for November 25,
2016) that you submitted in RLG314, contrary to section B.i.1(d) of the Code.
8.
In the alternative, on or about December 2, 2016, you knowingly obtained
unauthorized assistance in connection with a response (for November 25, 2016)
that you submitted in RLG314, contrary to section B.i.1(b) of the Code.

-39.
In the further alternative, on or about December 2, 2016, you knowingly
engaged in a form of cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or
misrepresentation not otherwise described in the Code in order to obtain academic
credit or other academic advantage of any kind in connection with a response (for
November 25, 2016) that you submitted in RLG314, contrary to section B.i.3(b) of
the Code.
10.
On or about December 9, 2016, you knowingly represented as your own an
idea or expression of an idea or work of another in a paper that you submitted in
RLG314, contrary to section B.i.1(d) of the Code.
11.
In the alternative, on or about December 9, 2016, you knowingly obtained
unauthorized assistance in connection with a paper that you submitted in RLG314,
contrary to section B.i.1(b) of the Code.
12.
In the further alternative, on or about December 9, 2016, you knowingly
engaged in a form of cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or
misrepresentation not otherwise described in the Code in order to obtain academic
credit or other academic advantage of any kind in connection with paper that you
submitted in RLG314, contrary to section B.i.3(b) of the Code.
13.
On or about March 31, 2017, you knowingly represented as your own an
idea or expression of an idea or work of another in a paper that you submitted in
RLG450H5 (Ritual, Material Practice, and the Senses in South Asian Islam)
(“RLG450”), contrary to section B.i.1(d) of the Code.
14.
In the alternative, on or about March 31, 2017, you knowingly obtained
unauthorized assistance in connection with a paper that you submitted in RLG450,
contrary to section B.i.1(b) of the Code.
15.
In the further alternative, on or about March 31, 2017, you knowingly
engaged in a form of cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or
misrepresentation not otherwise described in the Code in order to obtain academic
credit or other academic advantage of any kind in connection with paper that you
submitted in RLG450, contrary to section B.i.3(b) of the Code.
THE HEARING
2.

The Tribunal heard this matter over the course of two days, August 16, 2018 and January

28, 2019.
3.

The first day of hearings, August 16, 2018, was scheduled with the consent of the Student’s

representative from Downtown Legal Services (“DLS”). At the Student’s request, he was to attend
the hearing via Skype.

-44.

The Student’s representative attended the hearing, but the Student did not. The Student’s

representative advised the Tribunal that he had been able to speak with the Student over Skype
previously, but the Tribunal was unable to reach him on the day of the hearing. After a number of
unsuccessful attempts to reach the Student via Skype, the Tribunal proceeded without him,
although in the presence of his representative from DLS. It accepted into evidence an agreed
statement of facts (the “Agreed Statement of Facts”) signed by the Student and was provided
with a Joint Book of Authorities by counsel for the University and the Student’s representative. A
copy of the Agreed Statement of Facts is attached as Schedule A to these reasons.
5.

Based on the Agreed Statement of Facts and the admissions of guilt in it, the Tribunal

concluded that the student was guilty of some of the charges that the University had made against
him. Given that the Student was not present in person or via Skype at the hearing, the Tribunal
adjourned the sanctions hearing to October 29, 2018. To ensure that the sanctions hearing
proceeded on that date, the Tribunal ordered that the hearing was peremptory on the Student.
6.

Unfortunately, as a result of the illness of a Tribunal member, the hearing could not proceed

on October 29, 2018. By that point, DLS had withdrawn as the Student’s representative on the
basis that it had been unable to contact him since August 16, 2018.
7.

The Tribunal Chair asked both the Student and counsel for the University for written

submissions on whether any new date should also be made peremptory on the student. Counsel
for the University provided submissions pointing out the Student’s failure to explain his absence
on the original hearing date and failure to respond in a timely fashion to the University’s attempts
to reach him, as well as the University’s interest in imposing a sanction without further delay. The
Student did not provide any submissions, although he had responded to earlier emails. In those
emails he had stated that he had planned to attend the sanctions hearing on October 29, 2018 in
person, and asked that any future communications with him be via email and no other means of
contact.
8.

Based on its availability, the Tribunal scheduled the resumed hearing for January 28, 2019.

Notice of the new hearing date was provided to both counsel for the University and by email to
the Student. In the circumstances, the Tribunal Chair decided that he would not make the sanctions
hearing peremptory on the Student.

-59.

The Student did not attend the hearing on January 28, 2019 either in person or via Skype.

As with the first day of the hearing, the Tribunal made multiple attempts to contact the Student by
Skype, but was unable to do so.
10.

Counsel for the University provided the Tribunal with affidavits from Janice Patterson, an

assistant at her law firm, as well as from Tracey Gameiro, Associate Director, Appeals, Discipline
and Faculty Grievances, Office of the Governing Council of the University detailing the notice of
the hearing provided to the Student. Based on that evidence, the Tribunal was satisfied that the
Student had had notice of the resumed hearing and determined that it would proceed with the
sanctions portion of the hearing. After hearing submissions on sanction from counsel for the
University, the Tribunal imposed the sanction set out below.
MERITS OF THE CHARGES
Facts
11.

Based on the Agreed Statement of Facts, the Tribunal makes the following findings of fact.
RLG312

12.

In Fall 2016, the Student enrolled in RLG312 (Method and Theory in the History of

Religions) which was taught by Professor Barton Scott.
Statement Regarding Academic Integrity
13.

The syllabus for RLG312 provided to students who took that course contained a statement

stressing the importance of academic integrity. That statement read in part:
University Statement on Academic Integrity
Academic integrity is essential to the pursuit of learning and scholarship in a
university, and to ensuring that a degree from the University of Toronto is a strong
signal of each student’s individual academic achievement. As a result, the
University treats cases of cheating and plagiarism very seriously. The University of
Toronto’s
Code
of
Behaviour
on
Academic
Matters
(www.governingcouncil.utoronto.ca/policies/behaveac.htm)
outlines
the
behaviours that constitute academic dishonesty and the process for addressing
academic offences. Potential offences include, but are not limited to:

-6In papers and assignments:
1. Using someone else’s ideas or words without appropriate
acknowledgement.
2. Submitting your own work in more than one course without the
permission of the instructor.
3. Making up sources and facts.
4. Obtaining or providing unauthorized assistance on any assignment.
The RLG 312 Essay
14.

Students in RLG312 were required to submit three essays, each worth 20% of their final

grade. To help guard against plagiarism, students were required to submit their essays to Turnitin,
an online database of publications, other student submissions and internet sources.
15.

On October 26, 2016, the Student submitted his second essay entitled “Ludwig Feuerbach’s

theory of Religion” (the “RLG312 Essay”) to Turnitin. The Turnitin report returned a 48%
similarity index with internet sources. In particular, the Turnitin report found that the RLG312
Essay contained passages taken verbatim or nearly verbatim from an article by Kile Jones entitled
“A Critique of Ludwig Feuerbach’s Philosophy of Religion” which was available online. That
article was not cited in the text or bibliography of the RLG312 Essay.
Meeting with Professor Scott to Discuss Misconduct Allegation
16.

The Student met with Professor Scott to discuss the allegation of academic misconduct

involving the RLG312 Essay on November 9, 2016.
RLG314
17.

In Fall 2016, the Student was also enrolled in RLG314H5 (Religion and Gender) which

was taught by Dr. H. Ganapathy-Coleman.

-7Statement Regarding Academic Integrity
18.

Students in RLG314 were given information about the University’s expectations regarding

academic integrity. The course syllabus for RLG314 included language stressing the importance
of academic integrity similar to that in the course syllabus for RLG312.
Course Requirements
19.

Students in RLG314 were required to submit four response papers, each worth 6.66%, as

well as two papers, each worth 25% of their final grades.
The November 18 and 25 Response Papers
20.

During the term, the Student informed Dr. H. Ganapathy-Coleman of some difficulties that

he was having after missing several classes. As a result, Dr. H. Ganapathy-Coleman gave the
Student permission to submit his outstanding work at the end of the term.
21.

On December 2, 2016, the last day of classes in RLG314, the Student submitted two

response papers (the “November 18 Response” and the “November 25 Response”). On review,
Dr. H. Ganapathy-Coleman determined that the responses contained passages that were taken
verbatim or nearly verbatim from online sources that were not cited.
22.

In particular, the Student’s November 18 Response contained passages that were taken

verbatim or nearly verbatim from a review (the “November 18 Source”) by Nicki Waugh of
Goddesses and the divine feminine: a western religious history available online (at
http://bmcr.brynmawr.edu/2005/2005-12-16.html). The November 18 Source was not cited in the
November 18 Response.
23.

The November 25 Response contained passages that were taken verbatim or nearly

verbatim from two sources (collectively the “November 25 Sources”), a a summary of Is the
Goddess a Feminist? The Politics of South Asian Goddesses from the Amazon.com website (at
https://www.amazon.com/Goddess-Feminist-Politics-South-Goddessess/dp/081473619X and an
article by Karen G. Ruffle entitled “May Fatimah Gather our Tears: The Mystical and Intercessory
Powers of Fatimah al-Zahra in Indo-Persian, Shi-i Devotional Literature and Performance”.

-8The Second Paper
24.

On December 9, 2016 (the deadline for the second paper), the Student submitted his second

paper in RLG314 entitled “The Status of Women in the Societies of World Religion” (the
“RLG314 Paper”) to Turnitin. The Turnitin report returned a 53% similarity index to sources in
the Turnitin database. The Student’s RLG314 Paper contained passages that were taken verbatim
or nearly verbatim from an article (the “RLG314 Source”) by Kamila Klingorova and Tomas
Havlicek, “Religion and gender inequality: The status of women in the societies of world religions”
that was available online (at https://content.sciendo.com/view/journals/mgr/23/2/article-p2.xml)
(the “RLG314 Source”). The RLG314 Source was not cited in the RLG314 Paper.
Meeting with Professor Ganapathy-Coleman to Discuss Misconduct Allegations
25.

The Student met with Dr. H. Ganapathy-Coleman to discuss the allegations of academic

misconduct with respect to his assignments in RLG314 on December 16, 2016.
RLG450
26.

In Winter 2017, the Student enrolled in RLG450H5 (Ritual, Material Practice, and the

Senses in South Asian Islam) (“RLG450”), which was taught by Professor Karen Ruffle.
Statement Regarding Academic Integrity
27.

Professor Ruffle’s syllabus for RLG450 included a detailed statement on the importance

of academic integrity which reads, in part, as follows:
Academic Integrity
Academic integrity is fundamental to learning and scholarship at the University of
Toronto and beyond. Participating honestly, respectfully, responsibly, and fairly in
this academic community ensures that the U of T degree that you earn will be
valued as a true indication of your individual academic achievement, and will
continue to receive the respect and recognition it deserves. I am sympathetic to the
many challenges today’s students face. Reasonable late penalties are given for
assignments submitted after deadline in order to help you manage conflicting
deadlines. Should you feel pressured to seek unauthorized assistance or plagiarize
on work because of challenges you are facing, please speak to me or your College
Registrar for guidance. I will grant extensions on deadlines for documented
illnesses.

-9Students are expected to know what constitutes AI: Familiarize yourself with the
University of Toronto’s Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters
(www.governingcouncil.utoronto.ca/policies/behaveac.htm). It is the rule-book for
academic behaviour at the U of T. You can also find out more about academic
integrity here: https://www.utm.utoronto.ca/academic-integrity/students. Potential
offences include, but are not limited to
In papers and assignments:


Using someone else’s
acknowledgement.



Copying material word-for-word from a source (including lecture and study
group notes) and not placing the words within quotation marks.



Submitting your own work in more than one course without the permission
of the instructor.



Making up sources and facts.



Including references to sources that you did not use.



Obtaining or providing unauthorized assistance on any assignment
including:

ideas

or

words

without

appropriate

o Working in groups on assignments that are supposed to be
individual work;
o Having someone rewrite or add material to your work while
“editing;”
o “Crowdsourcing” ideas and text via a Facebook/online study group
without attribution.


Lending your work to a classmate who submits it as his/her own without
your permission.



For guidance on how not to plagiarize, please visit the Writing Centre and
refer to Margaret Proctor’s tip sheet on “Now Not to Plagiarize” (Appendix
A). For more information: http://www.writing.utoronto.ca/advice/usingsources/how-not-to-plagiarize

The RLG450 Paper
28.

Students in RLG450 were required to give a final presentation worth 15% and submit a

final paper worth 25% of their final grades. Due to illness, the Student did not attend the class in
which he was supposed to give his presentation. Professor Ruffle agreed to reallocate the
weighting so that his final paper would be worth 40% of his final grade.

- 10 29.

On March 31, 2017, the Student submitted his final paper entitled “The Taj Mahal in India”

(the “RLG450 Paper”) to Turnitin. Although the Turnitin report returned only a 9% similarity
index to other sources, Professor Ruffle suspected that the Student may have made unauthorized
use of sources. Professor Ruffle determined that the RLG450 Paper contained passages that
appeared to have been taken from online sources without appropriate attribution, in particular, two
articles (the “RLG Sources”): an article entitled “Taj Mahal” from the United Nations
Educational,

Scientific

and

Cultural

Organization

(UNESCO)

website

(at

https://whc.unesco.org/en/list/252 ) and, an article entitled “The Taj Mahal is so special – let us
tell you why” from the Imagine Travel website (at http://blog.imaginetravel.com/taj-mahaldefinitely-bucket-list/). The Student’s RLG450 Paper contained ideas that were taken from the
RLG450 Sources, which were not cited in the RLG450 Paper.
30.

On March 31, 2017, Professor Ruffle sent the Student an email advising him that she had

received his paper and asking him to meet with her. On April 1, 2017, the Student responded:
Oh I definitely would’ve but I’ll be in states. One of my relative is unfortunately
not well at all so I’ll have to be there but what’s it about maybe we can facetime or
something?
Also, I was about to email you actually I realized one of the references from the
paper is missing. It’s this one
Centre, UNESCO World Heritage. “Taj Mahal.” UNESCO World Heritage Centre.
Web. http://whc.unesco.org/en/list/252
I really apologize for this inconvenience there was a confusion. Sparavigna
should’ve been replaced with the above reference in the second paragraph. But I
used some of Sapravigna’s ideas in the essay too so it’s cited.
Let me know what it’s about if we can maybe reschedule it or talk on email
whichever way I convenient for you.
The Meeting with Professor Ruffle to Discuss the Misconduct Allegations
31.

The Student met with Professor Ruffle to discuss the allegation of academic misconduct

on April 17, 2017.

- 11 The Dean’s Designate Meeting
32.

On July 17, 2017, the Student met Professor Michael Georges, Dean’s Designate, to discuss

the alleged offences in RLG312, RLG314 and RLG450. Professor Georges gave the Student the
warning that was required to be given under the Code.
33.

The Student attended the meeting with a representative from DLS. During the meeting,

the Student read from a prepared statement in which he admitted to the offences alleged. In his
statement, he also described the difficulties that he was experiencing in Fall 2016 and Winter 2017,
including the illness of his grandfather (who subsequently passed away) and his own health
challenges (for which he sought accommodations from the University). He claimed that the
incidents of plagiarism were unintentional and were mistakes. He also relied on the fact that he
had emailed Professor Ruffle with the omitted citation when he became aware of it
34.

At the meeting, the Student signed Admission of Guilt forms for the alleged offences in

RLG312, RLG314 and RLG450.
Admissions of Guilt
35.

In the Agreed Statement of Facts, the Student made a series of admissions with respect to

the charges against him.
36.

In respect of the RLG312 Essay, in the Agreed Statement of Facts, the Student admitted

that he knowingly:
(a)

included verbatim or nearly verbatim text and ideas in the RLG312 Essay that were
taken from the RLG312 Source;

(b)

failed to attribute the verbatim or nearly verbatim text and ideas appropriately using
citations, references or other appropriate means;

(c)

represented in the RLG312 Essay the ideas of another person, the expression of the
ideas of another person, or the work of another person as his own; and

(d)

committed plagiarism, contrary to section B.i.1(d) of the Code.

- 12 37.

In respect of the RLG314 Paper, in the Agreed Statement of Facts, the Student admitted

that he:
(a)

included verbatim or nearly verbatim text and ideas in the RLG314 Paper that were
taken from the RLG314 Source;

(b)

failed to attribute the verbatim or nearly verbatim text and ideas appropriately using
citations, references or other appropriate means;

(c)

represented in the RLG314 Paper the ideas of another person, the expression of the
ideas of another person, or the work of another person as his own; and

(d)

committed plagiarism in the RLG314 Paper, contrary to section B.I.1(d) of the
Code.

38.

In respect of the November 18 and November 25 Responses, in the Agreed Statement of

Facts the Student admitted that he knowingly:
(a)

included verbatim or nearly verbatim text and ideas in the November 18 Response
that were taken from the November 18 Source;

(b)

failed to attribute the verbatim or nearly verbatim text and ideas appropriately using
citations, references or other appropriate means in the November 18 Response;

(c)

represented in the November 18 Response the ideas of another person, the
expression of the ideas of another person, or the work of another person as his own;

(d)

included verbatim or nearly verbatim text and ideas in the November 25 Response
that were taken from the November 25 Sources;

(e)

failed to attribute the verbatim or nearly verbatim text and ideas appropriately using
citations, references or other appropriate means in the November 25 Response;

(f)

represented in the November 25 Response the ideas of another person, the
expression of the ideas of another person, or the work of another person as his own;
and

- 13 (g)

committed plagiarism, contrary to section B.i.1(d) of the Code in respect of both
the November 18 Response and the November 25 Response.

39.

With respect to the RLG450 Paper, in the Agreed Statement of Facts, the Student admitted

that he knowingly:
(a)

included verbatim or nearly verbatim text and ideas in the RLG450 Paper that were
taken from the RLG450 Sources;

(b)

failed to attribute the verbatim or nearly verbatim text and ideas appropriately using
citations, references or other appropriate means;

(c)

represented in the RLG450 Paper the ideas of another person, the expression of the
ideas of another person, or the work of another person as his own; and

(d)

committed plagiarism, contrary to section B.i.1(d) of the Code.

Decision on the Merits of the Charges
40.

Having reviewed the evidence and the very clear admissions of guilt made by the Student,

we conclude that the Student is guilty of knowingly representing as his own an idea or expression
of an idea or work of another contrary to section B.i.1(d) of the Code in respect of the RLG312
Essay, the RLG314 Paper, the November 18 Response, the November 25 Response and the
RLG450 Paper.
41.

As a result, the Tribunal finds the Student guilty of the following five charges:
(a)

that on or about October 26, 2016, the Student knowingly represented as his own
an idea or expression of an idea or work of another in an essay that he submitted in
RLG312, contrary to section B.i.1(d) of the Code.

(b)

that on or about December 2, 2016, the Student knowingly represented as his own
an idea or expression of an idea or work of another in a response (for November
18, 2016) that he submitted in RLG314, contrary to section B.I.1(d) of the Code;

- 14 (c)

that on or about December 2, 2016, the Student knowingly represented as his own
an idea or expression of an idea or work of another in a response (for November
25, 2016) that he submitted in RLG314, contrary to section B.i.1(d) of the Code;

(d)

that on or about December 9, 2016, the Student knowingly represented as his own
an idea or expression of an idea or work of another in a paper that he submitted in
RLG314, contrary to section B.i.1(d) of the Code; and

(e)

that on or about March 31, 2017, the Student knowingly represented as his own an
idea or expression of an idea or work of another in a paper that he submitted in
RLG450, contrary to section B.i.1(d) of the Code.

42.

In accordance with the Agreed Statement of Facts, the Provost has withdrawn all of the

remaining charges.
PENALTY
Facts
43.

Although we adjourned the original hearing to permit the Student to lead evidence relating

to the issue of penalty, the Student did not to attend the penalty phase hearing either in person or
by Skype. As a result, the only evidence we had before us in respect of penalty was the Agreed
Statement of Facts.
Submissions
44.

Counsel for the University submitted that the Tribunal should make an order:
(a)

recording a grade of zero in each of RLG312 (Fall 2016), RLG314 (Fall 2016) and
RLG450 (Winter 2017);

(b)

suspending the Student starting the date of our order and continuing until December
31, 2022;

(c)

permanently recording the sanction on the Student’s academic record; and

- 15 (d)
45.

allowing the decision to be published, with the Student’s name withheld.

Counsel for the University submitted that the Student had committed a number of offences

involving serious plagiarism and that therefore a suspension of almost four years and a permanent
notation on the Student’s academic record was appropriate in the circumstances.
46.

Counsel for the University noted that the fact that the student had acknowledged his guilt

at the meeting with the Dean’s designate, demonstrated some degree of remorse, and that he had
agreed to the Agreed Statement of Facts, were all factors in his favour. Also in his favour was the
fact that this series of offences were the first time the Student had been found guilty of academic
misconduct. In this regard, counsel advised us that the University was treating the five offences
as one concurrent first offence by the Student.
47.

Counsel noted that the number of incidents and failure to attend the hearing, and his

suggestion to the Dean’s designate that the plagiarism was unintentional, counted against the
Student. The Student’s plagiarism was extensive. It was not just a matter of some missing
citations, but rather whole paragraphs. The degree of plagiarism in the RLG314 Paper was
particularly bad. That paper was entirely plagiarized. The one article from which the Student
appeared to have taken the entire paper was not even cited. The RLG 450 Paper was taken entirely
from two uncited on-line sources. The Student raised the missing citation for one of those sources
only after Professor Ruffle raised it with him.
48.

There were no extenuating circumstances. There was some suggestion that the Student

had been ill, but no evidence was before the Tribunal to support that suggestion.
49.

Counsel for the University submitted that while the Student had no past history of academic

offences, he had committed five offences between the end of October 2016 and March of 2017,
most of them in the six weeks between the end of October and the middle of December 2016. The
chronology of events was nevertheless troubling because some of the offences were committed
after the Student had met with his instructor to discuss allegations of plagiarism, demonstrating
that the meetings had not deterred him.
50.

The University submitted that the requested penalty was in line with the decisions of the

Tribunal in other similar cases.

- 16 Decision on Penalty
51.

As this Tribunal has stated repeatedly, plagiarism is a serious breach of the University’s

standards of ethical behaviour which undermines both the relationship of trust between the
University and its students, and the relationship between students themselves by undermining their
trust in one another, and the integrity of the degrees for which they are studying.
52.

The easy access to multiple sources afforded by the internet has only exacerbated the

problem by providing students with a wide array of source materials from which to choose, along
with the possibility that precisely because there are so many sources one might be able to use one
without discovery.
53.

The task for the Tribunal hearing a plagiarism case is to determine the appropriate penalty

for the individual offender, while taking into consideration the seriousness of the offence and the
need to deter others from it in the future.
54.

This Tribunal has set out the factors to be considered in imposing sanctions on students in

plagiarism cases. One such case is The University of Toronto v N.A (Case No.: 661, February 29,
2012) where the Tribunal described the factors this way:
31 The Factors to be considered when determining penalty are well established:
(i)

the character of the person charged;

(ii)

the likelihood of a repetition of the offence;

(iii)

the nature of the offence committed;

(iv)

any extenuating circumstances surrounding commission of the
offence;

(v)

the detriment to the University occasioned by the offence;

(vi)

the need to deter others from committing a similar offence.

32 The Tribunal, in determining the appropriate penalty, should consider various
factors in order to find a fit sentence for this offender, for this offence in this
community. In doing so, fairness, balance and proportion must be balanced.
33 There should be some measure of uniformity or proportionality so that there
should be similar sentences imposed for offences committed in similar

- 17 circumstances. The sentencing should preserve and ensure fairness by avoiding
disproportionate sentences among similar sentencing processes so that there are
not wide swings or inconsistencies between like offences and like offenders,
recognizing that there is never a like offence or like offender.
34 There should be a range of sentences for offences such as plagiarism with
sentences within that range moving up or down within that range depending on
aggravating or mitigating circumstances.
55.

Reviewing each of these factors in turn, and starting with the Student’s character, the

Tribunal agrees with the University that the Student’s admission of guilt and cooperation in
preparing and submitting the Agreed Statement of Facts are both positive factors, as is his
cooperation in meeting with the Dean’s representative. Both the admission of the guilt and the
agreement to the Agreed Statement of Facts demonstrate the Student’s acknowledgment that his
acts were wrong and go some way towards facilitating the resolution of the charges. Another
factor in the Student’s favour is the fact that this series of plagiarized papers amounted to a first
offence under the Code. Against this, however, must be weighed the fact that the Student failed
to attend in person at either session of the Hearing.
56.

Addressing the second factor, based on his past conduct, there is good reason to expect that

the Student will reoffend unless he is given a significant penalty. Despite meeting with Professor
Scott on November 9, 2016 to discuss the plagiarism in the RLG312 Essay, the Student submitted
the November 18 and November 25 Responses on December 2, 2016, and the RLG314 Paper on
December 9, 2016, all of which were heavily plagiarized. He met with Dr. H. Ganapathy-Coleman
to discuss the plagiarized papers on December 16, 2016, and yet submitted another plagiarized
paper, the RLG450 Paper in March 2017. Clearly, despite having been caught and spoken to by
his professors, the Student was not prepared to cease his academic misconduct when warned about
it and given the opportunity to continue his studies.
57.

In terms of the nature of the offence, as set out above, plagiarism is a serious academic

offence. The plagiarism in this particular case was significant. As counsel for the University
pointed out, this was not a case of missing citations, this was a case of whole paragraphs, even
more or less whole articles, written by others being presented as the Student’s own work. Possibly
worse, instead of stopping after he was caught the first or even the second time, the Student
persisted in portraying the work of others as his own.

- 18 58.

The Tribunal finds no extenuating circumstances based on the evidence before it. We

might have considered illness as an extenuating circumstance, but no evidence substantiating an
illness was provided to us.
59.

Dealing with the last two factors, the Student’s actions reflect very poorly on the

University. There is no issue that other students need to be deterred from such behaviour, a goal
that only a serious penalty will achieve.
60.

The cases provided to us by counsel for the University indicate that a finding of guilt in a

plagiarism case involving a paper in a course at the University warrant a penalty of a grade of zero
in the course for which the student has submitted the plagiarized paper, a suspension of between
three and five years, and a notation on the student’s academic record for a range of time between
the same time as the suspension or up to two years more than that period, or graduation. The most
serious sanctions have been imposed on students charged with multiple instances of plagiarism
who have already previously been found guilty of submitting plagiarized work, and who did not
agree to an agreed statement of facts and a joint submission on penalty.
61.

At the low end of the scale is University of Toronto v. H.M.E (Case No.: 941, February

16, 2018). In that case, the student had submitted two papers, both of which were virtual copies
of other papers, one a paper submitted by another student in the same course, the other a paper
available on-line from a paper sharing site. The student had also lied about turning in a third paper
in another course. The student had no prior record of academic misconduct and had cooperated
with the investigation. The hearing had proceeded on the basis of an agreed statement of facts and
a joint submission on penalty. The Tribunal noted the serious and deliberate nature of the offences
and the detriment to the University, as well as the student’s admission of guilt and cooperation in
the investigation, and lack of any prior record. Ultimately, the Tribunal accepted the joint
submission on penalty and imposed a sanction consisting of a grade of zero in the three courses, a
four-year suspension and a six year notation on the student’s academic record.
62.

At the high end of the scale is The University of Toronto v. N.A. (Case No.: 661, February

29, 2012). In that case, the student was found to have submitted an essay for a second-year English
course which contained words and phrases lifted directly from various websites. This was the
fourth incident in which the student had plagiarised the work of others. She had received penalties

- 19 of increasing severity for the previous offences, culminating in a twelve-month suspension. The
offence before the Tribunal had taken place in the year following the period of the student’s
suspension. Bearing in mind the number of prior offences, the student’s apparent lack of remorse,
and failure to cooperate with the disciplinary process, the Tribunal imposed a final grade of zero
in the course for which the plagiarized work had been submitted, a five year suspension and a
notation on the student’s academic record of just under seven years.
63.

Taking into consideration all of the circumstances, we agree with the University that a

grade of zero in all three of the courses in which the Student submitted plagiarized work and a
suspension of just under four years is appropriate.
64.

We do not, however, believe that a permanent notation of the sanction on the Student’s

academic record and transcript is appropriate. None of the cases cited to us, including ones where
the conduct was much more egregious, have imposed such a sanction. Should the student return
to the University and complete his studies, we believe that he should be able to move forward after
graduation without a notation of our sanction on his academic record. We therefore order that the
notation be from the date of our order up to the date of the Student’s graduation.
65.

The Tribunal therefore imposes the following penalty on the Student:
(a)

a final grade of zero in the course RLG312 in Fall 2016;

(b)

a final grade of zero in the course RLG314 in Fall 2016;

(c)

a final grade of zero in the course RLG450 in Winter 2017;

(d)

a suspension from the University from January 28, 2019, the date of the Tribunal’s
original order, until December 31, 2022; and

(e)

a notation of the sanction on the Student’s academic record and transcript from the
day the Tribunal makes its order until the Student’s graduation.

66.

The Tribunal further orders that this case be reported to the Provost of the University for

publication of a notice of the Tribunal’s decision and the sanction imposed with the name of the
Student withheld.

