Case #969

   DATE: April 29, 2019
   PARTIES:University of Toronto v. I.R.
   Hearing Dates: August 16, 2018 and January 28, 2019
   Panel Members:
   Mr. R.S.M. Woods, Chair
   Prof. Dionne Aleman, Faculty Member
   Ms. Natasha Brien, Student Member
   Appearances:
   Ms. Tina Lie, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg
   Rothstein LLP
   Mr. Hatim Kheir, Representative for the Student, Downtown Legal
   Services (August 16, 2018Â  only)
   Hearing Secretary:
   Ms. Tracey Gameiro, Associate Director, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty
   Grievances
   Trial Division â s. B.i.1(d) of Code â plagiarism â Student knowingly
   represented the work of another as his own in five written assignments
   submitted for course credit in three courses â Agreed Statement of
   Facts â admissions of guilt â Student did not attend second hearing
   date dealing with sanction â reasonable notice of hearing provided -
   sanction phase proceeded in Studentâs absence â reason to believe
   Student would reoffend â extent of plagiarism significant â no
   extenuating circumstances -Â  final grade of zero in three courses;
   suspension of just under four years; notation of sanction on academic
   record and transcript until graduation; and publication of notice of
   decision and sanction imposed with name of the Student withheld â
   permanent notation not appropriate
   The Student was charged with five offences under s. B.i.1(d) of the
   Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters , 1995 (the â Code â) for
   knowingly representing the work of another as his own in five written
   assignments submitted for course credit in three courses. The Student
   was charged, in the alternative, with five academic offences under s.
   B.i.1(b) of the Code (unauthorized assistance) and, in the further
   alternative, with five academic offences under s. B.i.3(b) of the Code
   (cheating for academic advantage).
   The parties submitted an Agreed Statement of Facts (ASF) in which the
   Student admitted that he knowingly committed plagiarism on five
   separate occasions.Â  Based upon the evidence and the very clear
   admissions of guilt made by the Student, the Panel found the Student
   guilty of fives counts of plagiarism contrary to section B.i.1(d) of
   the Code .Â  In accordance with the ASF, the University withdrew all
   remaining charges.
   Neither the Student, nor a legal representative, attended the second
   hearing date. Although Downtown Legal Services had represented the
   Student at the first hearing date, it had withdrawn by the second
   hearing date on the basis that it could no longer contact the
   Student.Â  The Panel was nevertheless satisfied that the Student had
   had notice of the resumed hearing and determined that it would proceed
   with the sanctions portion of the hearing in the Studentâs absence.
   In determining the appropriate penalty, the Panel considered the
   Studentâs character noting that the Studentâs admission of guilt and
   cooperation in preparing and submitting the ASF were positive factors
   demonstrating the Studentâs acknowledgement that his acts were wrong.Â
   On the other hand, the Panel also noted that there was good reason to
   expect the Student to reoffend because, despite having been caught and
   spoken to by his professors, the Student had not ceased his academic
   misconduct when warned about it and given the opportunity to continue
   his studies.Â  The Panel further noted that the plagiarism in this case
   was significant. This was not a case of missing citations; this was a
   case of whole paragraphs, even more or less whole articles, written by
   others, being presented as the Studentâs own work.Â  The Panel found no
   extenuating circumstances based on the evidence before it.Â  Although
   there was some suggestion that the Student had been ill, there was no
   evidence to support that suggestion. The Panel noted that the Studentâs
   actions reflected very poorly on the University and that other students
   needed to be deterred from such behaviour, a goal that only a serious
   penalty would achieve.
   After considering the range of penalties imposed in similar cases, the
   Panel imposed the following sanctions: a final grade of zero in all
   three of the courses in which the Student submitted plagiarized work; a
   suspension from the University of just under four years; a notation of
   the sanction on the Studentâs academic record and transcript until the
   Studentâs graduation; and publication of a notice of the decision and
   sanction imposed with the name of the Student withheld. In doing so,
   the Panel specifically rejected the Universityâs submission that a
   permanent notation on the Studentâs academic record was appropriate
   given the number of offences involving serious plagiarism.Â  The Panel
   stated that if the Student returned to the University to complete his
   studies, then he should be able to move forward after graduation
   without a notation of sanction on his academic record.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/28412
