Case #888

   DATE: February 7, 2017
   PARTIES: University of Toronto v. Y.H. ("the Student")

   Hearing Date(s): January 23, 2017

   Panel Members:
   Ms. Roslyn M. Tsao, Chair
   Professor Kathi Wilson, Faculty Panel Member (appearing by Skype)
   Ms. Sherice Robertson, Student Panel Member

   Appearances:
   Ms. Tina Lie, Assistant Discipline Counsel for University, Paliare
   Roland Barristers
   Mr. Cormac Donovan, Law Student for the Student, Downtown Legal
   Services

   In Attendance:
   Y.H., the Student
   Ms. Lucy Gaspini, Manager, Academic Integrity & Affairs, Office of the
   Dean, University of Toronto Mississauga
   Mr. Christopher Lang, Director, Office of Appeals, Discipline and
   Faculty Grievances

   Trial Division - s. B.i.1(c) and s.B.i.1(a) of Code - personation -
   falsification - student pretended not to have written test for medical
   reasons - guilty plea - agreed statement of facts - joint submission on
   penalty accepted - Tribunal may have imposed a more serious penalty but
   for the joint submission - zero on course, three year suspension, four
   year notation , publication of the decision with the name of the
   Student withheld

   The Student was charged with personation and three counts of
   forgery/falsification under s. B.i.1(c) and s. B.i.1(a) of the Code,
   and in the alternative with two counts of academic dishonesty under s.
   B.i.3(b) of the Code. The Student attended a quiz worth 10% of a course
   grade, but signed it with a false name and student number. On the quiz,
   they wrote a note falsely claiming that they were not a registered
   student in the course but were taking the quiz only "to test my
   knowledge". The Student then submitted a petition for accommodation
   falsely stating that they had been unable to attend the quiz for
   medical reasons.

   The Student pled guilty to personation and two counts of forgery, and
   the University withdrew the other charges. An Agreed Statement of Facts
   and a Joint Submission on Penalty were put before the Tribunal. The
   Tribunal accepted the Joint Submission on Penalty and ordered that the
   Student receive a mark of zero in the course, a three year suspension,
   a four year notation,Â and that the decision be published with the name
   of the Student withheld. In finding the Student guilty and in imposing
   the agreed-upon sanctions, the Panel noted the following: the Student
   cooperated; the Student had a prior offence; the Studentâs conduct was
   designed to gain an academic advantage; the suspension would delay
   graduation given that the Student had not been registered since 2016;
   and, absent the guilty plea, the Panel might have imposed a more
   serious sanction.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12930
