Case. No.: 888

UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
IN THE MATTER OF charges of academic dishonesty made on September 22, 2016
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic
Matters, 1995,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Act, 1971, S.O. 1971, c. 56 as amended
S.O. 1978, C. 88

BETWEEN:
UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO (the "University")
-AND-

YIIIIIIII I-11 (the "Student")
REASONS FOR DECISION
Hearing Date: January 23, 2017
Panel Members:
Ms. Roslyn M. Tsao, Chair
Professor Kathi Wilson, Faculty Panel Member (appearing by Skype)
Ms. Sherice Robertson, Student Panel Member
Appearances:
Ms. Tina Lie, Assistant Discipline Counsel for University, Paliare Roland Barristers
Mr. Cormac Donovan, Law Student for the Student, Downtown Legal Services
In Attendance:
fl, the Student
Mr.
Ms. Lucy Gaspini, Manager, Academic Integrity & Affairs, Office of the Dean, University of
Toronto Mississauga
Mr. Christopher Lang, Director, Office of Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances

'Ill

Charges and Appearances
1.

The Trial Division of the Tribunal heard this matter on January 23, 2017. The Student
was charged on September 22, 2016 with 6 charges, including personation, and
forgery/falsification (3 counts) relating to the Quiz #2 in MGT338H5 - Business Finance

I (the "Course"), a third year course. The Student was also charged, in the alternative,
with two instances of engaging in a form of cheating, academic dishonesty or
misconduct, fraud or misrepresentation not otherwise described in the Code.
2.

The Student attended at the hearing with representation from Downtown Legal Services.

3.

The Student and University tendered an Agreed Statement of Facts ("ASF") for a guilty
plea.

Facts

4.

Based on the ASF, the Student admits the following facts:
•

In the Fall 2015 semester, the Student was registered in the Course taught by Prof.
Kirsch.

The syllabus for the Course contained sections relating to Academic

Misconduct and its consequences and the following under the heading "Missed
Test(s)":
Students MAY NOT petition to re-write a test once the test has begun. lfyou are feeling
ill, you must leave the room before starting your test and seek medical attention
immediately. As described above, you must have a physician.fill out a UTM Student
Medical Certificate, and submit it along with an online Petition for Academic
Accommodation ... within one (I) week of the missed test ... There will be no make-up
exams for a missed quiz or term test .... lf the student's Petition for Academic
Accommodation for missing a test is approved, the instructor will determine whether (a)
the student will be required to do remedial work in its place (such as an oral exam or
extended assignment) or (b) the weighting of the.final exam will be increased by value of
the missed test ....

•

On November 18, 2015, Quiz #2 worth 10% of the final grade was held in the
Course.

•

The Student attended Quiz #2 and wrote his name and student number on the front
page of the test booklet. Later, the Student heavily crossed out this information so that
it was unreadable, and beside it wrote "Justin Zhang 1000320472".

•

On the second page of his Quiz #2, the Student wrote the following note ("Justin
Note")

2

Dear Marker,
I'm not a registered student. I just take this quiz to test my knowledge in order to have
good grade in the future. Thank you for your time and sorry for the inconvenience!
Justin

•

At the completion of the quiz, the Student submitted his Quiz #2 with the incorrect
name and student number on the cover and the Justin Note on the second page.
Although some attempt was made by the Student to answer question 1 and he made a
short note in respect of question 2(a)(i), he earned no marks on those attempts. The
remaining questions were left blank.

•

On November 20, 2015 following the quiz, the Student submitted a petition seeking
academic accommodation on the basis of medical reasons ("Petition") with a
University of Toronto Verification of Student Illness or Injury dated November 20,
2015 from Dr. Abdelsaied ("Medical Note"). The Medical Note indicated that the
Student was significantly impaired in his ability to fulfill academic obligations for 3
days from November 18 to 21, 2015, and that he had been "sick at home can not
move".

•

On December 4, 2015, the Student was informed that his Petition had been approved,
and that he was to contact his course instructor for further details in regards to the
missed quiz.

•

Professor Kirsch confirmed that there was no student by the name of Justin Zhang in
the Course in the Fall 2015 term. However, after the final exam in the Course on
December 4, 2015, she noted that the Student's handwriting on his final exam was
very similar to that of the handwriting of the "Justin Zhang".

•

On March 31, 2016, the Student met with Catherine Seguin, Dean's Designate. The
Student acknowledges that he was provided with the requisite warning under the
Code and admitted to Professor Seguin that:
o he attended Quiz #2 on November 18, 2015, at which time he wrote a
fictitious name and student number on his exam, and wrote the Justin Note;

3

o

he filed the Petition later that same day saying that he had not attended Quiz
#2 due to illness;

o

he subsequently submitted the Medical Note to support his Petition;

o

he was aware that he did not have to write Quiz #2 if he was ill; and

o

he did not notify Professor Kirsch or anyone else that he felt ill during Quiz
#2.

Decision of the Tribunal

5.

Based on the ASF and the panel's review of the examination booklet in question, the
Student is found guilty of Charges 1, 2 and 5 being one count of personation contrary to
section B.I.l(c) and 2 counts of forgery/falsification contrary to section B.I.l(a) of the
Code.

6.

The University withdrew Charges 3, 4 and 6.

Penalty

7.

The Student and University submitted an Agreed Statement of Facts relating to Penalty
("ASFP") and a Joint Submission on Penalty ("JSP") for the following penalty:
(a)

a final grade of zero in Course MGT338H5 in Fall 2015;

(b)

a three (3) year suspension from the University commencing September 1, 2016;
and ending on August 31, 2019; and

(c)

a four (4) year notation of the sanction on the Student's academic record and
transcript commencing on January 23, 2017 and ending on January 22, 2021.

8.

The Student has one prior sanction relating to academic misconduct since attending the
University in Fall, 2011:

4

(a)

in December 2012, the Student admitted to obtaining unauthorized assistance
from another student in CSC 108H5 for a computer code assignment the month
earlier;

(b)

the Student received a grade of zero for that assignment worth 10% of the course
grade; and

(c)

the Student received a written sanction letter which warned him that subsequent
allegations of academic misconduct would be referred to the Office of the Dean or
Tribunal for investigation.

9.

Unfortunately, the Student has again crossed the line into academic misconduct despite
his previous experience. It is troubling that the Student would repeat conduct which was
clearly designed to gain an academic advantage, either to hide his lack of preparedness
for the quiz or to enable him to review the questions and then take the quiz later with
such additional knowledge.

10.

It was noted by the University that the Student has completed 3 more credits since the

offence and now has 19 credits of the required 20 credits to obtain his degree. However,
the Student has apparently not registered for any courses since 2016.

The 3 year

suspension ending August 31, 2019 will delay his graduation by a significant period of
time.
11.

The Tribunal accepts the terms of penalty set out in the JSP. Although the Student
pleaded guilty, as he did on the previous occasion, the Panel might well have imposed a
more serious sanction but for the JSP given the prior finding.

12.

An Order was signed at the hearing by the Panel. The Tribunal is to report this decision
to the Provost for publication of a notice of the decision of the Tribunal and the sanctions
imposed in the University's newspapers, with the name of the Student withheld.

5

Dated at Toronto, this

7th day of February, 2017

6

