Case 547

THE UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO

IN THE MATTER OF charges of academic dishonesty made on January 5, 2009;
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic
Matters, 1995;

AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Act, 1971, S.O. 1971, c. 56 as amended
S.O. 1978, C. 88

BETWEEN:
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO

- and-

xalPJII

L-117-

Members of the Panel:
• Ms. Kirby Chown, Chair
• Professor Paul Cooper, Faculty Panel Member
• Mr. Nikola Cunjak, Student Panel Member
Appearances:
• Mr. Robert Centa, Assistant Discipline Counsel
•

Mr. XIII ZIIII, the Student, did not appear

Preliminary
[1]

The Trial Division of the University Tribunal was convened at 5:30 p.m. on May 4, 2009
to consider charges under the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic
Matters, 1995 (the "Code") laid against the Student by letter dated January 5, 2009 from
Professor Edith Hillan, Vice-Provost, Academic.

[2]

The panel was made up of Ms. Kirby Chown, Chair; Professor Paul Cooper, a faculty
member and Mr. Nikola Cunjak, a student member. Counsel for the University was Mr.
Robert Centa. The Student was not represented and did not attend the hearing.

- 1-

Case 547

[3]

The hearing was called to order at 5:30 p.m. and then adjourned until 6:00 p.m. to allow
the Student further time to appear. At 6:00 p.m. the hearing was reconvened, but the
Student had still failed to appear. The University proposed to proceed in the Student's
absence and the Tribunal heard submissions with respect to this issue.

[4]

Mr. Centa presented the panel with the affidavit of Ms. Betty-Ann Campbell, a law clerk
from his firm, Paliare Roland. In addition, Mr. Centa called Ms. Campbell as a witness.
Ms. Campbell testified that she had personally attended at the examination facility on
McCaul Street in Toronto on March 20, 2009. The Student identified himself to her. She
then personally served the Student with the Notice of Hearing, the Charges and the
University's disclosure brief.

[5]

After considering the Affidavit of Ms. Campbell, her evidence and the submissions of
counsel, the panel was satisfied that the provisions in the Code and in the Statutory
Powers Procedure Act ("SPPA") had been met and ruled that the hearing would proceed
in the Student's absence.

[6]

In arriving at its decision, the panel found that Student had received the Notice of
Hearing, the Charges and the complete disclosure brief approximately six weeks before
the hearing date and that this material provided the Student with reasonable notice of the
charges, the hearing date and the seriousness of the said charges.

Hearing on the Facts

[7]

[8]

The charges are as follows:
1.

On or about March 17, 2008, you knowingly represented as your own an idea or
expression of an idea, and/or work of another in an essay that you submitted to fulfill
the course requirements of AST251, contrary to Section B.1.1.(d) of the Code.

11.

In the alternative, on or about March 17, 2008, you knowingly engaged in a form of
cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or misrepresentation not
otherwise described in the Code in order to obtain academic credit or other academic
advantage of any kind in connection with an essay you submitted for academic credit
in AST251, contrary to Section B.1.3.(b) of the Code.

Particulars of the charges are as follows:
1.

You were registered at the University of Toronto Mississauga and enrolled m
AST251 ("Course") at all material times.

u. On or about March 17, 2008, you submitted an assignment entitled "Life on Other
Worlds: The Research Paper'' to partially fulfill the Course requirements ("Essay").

-2-

Case 547

iii. The Essay contained unacknowledged passages taken verbatim or nearly verbatim
from various sources including websites.
1v. For the purposes of obtaining academic credit or a.'lother academic advantage, you

knowingly plagiarized your assignment.
v. Your conduct violated the Code.
[9]

The University called three witnesses: Ms. Marija Stankovic, Professor Slavek Rucinski
and Ms. Kristi Gourlay.

[10]

Ms. Stankovic is a graduate student at the University of Toronto and was the Teaching
Assistant (TA) in AST25 l at the time of the events in question. It was her responsibility
to mark the essays prepared by the students in AS T25 l.

[ 11]

Ms. Stankovic testified that students were made aware of the requirements for the course
which included the preparation of a research paper ("paper") worth 25% of the final mark
that was required to be submitted in hard copy and email on March 17, 2008. She also
testified that the webpage for the course contained further information on the paper and,
in particular, noted the fact that the papers would be checked for plagiarism and there
would be "very serious consequences if plagiarism is detected". As well, she drew the
panel's attention to a further posting on the website entitled "Critical Writing", which
was prepared by the previous professor of the course and updated by Professor Rucinski.
This section of the website advised students to read and adhere to the guidelines "How
Not to Plagiarize".

[12]

The Student submitted a paper entitled "Life on Other Worlds" on March 17, 2008 in
hard copy and via email to the TA. Ms. Stankovic reviewed the hard copy of the
Student's research paper and became alerted to some potential irregularities in the paper
when she noted that a sentence from the first page was repeated on the third page of the
paper. She entered this sentence into the Google search engine and found that it was a
verbatim match to material on the internet. She reviewed the rest of the paper and
Googled other passages, finding that they were similarly extracted verbatim, or virtually
verbatim, from articles on the internet. She noted on the paper "Case for plagiarism!"
and highlighted portions of the paper that were copied from the internet. She then
provided the paper and copies of the primary sources, to Professor Rucinski. Although
the Student noted some articles as references at the end of the paper, he did not
acknowledge the portions that had been copied from the internet.

[13]

Professor Rucinski is a professor in the Department of Astronomy and Astrophysics and
the professor for AST251. He advised the panel that he discussed plagiarism in class at
the beginning of the course and directed the students to the relevant pages dealing with
plagiarism on the course website.

- ..,., -

Case 547

[14]

Professor Rucinski testified that he received the Student's original paper from the TA and
reported this matter to the chairperson of the depa...rtment on April 15th , describing it as a
case of plagiarism.

[15]

The panel was provided with a Book of Documents that included the hard copy of the
Stu.dent's research paper together with Ms. Stankovic's notations and, as well, copies of
the internet sources from which the Student had allegedly plagiarized. The panel was
invited to compare the internet documents to the Student's essay as counsel for the
University led Ms. Stankovic through the evidence.

[16]

Ms. Gourlay, who is the manger of the Office of Student Academic Integrity for Arts and
Science, was called. She had reviewed the electronic copy of the Student's research
paper. She carried out a very thorough review of the paper as against internet sources.
Once again, in the Book of Documents, the panel was invited to follow along with her
annotations on the electronic copy of the Student's essay and to compare it to the
provided internet sources from which the Student had allegedly plagiarized.

Decision of the Tribunal
[17]

After considering the submissions of counsel, reviewing the documentation and after
deliberation, the panel was satisfied that counsel for the University had proved the case on clear
and compelling evidence and found the Student guilty of the offence set out at charge # 1.

[18]

The panel noted that the extent of plagiarized material in the Student's paper was
significant and comprised virtually all of the submitted paper. The panel also noted that
although the Student included at the end of his paper a section entitled "References and
Resources" which listed a number of books and internet sites he had apparently
consulted, he failed to list the sites from which he actually took the material in question.
This represents a very flagrant and serious case of plagiarism.

[19]

On being advised of the Tribunal's decision, discipline counsel withdrew charge #2.

Penaltv Phase
[20]

Counsel for the University recalled Ms. Kristi Gourlay to introduce the ROSI transcript
of the Student and invited the panel to consider it as part of the penalty phase.

[21]

The University submitted that the appropriate penalty in the circumstances would be as
follows:
1.

That the Student receive a final grade of O in AST25 l;

11.

That the Student be suspended for a period of two years from May 4, 2009 to May 3,
2011;

-4-

Case 547

iii. That a notation appear on the transcript of the Student that the Student had committed
an academic offence for a period of three years from May 4, 2009 to May 3, 2012;
and
1v. That the decision be reported to the Provost to be published \:\11th the name of the
Student withheld.
[22]

Counsel for the University provided the panel with a Book of Authorities, which
contained several decisions of the University Tribunal in similar cases. The panel paid
particular attention to the criteria for sanction first proposed by Mr. Justice Sopinka in the
matter of the appeal of Mr. C. (November 5, 1976). Mr. Sopinka, as he then was,
indicated that a panel should consider the following six criteria when deciding on an
appropriate sanction:
a) the character of the person charged;
b) the likelihood of a repetition of the offence;
c) the nature of the offence committed;
d) any extenuating circumstances surrounding the commission of the offence;
e) the detriment to the University occasioned by the offence;
f) the need to deter others from committing a similar offence

[23]

As the Student did not attend the hearing, this panel was not able to consider relevant
factors which might influence the sanction to be applied, including his character, any
extenuating circumstances and the likelihood of a repetition of offence.

[24]

The panel took into account the following factors:
1.

the Student had been convicted of one serious count of plagiarism;

11.

the Student had shown no remorse or any acceptance of responsibility for this matter
and had declined to attend the hearing;

iii. the Student had no prior academic offences;
iv. the detriment to the University occasioned by the offence; and
v. the need to deter others from committing a similar offence
[25]

The panel was strongly of the view that plagiarism is a serious offence that goes to the
very heart of the academic integrity of the University and its students.

-5-

Case 547

[26]

The panel also notes, as stated in the case of re: University of Toronto and A. K
(November 9, 2007), that a number of cases has established a threshold minimum penalty
for those convicted of plagiarism of a two-year suspension.

[27]

The panel agrees that a two-year suspension should be the threshold for a first time
offence of plagiarism and judges that it is the appropriate sanction for this case.

[28]

The panel is of the view that this case is very similar in all respects to the case of re: lvls.
OK (June, 2006). Cornparing the nature of the offence, the fact that there were no prior
offences committed bv the Student and the fact that the Student did not appear at the
hearing. we felt that the University's submission re penalty should be varied in one
n~spect~ namely, that a notation should be on the Student's transcript for a period of nvo
years rather than three years.

[29]

Accordingly, we determine the sanction in this case as follows:
1.

the Student receive a final grade of 0 in AST251;

n. the Student be suspended for a period of two years from May 4, 2009 to May 3, 2011;
iii. that a notation appear on the transcript of the Student for a period of two years from
May 4, 2009 to May 3, 2011 that the Student has committed an academic offence;

and
iv. the decision be reported to the Provost to be published with the name of the Student
,vithheld.

~

Dated this

IO day of September, 2009

,~~
Kirby Cho\\n, Associate Chair

-6-

