Case #547

   DATE: September 10, 2009
   PARTIES: University of Toronto v. X.P.Z.
   Hearing Date(s): May 4, 2009
   Panel Members:
   Ms. Kirby Chown, Chair
   Prof. Paul Cooper, Faculty Member
   Mr. Nikola Cunjak, Student Member
   Appearances:
   Mr. Robert Centa, Assistant Discipline Counsel for the University

   Trial Division - s. B.i.1(d) of Code â plagiarism â course work â
   hearing not attended â reasonable notice of hearing â see Code and
   Statutory Powers Procedure Act â paper plagiarized from internet â
   finding of guilt â serious act of plagiarism â no remorse â
   non-cooperation â see case of Re: University of Toronto v. A.K. and
   case of re: Ms . O.K â two-year suspension threshold appropriate â
   length of notation varied â grade assignment of zero for course;
   two-year suspension; two-year notation; and report to Provost

   Student charged under s. B.i.1(d) , and alternatively, under s.
   B.i.3(b) of the Code . The charges related to allegations that the
   Student submitted a research paper plagiarized from internet sources.
   The Student did not attend the Hearing and did not respond to the
   charges. The Panel considered the evidence of a law clerk who claimed
   to have personally served the Student with the Notice of Hearing and
   found that the relevant provisions of the Code and in the Statutory
   Powers Procedure Act had been met and that the Hearing would proceed in
   the Studentâs absence. The Panel considered the evidence of the
   Universityâs witnesses and a review of the research paper against the
   alleged internet sources of the plagiarism. The Panel found that
   plagiarized material comprised most of the Studentâs paper and that the
   Student failed to cite the websites from which he took the material in
   question. The Panel found the Student guilty of the offence under s.
   B.i.1(d) of the Code . The Panel considered that the offence was for a
   serious count of plagiarism; that the Student had shown no remorse or
   acceptance of responsibility and had declined to attend the hearing;
   that he had no prior academic offences; the detriment to the University
   occasioned by the offence; and the need to deter others from committing
   a similar offence. The Panel considered the cases of Re: University of
   Toronto v. A.K. and re: Ms . O.K. and found that a two-year suspension
   threshold for a first time offence of plagiarism was the appropriate
   sanction but that the notation should be on the Studentâs transcript
   for a period of two-years rather than three. The Panel imposed a mark
   of zero in the course; a two-year suspension; a two-year notation on
   the Studentâs academic record and transcript; and that a report be
   issued to the Provost.

   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12995
