Case 816

DATE:

   July 27, 2016

PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v L.D.

Hearing Date(s):

   April 7, 2016
   June 23, 2016
   June 29, 2016

Panel Members:

   Lisa Brownstone, Chair
   Joel Kirsh, Faculty Member
   Carl Shen, Student Member

Appearances:

   Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Barristers
   Lucy Gaspini, Manager, Academic Integrity & Affairs, UTM
   Shu Cui Lin, Paralegal for the Student
   Joseph Jim, Assistant to Ms. Lin
   Prof. Kathleen Yu, Instructor of the Course
   Prof. Catherin Seguin, Deanâs Designate, UTM
   Alexandra Di Blasio, Academic Integrity Assistant, UTM
   Ms. L.D., the Student
   Mr. Y.L. Ms. X.C., and Ms. B.J.L, friends of the Student, UTM
   Mary Xu Ling Wang, Interpreter for the Student

In Attendance:

   Tracey Gameiro, Associate Director, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty
   Grievances
   Krista Osbourne, Administrative Assistant, Appeals, Discipline and
   Faculty Grievances
   Sean Lourim, IT Support, Office of the Governing Council
   Mr. Y.J., the Studentâs boyfriend
   Student charged under s. B.i.1(a) and, in the alternative, s. Bi.3(a)
   and s. B.i.3(b) of the Code . The charges related to allegations that
   the Student knowingly forged, altered, or falsified her Test before
   resubmitting it in an attempt to obtain additional marks. Student found
   guilty with respect to the forged documents charge contrary to s.
   B.i.1(a) of the Code. The University then withdrew the alternative
   charges. The Panel took into account evidence that the Student made two
   alterations to her test based on the Course Instructorâs scan of her
   originally submitted Test. In The University of Toronto v. O.S . (case
   #824), a student was found guilty of a forged documents charge
   involving the very same course and the very same test. The Student in
   this case argued that she made two markings on the Test but forgot
   about these changes when she resubmitted it for regarding. The Panel in
   this case noted the differences in this case, namely the mitigating
   factors of this Student: the Student took the proceedings and the
   fall-out from her actions seriously, there was a degree of remorse, the
   conduct was unlikely to be repeated, and the student had difficult
   personal circumstances. The Panel therefore imposed a lesser sentence
   than it had in Case #824, but it continued to emphasize the serious
   nature of the misconduct. The Panel imposed a grade assignment of zero
   in the Course; a 1-year suspension from the University; a 2-year
   notation on the Studentâs academic record and transcript; and that the
   matter be reported to the Provost for publication.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12910
