Case 672

DATE:

   July 24, 2013

PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v. J.K.

Hearing Date(s):

   November 27, 2012

Panel Members:

   William McDowell, Chair
   Pascal Van Lieshout,Â Faculty Member
   Peter Qiang, Student Member

Appearances:

   Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel for the University
   John Britton,Â Dean's Designate
   Lilach Gilady, Professor
   Rebecca Sanders, Teaching Assistant
   James McKee, Teaching Assistant
   Matthew Walls, Teaching Assistant
   Michael Nicholson, Associate Registrar

In Attendance:

   The Student
   Kristi Gourlay, Manager, Office of Academic Integrity
   Natalie Ramtahal, Coordinator, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty
   Grievances

   Student charged with two offences under s. B.i.1(d) and two offences
   under s. B.i.1(a). The Student had admitted guilt but an Agreed
   Statement of Facts had not been prepared. Counsel for the University
   was therefore permitted to lead her witnesses during a brief
   examination period. The charges under s. B.i.1(d) related to
   allegations that the Student purchased two essays for submission as his
   own. The Student paid an individual to make substantial changes to a
   paper he wrote and convert his ideas, expressed in Korean, into
   English. The Student paid the same individual to write another paper
   for him in its entirety. The charges under s. B.i.1(a) related to an
   allegation that the Student submitted forged correspondence in support
   of a petition for a differed exam in two courses. The Student had
   suffered a head injury for which he had received academic accommodation
   in previous years. The Student continued to rely on this historical
   injury in his requests for academic accommodation, noting each time
   that the injury had occurred only âa month ago.â The Student had been
   warned about the consequences of academic misconduct previously,
   although he was not found guilty of any prior offence. The Panel
   imposed a final grade of zero in three courses, a recommendation that
   the Student be expelled from the University, and a five-year
   suspension.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12791
