UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL - TRIAL DIVISION

IN THE MATTER OF charges of academic dishonesty filed on July 3, 20 12,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic
Matters, 1995,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University a/Toronto Act, 1971, S.O. 1971, c. 56 as amended
S.O. 1978, C. 88

BETWEEN:
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO

-AND-

Date of Hearing: November 27, 2012
Members of the panel:
Mr. \Villiam McDowell, Chair
Professor Pascal van Lieshout, Faculty of Medicine, Faculty Panel Member
Mr. Peter Qiang, Student Panel Member
Appearances:
Ms. Lily Hanner, Assistant Discipline Counsel for the University of Toronto, Paliare Roland
Barristers
Mr. John Britton, Dean's Designate, Faculty of Arts and Science
Professor Lilach Gilady, Instructor POL208Y: Introduction to International Relations
Ms. Rebecca Sanders, Head Teaching Assistant POL208: Introduction to International Relations
Mr. James McKee, Teaching Assistant POL208Y: Introduction to International Relations
Mr. Matthew Walls, Teaching Assistant ANT200Y: Introduction to Archaeology
Mr. Michael N icholson, Associate Registrar, University College
In Attendance:
Mr. ~ . , t h e Student
Dr. Kristi Gourlay, Manager, Office of Student Academic Integrity, Faculty of Arts and Science
Ms. Natalie Ramtahal, Coordinator, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances

-2-

[ 1]

The student ~ ~ appeared before the Tribunal for a hearing on five admitted
counts of academic misconduct. The student admitted that he had committed misconduct
in the following particulars in the Amended Notice of Hearing:
1.

On or about October 25, 2011, you knowingly represented the ideas of another
person as your own work, or knowingly represented the expression of the ideas of
another person as your own work, in an assignment entitled "Question 2"
submitted in the University of Toronto course POL208Yl ("POL208 Assignment
1")"), contrary to section B.I.l(d) of the Code.

2.

On or about February 14, 2012, you knowingly represented the ideas of another .
person as your own work, or knowingly represented the expression of the iedeas
of another person as your own work, in an assignment entitled "Essay Prompt II"
submitted in the University of Toronto course POL208Yl ("POL208 Assignment
2")"), contrary to section B.l.l(d) of the Code.

3.

On or about January 17, 20 12, you knowingly falsified a document or evidence
required by the University of Toronto, or uttered, circulated or made use of any
such forged, altered or falsified document or evidence, namely, correspondence
which you submitted to the University of Toronto in support of your request for
academic accommodation or relief in the form of a deferred exam in POL208Yl ,
contrary to Section B.I.l(a) of the Code.

4.

On or about January 17, 2012, you knowingly falsified a document or evidence
required by the University of Toronto, or uttered, circulated or made use of any
such forged, altered or falsified document or evidence, namely, correspondence

-3which you submitted to the University of Toronto in support of your request for
academic accommodation or relief in the fonn of a deferred exam in ANT200Yl,
contrary to Section B.1.1(1) of the Code.

[2]

The procedure followed at the hearing was somewhat unusual. Mr. • had just flown
in from Korea shortly before the commencement of the hearing.

Counsel for the

University had not had the opportunity of attempting to achieve an Agreed Statement of
Facts.

Consequently, although Mr. • made admissions with respect to the five

charges, this matter came before us in the absence of an Agreed Statement of Facts. Ms.
Harmer submitted to us that we should hear witnesses briefly on these matters. We
permitted her to lead in her examination of these witnesses, and Ms. Harmer was able to
do so quite efficiently.

Background
[3]

In the winter of 2011, Mr.~ was enrolled in MAT223H1S. The final exam was held
on April 19, 2011. Mr. •

did not write this examination. Instead, he filed a petition

dated April 27, 2011 in which he represented that he had suffered food poisoning by
reason of consumption of Chinese food and too much energy drink. We were provided
with a medical certificate executed by a physician practising at the medical practice on
Bloor Street, Dr. Hinal Sheth. Dr. Sheth executed the relevant form (on which Mr. ~
had ticked the box as follows:

I have provided accurate and complete information on this form
and with my petition. I have also read, understood and will abide
by the petition instructions that were attached to this form/on the

-4-

petition's website:
http://www.artsci.utoronto.ca/current/undergraduate/petitions.)

[4]

His petition was granted and accordingly he was to write a deferred examination. The
deferred examination was set for August 18, 201 1. Mr. ~ did not do the examination
on that date, but filed a further petition dated August 25, 20 11 . His accompanying letter
dated August 26, 2011 claimed that, "I was not able to take the exam due to a serious
illness". That description was somewhat inapt in that his letter continued as follows:
I got hit by a bottle (glass) right in my left forehead a week ago. I
was sent to the St. Michael 's Hospital. After the event, whenever I
concentrate or work on something really hard, serious pain appears
onmy head.

[5]

A medical certificate which was ostensibly executed by a physician at BP Health Clinics,
845 Adelaide Street West, Suite 800, Toronto stated that Mr. •
following:

was suffering from the

"possible post-concussive syndrome secondary to head trauma".

problem was described as acute. Mr . •

The

was said to have suffered the injury on August

16, 2011. The attending physician, Jasdeep Gill, whose CPSO registration number was
included on the form, offered the opinion:
Concussions may limit ability to focus, concentrate with
s[ymptoms] of HA and irritability in some cases.

-5-

[6]

Mr. ~

in his petition also requested permission to enrol in the Fall and Winter session.

Again, his petition was granted.
[7]

In the Fall of 2011/Winter 2012 academic session, Mr. •

was enrolled in POL208Y

and in ANT200Yl Y (courses in political studies and anthropology respectively).
[8]

On October 25, 2011, Mr. •

was to submit an assignment in the political studies

course worth 20% of the grade. On November 29, 2011 he was to write a mid-term test
in the political studies course.
[9]

On December 5, 2011, he had a first mid-term assignment due in anthropology.

[10]

Again, matters went awry. On December 6, 2011 , Mr. •

emailed his instructor in

POL208Y to say that he had missed the mid-term test. This prompted some interaction
with Professor Lilach Gilady, who taught the course with the assistance of several
teaching assistants. Professor Gilady requested the production of medical notes. She also
sought copies of the first term paper which she believed Mr. • had completed in order
to consider whether or not his marks could be re-weighted (in other words whether it was
possible to assign him a grade without him having to take the mid-term test). After
several prompts, Mr. •

relied to Professor Gilady as follows:

First of all I attached a screen shot of my following email to let the
instructor know how I missed the term test.
Second of all, Im still looking for my essay. I had too much
material to handle this semester, huge burden of papers. I will drop
it off at your file when I find it.

-6If fail to do so, I will contact you as soon as possible.

Thrid of all,
I got better a bit after a sleep with the medication I was assigned to
take. Therefore, I thought it would be fine to take rest rather than
visiting the hospital. I decided not to go to the hospital because it
would cost too much and even waiting would be really long to
endure the pain (thought taking a rest at home would be way better
to releif the pain). (I was not an emergency patient.)

[11]

On January 17, 2012 Mr. ~ wrote to Rebecca Sanders, the Head Teaching Assistant in
the Political Studies course. In his email, he explained why he had missed the make-up
test on January 19, 2012. He claimed "an extreme circumstance". His explanation
continued,
First of all, I had an accident hit on my forehead with a glass bottle
about a month ago . ... I was moved to the St. Michael's Hospital
right away and had an MRI going on. At that time, they said
there's no other problem. Just the minor injury (few stitches)
however there might be a problem afterwards.
I had no other pain afterwards, so thought I was fully recovered.
However, last night at first, I thought I was having a minor pain
which I can endure with the Advil. H owever it got worse and

-7-

worse ( even vomitted) so visited my family doctor at 11 ' o clock in
the morning today.
He said it's a tension headache which could be recovered soon but
if it doesn't
he told me to visit big hospital.
Now it's even worse so planning to go to the St. Michael's
Hospital to get a CT of my head.

[12]

Ms. Sanders expressed her sympathy. She advised that there would not be a further makeup exam, but that instead it would likely be necessary to re-weight Mr. •s
assignments. She requested that Mr. • submit a medical certificate.

[13]

In the meantime, Mr. ~ had also missed the mid-term examination in ANT200 which
was offered on December 5th . Mr. ~ wrote to Matthew Walls, the Head Teaching
Assistant for the anthropology course. The text of his email is identical to that set out
above.

[14]

th

On January 18 , Mr. • submitted two medical certificates to Mr. Walls. The first was
a form completed by a Ms. Choo of Susies Acupuncture and Herb Medical Centre on
Bloor Street in Toronto. The form requested the physician's registration certificate
number with the College of Physicians and Surgeons of Ontario. Ms. Choo filled out a
registration number which appears to be from some other regulatory body. The form
deposes that Mr. • had suffered from flu, chest conjection [sic] and headache all over.
Ms. Choo has described the condition as acute as at December 3rd to the 6th 2011. Mr.

-8~ also attached the medical certificate of Dr. Timur Khamidbayev. Dr. Khamidbayev

worked at the Lakefront Clinic on Queens Quay. The physician completed the University
of Toronto Student Medical Certificate form describing Mr. .

,s problem as a tension

headache which was "sub acute". He described that the problem had come on January
16, 2012. It included,

Recurrent episodes of tension headache possibly related to head
injury. NSAIDs for pain.

(15]

He offered the further opinion that,
This student missed classes on January l ih due to headache.
Return to regular class schedule on January 18, 20 12.

[1 6]

The instructors in the politics course were by mid-January suspicious of Mr. • · Ms.
Sanders emailed James McKee, another Teaching Assistant, in POL208 to request
infom1ation about the student. Mr. McKee responded that he had had suspicions about
Mr. .

for some time. In his evidence before the Tribunal he explained that Mr. ~

never said anything in class. He had submitted a paper in which he was asked to analyze
a speech given by President Obama. The paper was very good and Mr. ~

had received

a mark of 83 which was the top mark in the section. He had submitted another good paper
later in the term.

This one entitled, "Essay Prompt II" which recounted a fictional

exchange concerning the role of national governments in the economy.

-9(17]

On February 7, 2012 M r . . was requested to attend a Dean 's meeting concerning a
suspicion that he and another student had collaborated to cheat during an examination
held in PSYl00H, a psychology course. In that case, a concern had been raised that a
group of Korean students had been writing in unusually large letters to permit one
another to cheat.

[ 18]

Professors Sam Solecki, who was acting as the Dean' s Designate for Academic Integrity
and had charge of this meeting, sought examinations for Mr. • . Mr. • claimed not
to know the other students who were observed communicating with him.

Professor

Solecki concluded that he could not prove academic misconduct and the matter ended
there. What is significant is that Mr. • was warned by email on February 3, 2012 as
follows:

While I hope you have learned from this experience, this letter is a
warning to you that all future academic work must be conducted in
accordance with the rules and regulations of the University, with
which you are expected to be familiar. Any further offence will be
treated more severely.

[19]

One might quibble with Professor Solecki in that he had expressly decided that he could
not prove the commission of any offence. That said, Mr. •

carried on in a most

dishonest way in his relations with the University, beginning with his email to Professor
Gilady on February 5th -

- 10 [20]

He had suffered a serious flu. However, in a subsequent email, Mr. •

reverted to his

explanation that his difficulties flowed from his earlier head injury. Professor Gilady
made the sensible observation that ''in your initial email you said the doctor referred you
to the hospital. No one can just walk into a hospital and get a CT. If you were referred to
a hospital you should have been given a referral. This is the document we need in order to
confirm your story ... ".
(2 1]

On February 16, 2012 Professor Chazan of the Department of Anthropology wrote:
I am writing to you with regard to your participation in
Anthropology 200.

I am formally requesting that you please

provide by the end of the week documentation about your original
head injury, visit to the hospital and MRI, as well as
documentation of referral for a CT.
[22)

Mr. •

responded that there was no referral. It had been suggested to him that he visit

the hospital as an emergency patient "if my symptom gets way worse". "He said there
would be no other requirement to take a CT of my head injury as an emergency patient."
Of course, the head injury in question had been suffered the previous August.
[23)

In the meantime, Mr. •

had been required to submit more written work, and had once

again done so dishonestly.
[24]

He submitted a second assignment in POL 208 entitled Essay Prompt II. This was to
reconstruct a discussion which had taken place at the Davost Economic Forum on the
premise that the only recording of the discussion among two academics concerning the
global economic role of the United States in times of crisis had been destroyed. Mr.~

- 11 turned in a paper which contained a lively discussion written (as required) in the voices
of the two scholars as well as Mr. • .
[25]

His instructors again expressed concern that the paper appeared to be written in a way
which sugge~ied that Mr. ~ was not the author.

[26]

Mr. ~

, in his evidence before us, initially took the position that he had provided ideas

to a "consultant" who had incorporated them and helped him with his language. He fairly
readily agreed, however, that in fact very little of the content of the paper had been his
own.
[27]

These matters were raised with him in the Dean's meeting held by the designate
Professor John Britton on April 13, 2012, to discuss allegations in respect of three
courses, MAT223 , POL208 and ANT200. In that meeting, Mr. •
he had purchased two assignments for submissions in POL208.

acknowledged that
These were the

assignments entitled Question 2, submitted October 25, 201 1, and the February 14, 2012
assignment discussed immediately above.
[28]

Mr. ~ also admitted during the course of the meeting that the medical excuses which
he had provided in relation to his head injury were false to the extent that he was still
relying on them in 2012. It will be recalled that Mr. ~ had claimed in a January 17,
2012 email to Matthew Walls his ENT200 tutor and to Rebecca Sanders, the head TA in
POL208, that he had suffered a head injury "a month ago". Mr. Walls received a medical
certificate in relation to the head injury on January 18, 2012 and at another unknown date
he had furnished another note in relation to his head injury. There was some imprecision
in the evidence of just what information Mr. •

had provided in relation to his head

l';'-¥'ii'l"!'E';

7

3••·~.,,....,...

- 12 injury and on what date. We are satisfied that by 2012 the head injury was simply not an
issue, and that Mr. •
[29]

had so acknowledged.

Mr. ~ had tried to write his first paper himself. He found it difficult. He went to a
tutor who made all the changes. Given the extent of involvement of the "tutor" Mr . •
appears to have determined that it was simpler to pay the tutor $32.00 per hour to put his
ideas expressed in Korean into English. He admitted that the tutor had simply written the
second paper in its entirety.

[30]

Purchasing academic work for submissions as one's own is the most serious misconduct
that a student can commit. We need not elaborate extensively on this point having regard
to the admissions which had been made by Mr. I~ in this case.

[31]

We were referred to the case of the University of Toronto and . -

ca ~ ~

and ~ - J9 (October 24, 2011, Ronald G. Slaght Q.C., Chair). That panel set
out factors which would have a bearing on penalty.

At paragraph 136 Mr. Slaght

proposed the following test:
Under what circumstances was the essay purchased and submitted.
What degree of intent and deliberation was involved.

What

recognition that the conduct was grave and wrong can be seen in
the student. Was anyone else involved. Were there influences that
can legitimately influence the penalty. What were the subsequent
events - did the student admit guilt or attempt to continue the
fraud. Is there anything particularly egregious or saving about the

- 13 case or are there other facts that may ameliorate what is otherwise
conduct to be condemned.
[32]

Further, in the facts of that case, Mr. Slaght stated at paragraph 146 the following:

In our judgment, sentencing in purchased essay cases, and
certainly in this one, must consider two of the Chelin sentencing
principles to be paramount over all the others. These are the
detriment to the University occasioned by the offence of
purchasing essays, and the need to deter others from committing a
similar offence. These offences strike deeply at the roots of the
institution, and must be deterred with an emphasis on these
objective elements of the sentencing matrix.
[3 3]

We see no material difference from the circumstances in that case and the facts which
have been admitted or proved in the present one. Accordingly, this panel imposes the
following sanction:
a) Mr. I~ shall receive a grade of O in each of POL208Y, ANT200Yl Y and
MAT223;
b) This panel recommends that the President in turn recommend to the Governing
Council of the University that Mr.~ be expelled;
c) Mr. ~ shall be suspended for a period of five years from the University
effective from the date of November 27, 2012.

- 14 DATED at Toronto this 24 day of June, 2013.

William C. McDowell, Chair

