Report #364

   DATE: December 13, 2012
   PARTIES: University of Toronto v A.M.
   Hearing Date(s): November 21, 2012
   Committee Members:
   Sara Faherty, Chair
   Hugh Gunz, Faculty Member
   Michael Donnelly, Student Member
   Secretary:
   Mr. Christopher Lang, Director, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty
   Grievances

   Appearances:
   For the Student: A.M. (student)
   For UTSC, John Scherk, Vice Dean

   UTSC â request to rewrite examinations â appeal dismissed â Student
   failed to provide adequate documentation â UTSC should adopt a
   standardized practice outlining for students and invigilators alike how
   to proceed when a student is ill during an examination

   Student appealed decision of the UTSC Academic Appeals Committee
   denying her request to rewrite two final examinations she took during
   the Summer 2011 session. The Student made the request on the grounds
   that she was ill on the day both the exams were written. The Student
   submitted a medical certificate dated two weeks after the exam and did
   not provide a letter from the examination invigilator who, according to
   the Student, had refused her request for a letter because the
   examination was a long time ago and she had no recollection of a
   previous conversation with the Student.

   The Committee observed that there was no reliable documentation of the
   Studentâs condition on the day of the two final examinations. The
   Student claimed she did not leave during the examination because the
   invigilator informed her that she should try her best to continue. The
   Committee acknowledged that the obligation to document an illness is
   properly placed on the student asserting a medical excuse, but
   expressed disappointment in the lack of clarity on the part of the
   examination invigilators. The Committee noted that other divisions make
   clear prior to the start of an exam that if a student feels ill, they
   should leave immediately because no re-write will be granted once the
   exam has begun. The Committee urged the division to consider adopting a
   similar, standardized practice outlining for students and invigilators
   alike how to proceed when a student is ill during an examination. The
   Committee concluded that UTSC was justified in invoking its policy
   requiring the Student to document her illness and provide corroboration
   from the examination invigilator and a health care professional. The
   certificate the Student provided was insufficient to document the
   Studentâs condition two weeks prior. Appeal dismissed.
   [1]View Report

References

   1. file:///media/12608
