UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
TRIAL DIVISION

IN THE MATTER OF charges of academic misconduct made on February 14,
2013;
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on
Academic Matters, 1995;
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Act, 1971, S.O. 1971, c. 56
as amended S.O. 1978, c. 88.

BETWEEN:
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
-AND-

REASONS FOR DECISION

Hearing Date: November 20, 2013
Members of the Panel:
Mr. Andrew Pinto, Barrister and Solicitor, Chair
Professor Faye Mishna, Factor-lnwentash Faculty of Social Work , Faculty Panel
Member
Ms. Stoney Baker, Student Panel Member
Appearances:
Mr. Robert Centa, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Barristers
In Attendance:
Professor Wayne Dowler, Dean's Designate, University of Toronto Scarborough
Ms. Sana Halwani, Tribunal Co-Chair, Observer
Ms. Sinead Cutt, Administrative Assistant, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty
Grievances

Preliminary
[1]

The Trial Division of the University Tribunal was convened on November
20, 2013 to consider charges under the University of Toronto Code of
Behaviour on Academic Matters, 1995 (the "Code") laid against the
Student by letter dated September 9, 2013 from Professor Edith Hillan,
Vice-Provost, Faculty and Academic Life. The charges were revised on
September 17, 2013.

[2]

The Student and the University entered into an Agreed Statement of Facts
("ASF"), a copy of which is attached to these Reasons as Appendix "A".

[3]

The Student did not attend the hearing and did not send a representative.
However, the Student acknowledged in the ASF that he received
reasonable notice of the hearing. Discipline Counsel also advised the
panel that he had spoken to the Student earlier on the day of the hearing.
The panel was satisfied that the Student had reasonable notice of the
hearing and that it was appropriate to proceed with the hearing in the
Student's absence.

Hearing on the Facts

[4]

The charges against the Student were as follows:
1)

In or about July 2013, you knowingly forged or in any other way altered or
falsified an academic record, and/or altered, circulated or made use of such
forged, altered or falsified academic record, namely a document that
purported to be a degree certificate from the University of Toronto dated June
15, 2004, which represented that you had fulfilled the requirements of the
University of Toronto and had been admitted to the degree of Honours
Bachelor of Business Administration, contrary to Section B.1.3(a) of the
Code.

2)

On or about March 31, 2013, you knowingly altered or falsified an academic
record,and/or altered, circulated or made use of such altered or falsified
academic record, namely a cover letter and resume in which you claimed to

2

i

have earned the degree of Honours Bachelor of Business Administration,
contrary to Section B.1.3(a) of the Code.
3)

On or about March 31, 2013, you knowingly altered or falsified an academic
record, and/or altered, circulated or made use of such altered or falsified
academic record, namely a cover letter and resume in which you claimed to
have earned the degree of Master of Business Administration, contrary to
Section 8.1 .3(a) of the Code.

[5]

Discipline Counsel provided an overview of the ASF.

[6]

The Student, via the ASF, entered a guilty plea to all three charges.

Decision of the Tribunal on Charges

[7]

Following deliberation, based on the facts set out in the ASF and a review
of the documents contained in a Joint Book of Documents ("JBD"), the
Tribunal accepted the Student's guilty plea on the charges. Consequently,
the Student stood convicted on charges 1, 2 and 3.

Penalty

[8]

The matter then continued with a hearing into the appropriate sanction.

[9]

The University submitted that the appropriate sanction here included
recommendation for expulsion due to the severity of the misconduct.

[1 O]

Discipline Counsel presented a Brief of Authorities containing relevant
cases as well as a one-page document, "Summary of Cases in Book of
Authorities". All the authorities concerned students with no prior offences.
The Summary suggested that where a transcript was forged, the resulting
Tribunal sanction was at the very high end resulting in either a 5-year
suspension, recommendation for expulsion or revocation of a degree.

[11]

Discipline Counsel cited the principles from the decision of Mr. Sopinka,
as he was then, in University of Toronto and Mr. C. (Case# 1976/77-3;
November 5, 1976) Counsel suggested that, with respect to the present
case, the forging of a degree certificate moves the case to the high end of

3

the spectrum in terms of the seriousness of the offence. While the Student
cooperated by admitting his misconduct at the Dean's Designate meeting
and by agreeing to the ASF, he did not attend the hearing and did not
present any mitigating circumstances with respect to the commission of
the misconduct. The Student presented no evidence for the panel to
gauge more about his character.
[12]

The aggravating circumstances were the forgery of the degree certificate
and the fact that the Student falsely represented that he had earned two
business degrees. It was difficult to ascertain whether the Student would
be likely to commit another academic offence because of the paucity of
the evidence.

[13)

The panel noted that the reasoning and disposition in the University vs DD
(Case # 593; September 3, 2010) decision were apposite:
Forging or falsifying an academic history is, in particular, among the
most serious offences a student can commit. The University's
reputation and credibility hinge on the reliability of its official records
(para. 9)
The Tribunal also notes that these are acts that entailed a
subjective intention and obvious planning (para. 10)

[14]

The panel noted that the Student forwarded to an employer an entirely
fictitious facsimile of what appeared to be a university degree certificate;
and, in job application materials, suggested that he possessed an
undergraduate and master's degree in business which he clearly did not
attain. The University's proposed sanction was consistent with the
Tribunal's jurisprudence.
The principle of general deterrence also
supported issuing the proposed sanction to discourage others who may
contemplate similar actions.

[15]

In light of the facts of this case, the admission of guilt by the Student, and
Discipline Counsel's submission regarding penalty, the Tribunal imposes
the following sanctions:
1.

THAT the hearing may proceed in the absence of the Mr.
~
;

2.

THAT Mr. ~ is found guilty of 3 counts of academic
misconduct, contrary to the Code of Behaviour on Academic
Matters;

4

3.

THAT Mr. ~ be suspended from the University for a
period of up to 5 years from the date of this order;

4.

THAT the Tribunal recommends to the President that he
recommend to Governing Council that Mr. ~ be
expelled from the University;

5.

THAT a permanent notation be placed on Mr. ~
academic record and transcript; and

6.

THAT this case shall be reported to the Provost for
publication of a notice of the decision of the Tribunal and the
sanctions imposed, with Mr. ~
's name withheld.

Dated at Toronto, this 8

·s

iv

of April, 2014.

Andrew Pinto, Co-Chair

5

APPENDIX A

1
THE UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO

IN T HE MATTER OF charges of academic dishonesty made on September 9, 2013 and revised
on September 17, 2013
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters, 1995,
AND IN THE MATTER OF lhe University of Toronto Act, 1971 , S.0 . 1971, c. 56, as ~meoded

"]

-

NO. //
.

8 ETWEE N:

.,

THE UN;V~RSDTV TRH~tg~., Al
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONToUl~\HVERSrnr Oti= l'Of~.; }f\\j"f(()
- and -

ts

the ....

AGREED STATEMENT OF FACTS

x111 it is

produced by

~1.1~. ...U!.1t0.0.5.".I.~.......~···

:).0

1.

.

day of

rJov.QY'lhJD , 20..

••••••0i.~d,.0.J.tJ,.rr

This hearing arises out of charges of academic misconduct filed by the Provost of
the University of Toronto (the "Provost" and the "University") under the Code of
Behaviour on Academic Matters ("Code"). For the purpose of this hearing, the

Provost and ~ ~ ("Mr. ~

") have prepared this Agreed Statement of

Facts ("ASF") and joint book of documents ("JBD"). The Provost and Mr. ~
agree that:
(a)

!.i..

each document contained in the JBD may be admitted into evidence at the
Tribunal for all purposes, including for the truth of the document's
contents, without further need to prove the document; and

2

(b)

if a document indicates that it was sent or received by someone, that is
prima facie proof that the document was sent and received ·as indicated .

2.

Mr. ~ admits that he received a copy of the charges filed by the Provost.
The charges, as revised and delivered on September 17, 2013, are included in
the JBD at Tab 1. M r . ~ waives the reading of the charges f iled against him
and pleads guilty to all 3 charges.

3.

Mr. ~ admits that he received the notice of hearing, which is included in the
JBD at Tab 2. He acknowledges that .he received reasonable notice of the
hearing.

A.

Honours Bachelor of Business Administration - Charges 1 and 2

4.

Mr. ~ is a student at the University of Toronto Scarborough within the
meaning of the Code. At various times between Fall 2002 and Winter 2010, Mr.
~ registered for courses and he has earned a total of 15.50 academic

credits. A copy of Mr. ~ s academic record dated July 17, 2013, is included
in the JBD at Tab 3.
5.

· Mr. ~ has never been eligible to receive a degree of any kind from the
University.

6.

On or about March 31 , 201~, Mr. ~

applied for a job at PepsiCo Canada

("Company"). He submitted a cover letter and resume in support of his
application for employment. A copy of the cover letter is included in the JBD at

3

Tab 4 and a copy of the resume is included in the JBD at Tab 5. In his cover
letter and his resume , Mr. ~ indicated that he had received from the
University:
(a)

an Honours Bachelor of Business Administration; and

(b)

a Master of Business. Administration degree with a dual specialization in
Finance and Marketing.

7.

At about the same time, and in support of his application for employment, Mr.
~ submitted to the Company a document that purported to be a copy of a

degree certificate from the University. The degree certificate was dated June 15,
2004, and purported to certify that Mr. ~ had fulfilled the requirements of
the University and had been admitted to the degree of Honours Bachelor of
Business Administration. A copy of the purported degree certificate is included in
the JBD at Tab 6.
8.

The Company retained the services of BackCheck to verify. the academic
credentials of the candidates for employment.

9.

In July 2013, BackCheck contacted the Office of Convocation at the University to
confirm the authenticity of the degree certificate submitted by Mr. ~
Office of Convocation had no record of Mr. ~

- The

's graduation, because he had

never graduated from the University. A copy of the correspondence between the
Office of Convocation and BackCheck is included in the JBD at Tab 7.

4

10.

With respect to the cover ietter, resume , and degree certificate, Mr. ~
admits that he knowingly:
(a)

created and circulated these documents to the Company knowing that
they did not accurately reflect the information contained in his official
academic record at the University; and

(b)

falsified his academic record, and altered, circulated or made use of such
falsified academic records.

11.

With respect to the degree certificate he submitted to the Company, M r . ~

admits that he forged that document knowingly and circulated that forg~d document to
the Company.

B.

The meeting with the Dean's Designate

12.

On August 26, 2013, M r . ~ met with Prof. Wayne Dowler, Dean's Designate
for academic integrity at the University of Toronto Scarborough. Mr. ~
admits that Prof. Dowler provided the warning that was required to be given to
him under the Code.

13.

During that meeting, Mr. .~
offences described above.

C.

Acknowledgments

14.

M r . ~ acknowledges that:

admitted that he committed the academic

5

(a)

the Provost has advised M r . ~ of his right to obtain legal counsel and
· that Mr. ~ has obtained legal advice or has deliberately waived his
right to do so; and

(b)

he is signing th is ASF freely and voluntarily, knowing of the potential
consequences he faces; and

(c)

that the Provost has made no representations to Mr. ~ regarding
what penalty the Provost may ask the Tribunal to impose in the
circumstances of this case.

Signed on October

, 2013

No \/Cl'M~ I~

Signed on ectobe1

, 2013

Robert A. Centa
Assistant Discipline Counsel
University of Toronto
Doc 959816 v1

5

(a)

the Provost has advised Mr. ~

of his right to obtain rega l counsei and

that Mr. ~ has obtained legal advice or has deliberately waived his
right to do so; and

(b)

he is signing this ASF freely and voluntarily, knowing of the potential
consequences he faces; and

( c)

that the Provost has made no representations to Mr. ~ regarding
what penalty the Provost may ask the Tribunal to impose in the

circumstances of this case.

Nrfll~

.

Signed on ~ t ? • 2013 ·

Signed on October

, 2013

Robert A. Centa ·
Assistant Discipline Counsel
University of Toronto
Doc 959816 v1

