Case No: 1239
THE UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
IN THE MATTER OF charges of academic dishonesty filed on October 14, 2021,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic
Matters, 1995,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Act, 1971, S.O. 1971, c. 56 as
amended S.O. 1978, c. 88
B E T W E E N:
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
- AND Y

L

REASONS FOR DECISION
Hearing Date: February 8, 2022, via Zoom
Panel Members:
Mr. Christopher Wirth, Chair
Professor Ernest Lam, Faculty Panel Member
Ms. Jihyun Kwon, Student Panel Member
Appearances:
Mr. William Webb, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg Rothstein LLP
Ms. Lily Harmer, Co-Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg Rothstein LLP
Hearing Secretary:
Ms. Krista Kennedy, Administrative Clerk & Hearing Secretary, Appeals, Discipline and
Faulty Grievances
Not in Attendance:

A Panel of the Trial Division of the University Tribunal was convened on February
8, 2022 by videoconference to consider charges brought by the University of
Toronto (the “University”) against

(the “Student”) under the University’s

Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters, 1995 (the “Code”).
Preliminary Issue: Proceeding in the Absence of the Student
The hearing was scheduled to begin at 9:45 a.m. Neither the Student, nor anyone
on the Student’s behalf, were logged onto the Zoom link at that time. The Panel
waited until 10:00 a.m. to start the hearing. The University then requested that the
Panel proceed with the hearing in the Student’s absence.
Pursuant to Rule 16 of the University Tribunal Rules of Practice and Procedure
(the “Rules”), notice of an electronic hearing must include the date, time, place and
purpose of the hearing; a reference to the statutory authority under which the
hearing will be held; information about the manner in which the hearing will be held;
and a statement that if a person does not attend the hearing, the Panel may
proceed in the person’s absence. Rule 17 provides that where notice of an
electronic hearing has been given to a person and that person does not attend the
hearing, the Panel may proceed with the hearing in the party’s absence. The Rules
conform to sections 6 and 7 of the Statutory Powers Procedure Act (the “SPPA”),
which set out the notice requirements.
Pursuant to Rule 9, a notice of hearing may be served on a student by various
means, including by emailing a copy of the document to the student’s email
address contained in the University’s Repository of Student Information (“ROSI”).
The University’s Policy on Official Correspondence with Students dated
September 1, 2006 expressly states that students are responsible for maintaining
on ROSI a current and valid mailing address and University-issued email account,
and that “[f]ailure to do so may result in a student missing important information
and will not be considered an acceptable rationale for failing to receive official
correspondence from the University.” Students are expected to monitor and

2

retrieve their email on a frequent and consistent basis. Students have the right to
forward their University issued email account to another email account, but remain
responsible for ensuring that all University email communications are received and
read.
The onus of proof is on the University to establish that it provided the Student with
reasonable notice of the hearing in accordance with these Rules.
In this case, the University provided evidence relevant to service by way of the
evidence of five witnesses: Laurie O’Handley (“Ms. O’Handley”), an Academic
Integrity Specialist with Student Academic Integrity at the University, Andrew Wagg
(“Mr. Wagg”), an Incident Report Architect at Information Security, Information
Technology Services at the University, Justine Cox (“Ms. Cox”), of the Office of the
Vice-Provost, Faculty & Academic Life at the University, Samanthe Huang (“Ms.
Huang”), an Administrative Assistant with the Appeals, Discipline and Faculty
Grievances Office, Office of the Governing Council at the University and Natalia
Botelho (“Ms. Botelho”), an Assistant at the law firm of Paliare Roland Rosenberg
Rothstein LLP. These five witnesses provided their evidence by affidavit, which
were accepted by the Panel pursuant to Rule 61 of the University Tribunal’s Rules
of Practice and Procedure (the “Rules”).
The contents of the affidavits (without Exhibits) of these five witnesses are set out
below:
a) Evidence of Ms. O’Handley
Ms. O’Handley’s affidavit provides as follows:
1.

I am an Academic Integrity Specialist with Student Academic Integrity (“SAI”) at
the University of Toronto (the “University”). As such, I have personal knowledge of
the matters set out in this affidavit. Where I do not have personal knowledge of a
matter, I state the source of my information and I believe it to be true.

2.

SAI is the office at the Faculty of Arts and Science that is responsible for
investigating allegations of academic misconduct and arranging for students who

3

are facing such allegations to meet with the Dean or Dean’s Designate in
accordance with the process set out in the Code of Behaviour on Academic
Matters (the “Code”).
A.

Academic history

3.

first registered at the University in Fall 2017.
academic suspension in 2019-2020. To date,
a cumulative GPA of 0.31.

served a one-year
has earned 1.5 credits with

is currently serving a three-year academic

suspension, which commenced following the Winter 2021 semester, due to his low
cumulative GPA. At present,

is eligible to return to the University in May

2024. I have attached a copy of

academic history dated January 10, 2022,

to my affidavit as Exhibit A.
B.

Instructor contact with the student

1.

Professor Robert Gazzale, one of the instructors for ECO101 H1F: Principles of
Microeconomics (the “Course”), has advised me that on October 19, 2020, he
emailed

, stating that a version of Term Assessment 2 was provided to a

commercial tutoring service, and that he had concerns about the similarity of the
assessment that

completed and the commercial tutoring service’s study

guide. Professor Gazzale has advised me that

responded via email on

October 22, 2020. I have attached a copy of this email thread, which Professor
Gazzale provide to SAI, to my affidavit as Exhibit B.
2.

Professor Gazzale has advised me that, on October 26, 2020, he met with
to discuss allegations of academic misconduct.

C.

Attempts to contact the student

3.

On December 9, 2020, SAI emailed

to request that he meet with the Dean’s

Designate to discuss the allegations of academic misconduct on December 15,
2020. On December 14, 2020, SAI emailed
scheduled for the next day.

a reminder about the meeting

did not respond to either email. I have attached

a copy of the email thread between SAI and

4

to my affidavit as Exhibit C.

4.

On December 22, 2020, SAI emailed

to request that he meet with the

Dean’s Designate to discuss the allegations of academic misconduct on February
2, 2021. On and February 1, 2021, SAI emailed
meeting scheduled for the next day.

a reminder about the

did not respond to either email. A copy

of these emails is included in the email thread attached to my affidavit as Exhibit
C.
5.

The matter was subsequently forwarded to the Vice-Provost.

D.

SWS Activity Log

6.

On February 1, 2022, I obtained a copy of the Student Web Services Activity Log
(“SWS Activity Log”) for

from the Repository of Student Information

(“ROSI”). The SWS Activity Log shows that

last logged onto the University’s

online portal on October 27, 2020 at 20:52:45. I have attached a copy of the SWS
Activity Log to my affidavit as Exhibit D.

b) Evidence of Mr. Wagg
Mr. Wagg’s affidavit provides as follows:
1.

I am an Incident Report Architect at Information Security, Information Technology
Services at the University of Toronto (the “University”). As such, I have knowledge
of the matters contained in this affidavit. Where I do not have direct knowledge of
a matter contained in this affidavit, I state the source of my knowledge and I believe
it to be true.

2.

Information Technology Services provides many services to the University,
including management of the email accounts used by students. To access an email
account one needs to input both the user’s login id and the password for that
account. The Microsoft 365 Exchange portal automatically records the last time
someone accessed a particular university-issued email account. This is denoted
with the code “LastUserActionTime.” The LastUserActionTime log only updates
when someone logs in to a university-issued email account.

3.

On January 10, 2022, at the request of William Webb, Assistant Discipline Counsel
for the University, I checked the portal records to determine the last time someone

5

accessed the email account

. In order to view the

LastUserActionTime log, I ran a PowerShell script.
4.

I determined that the last time someone accessed this e-mail account was on
October 29, 2020 at 3:13:20 AM, local Toronto time.

c) Evidence of Ms. Cox
Ms. Cox’s affidavit provides as follows:
1.

On October 14, 2021, I served
Heather

Boon.

I

served

with the charges issued by Professor

the

charges

on

by

e-mail

to

, which was the e-mail address
provided to the University of Toronto in ROSI.
2.

Attached as Exhibit A is a copy of

ROSI.

3.

Attached as Exhibit B is a copy of the email and charges that was sent to
on October 14, 2021.

d) Evidence of Ms. Huang
Ms. Huang’s affidavit provides as follows:
1.

I am an Administrative Assistant with the Appeals, Discipline and Faculty
Grievances Office (“ADFG Office”), Office of the Governing Council, University of
Toronto (the “University”) and, as such, have knowledge of the matters contained
in this affidavit.

2.

On October 15, 2021, I served

(the “Student”) with a letter regarding the

revised charges that were filed against him, together with copies of the revised
charges, the Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters, the Rules of Practice and
Procedure and a pamphlet for Downtown Legal Services. I served the Student with
these documents by email at

, which is the e-mail

address that the Student had provided in the Repository of Student Information
(“ROSI”). A copy of my email and letter of October 15, 2021 (without any other
enclosures) is attached to my affidavit as Exhibit “A”.

6

3.

On January 3, 2022, I received an email from William Webb, an associate at
Paliare Roland, requesting to schedule an electronic hearing for the Student for
Tuesday, February 8, 2022 at 9:45 am. The Student was copied on Mr. Webb’s
email.

4.

On January 3, 2022, I responded to Mr. Webb’s email advising that the Notice of
Electronic Hearing would be issued in due course. A copy of my email exchange
with Mr. Webb is attached to my affidavit as Exhibit “B”.

5.

On January 3, 2022, I served the Student with the Notice of Electronic Hearing for
a hearing on February 8, 2022 at 9:45 am, together with copies of my letter of
October 15, 2021 and enclosures (which included the revised charges) by email. I
advised the Student that the hearing would be conducted using the Zoom
videoconferencing platform and I provided the Student with the coordinates to
access the videoconference. A copy of my email of January 3, 2022 and the Notice
of Electronic Hearing (without any other enclosures) is attached to my affidavit as
Exhibit “C”.

6.

All of my emails to the Student were sent to

,

which is the email address that the Student had provided in ROSI. I did not receive
a “bounce back” message to any of my emails, indicating that they could not be
delivered.
7.

I have not received a response from the Student to any of my correspondence. To
the best of my knowledge, the Student has not contacted my office.

e) Evidence of Ms. Botelho
Ms. Botelho’s affidavit provides as follows:
1.

I am an assistant at the law firm of Paliare Roland Rosenberg Rothstein LLP
(“Paliare Roland”). I work with Lily Harmer, a partner at Paliare Roland, who
currently acts as Assistant Discipline Counsel for the University of Toronto. Ms.
Harmer is prosecuting the charges filed against

on behalf of the Provost.

As such, I have knowledge of the matters set out in this affidavit. Where my

7

information is based on information and belief, I have stated the source of that
information and that I believe it to be true.
contact information

A.
1.

On November 23, 2021, at the request of William Webb, an associate at Paliare
Roland, the Student Academic Integrity (“SAI”) office at the Faculty of Arts and
Science, University of Toronto, provided my office with a copy of the current
contact information for

in the University’s Repository of Student Information

(“ROSI”). A copy of

ROSI record dated November 23, 2021, is attached

to my affidavit as Exhibit “A”.
2.

On January 6, 2022, at the request of Mr. Webb, the SAI office provided my office
with a copy of the current contact information for

in ROSI. A copy of

ROSI record dated January 6, 2022, is attached to my affidavit as
Exhibit “B”.
3.

In

ROSI record dated January 6, 2022, his official email address is listed

as
4.

A copy of

(the “

Email”).

academic record as of January 10, 2022, is attached to my

affidavit as Exhibit “C”.
B.

Service of revised charges and disclosure to

5.

On October 14, 2021, the Office of the Vice-Provost, Faculty and Academic Life
served the revised charges in this matter on

by email to the

Email.

A copy of the email and revised charges is attached to my affidavit as Exhibit “D”.
6.

On October 20, 2021, Ms. Harmer sent an email to
to introduce herself. Ms. Harmer advised

at the

Email

that important documents and

correspondence would be sent to his mail.utoronto.ca email address. A copy of
Ms. Harmer’s email (on which I was copied) is attached to my affidavit as Exhibit
“E”.
7.

On November 5, 2021, Mr. Webb sent

an email at the

attaching a letter from Ms. Harmer to

dated November 5, 2021 (the

8

Email

“Disclosure Letter”), a disclosure brief relating to this matter, and a copy of the
University’s Policy on Official Correspondence with Students. A copy of the email
and the Disclosure Letter (on which I was copied), without other attachments, is
attached to my affidavit as Exhibit “F”.
8.

On November 8, 2021, Mr. Webb sent

an email at the

Email

attaching the Disclosure Letter and a revised disclosure brief. A copy of the email
(on which I was copied), without any attachments, is attached to my affidavit as
Exhibit “G”.
C.

Emails to

regarding the hearing

9.

On December 6, 2021, Mr. Webb sent an email to

at the

Email

regarding scheduling a hearing date in this matter. Mr. Webb advised
if he did not hear back from

that

regarding his availability by December 13,

2021, Mr. Webb would request a hearing date to be scheduled. A copy of the email
(on which I was copied) is attached to my affidavit as Exhibit “H”.
10.

On January 3, 2022, Mr. Webb sent a follow-up email to

at the

Email advising that he would be requesting a hearing to be scheduled for Tuesday,
February 8, 2022 at 9:45 am. A copy of the email (on which I was copied) is
attached to my affidavit as Exhibit “I”.
11.

On January 3, 2022, Mr. Webb and the Office of Appeals, Discipline and Faculty
Grievances (“ADFG”) had an email exchange regarding the request for a hearing
date of February 8, 2022 at 9:45 am.

was copied on this email at the

Email. A copy of the email exchange (on which I was copied) is attached
to my affidavit as Exhibit “J”.
12.

On January 3, 2022, the ADFG sent an email to

at the

Email. The

ADFG issued the Notice of Electronic Hearing to take place via zoom on February
8, 2022 at 9:45 am. A copy of ADFG’s email (on which I was copied) and the Notice
of Electronic Hearing is attached to my affidavit as Exhibit “K”.
D.

Attempts to contact

by telephone

9

13.

I am advised by Mr. Webb that he made attempts to call
2021 at the phone number

on November 23,

, which is the number that

had

provided in ROSI. I am advised by Mr. Webb that:
(a)

a man answered the phone and stated that he did not know anyone
named

(b)

or

;

he called

again, and that he spoke with the same man

who stated he did not know anyone named
(c)

or

;

he reviewed the number that he dialed, and verified that he dialed
on both occasions.

14.

I am advised by Mr. Webb that he reviewed

ROSI record, dated January

6, 2022, on that same date to determine whether
number.

had updated his phone

phone number in the November 23, 2021 ROSI record and the

January 6, 2022 ROSI record are both
did not call

. I am advised that Mr. Webb

on January 6, 2022 because

had not updated

his number.
E.

Attempts to contact

by courier

15.

On January 7, 2022, our office arranged for a courier to deliver a package to
at

(the “

Address”), which is the mailing address that

had provided in ROSI. The

courier package contained a letter from Ms. Harmer dated January 7, 2022, the
Notice of Electronic Hearing and cover email from Samanthe Huang dated January
3, 2022 (which contained the Zoom details to access the hearing), and the revised
charges in this matter. A copy of Ms. Harmer’s letter (without any enclosures) and
the courier delivery notification email are attached to my affidavit as Exhibits “L”
and “M”.
16.

On January 10, 2022, I spoke to the courier company regarding the delivery of our
package on January 7, 2022 at the

Address. The courier company advised

me that the courier arrived at the

Address, which is an English speaking

school called

, and was told by an individual to leave the

package on the main table.

10

17.

On January 12, 2022, our office arranged for a courier to deliver a package to
at

(the “

Address”), which is the permanent address that

had provided in ROSI. The

courier package contained a letter from Ms. Harmer dated January 11, 2022, the
Notice of Electronic Hearing and cover email from Samanthe Huang dated January
3, 2022 (which contained the Zoom details to access the hearing), and the revised
charges in this matter. A copy of Ms. Harmer’s letter (without any enclosures) and
the courier delivery notification email are attached to my affidavit as Exhibits “N”
and “O”.
18.

On January 14, 2022, I spoke to the courier company regarding the delivery of our
package on January 12, 2022 at the

Address. The courier company

advised me that the courier arrived at the

Address, which is an

apartment building. The entrance to the apartment building was locked. The
courier was able to enter the apartment building and left the package in front of the
Canada Post box where other packages were piled up.
19.

had not provided an apt. # in ROSI for the

20.

has not provided any other addresses in ROSI.

Address.

F.

University’s attempts to contact

21.

The file that our office received from the Vice-Provost indicates that the following
attempts were made to contact

about the allegations of academic

misconduct in issue:
(a)

Between December 9, 2020 to February 1, 2021, SAI sent emails to
at

about the allegation of

academic misconduct. A copy of these emails is attached to my
affidavit as Exhibit “P”.
(b)

On March 17, 2021, SAI sent an email to
to advise that the matter would be
forwarded to the Vice-Provost. A copy of the email is attached to my
affidavit as Exhibit “Q”.

11

at

G.

Affidavits

22.

On February 1, 2022, Mr. Webb sent

a copy of the affidavit of R. Gazzale.

Mr. Webb stated that the University would rely on the affidavit at the hearing. Mr.
Webb also stated that Professor Gazzale would attend the hearing and be
available for cross-examination. I have attached a copy of Mr. Webb’s email
(without attachment), on which I was copied, to my affidavit as Exhibit “R”.
H.

Communication from

23.

To date, our office has not received any communication from

The evidence is that the Student has not received actual notice of the Charges, of
the disclosure or of the Notice of Electronic Hearing. However, the Rules do not
require actual notice. The University can serve the Student, but cannot make the
Student actually read what is served.
The University did everything it could reasonably have done to contact the Student
and did take the steps it was required to under the Rules. Given the Student’s
academic suspension and his interactions with Professor Gazzale concerning the
allegations of academic misconduct, the Tribunal was satisfied it was more likely
than not that the Student had made a deliberate choice some time ago to avoid his
University-issued email and turn his back on any official communications from the
University. That choice has consequences.
Therefore, in light of the evidence and the submissions of Assistant Discipline
Counsel, the Panel was satisfied that the Student had been given reasonable
notice of the hearing in compliance with the notice requirements of the SPPA and
the Rules. The Panel decided to hear the case on its merits in the absence of the
Student.
Charges and Particulars
The revised charges alleged against the Student as filed by the Provost on October
14, 2021 are as follows:

12

1.

On or about October 18 and 19, 2020, you knowingly used or possessed an
unauthorized aid or obtained unauthorized assistance in Assessment #2 in
ECO101H1F (20209) (“Course”), contrary to section B.I.1(b) of the Code.

2.

In the alternative, on or about October 18 and 19, 2020, you knowingly engaged
in a form of cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or
misrepresentation not otherwise described in the Code in order to obtain academic
credit or other academic advantage of any kind in connection with Assessment #2
in the Course, contrary to section B.I.3(b) of the Code.

The particulars related to charges 1 and 2 are as follows:
1.

At all material times, you were a registered student in the Faculty of Arts & Science,
University of Toronto.

2.

In Fall 2020, you enrolled in the Course, which was taught by Professor Robert
Gazzale.

3.

On October 18 and 19, 2020, you wrote Assessment #2, which was worth 10.5%
of the final grade in the Course. Due to the COVID-19 pandemic, the assessment
was administered online in an unsupervised setting.

4.

You knew that you were not permitted to collaborate with other persons during the
assessment.

5.

You knowingly obtained unauthorized assistance from a paid tutor while
completing Assessment #2.

6.

While completing Assessment #2, you knowingly engaged in a form of cheating,
academic dishonesty or misconduct in order to obtain an academic advantage.

The Student’s Position
Given that the Student was not present nor represented, he was deemed to have
denied the charges. As a result, the hearing proceeded on the basis that the
University bore the burden of proving the charges on the balance of probabilities.

13

Overview
In addition to the previously identified affidavits, the University tendered the
evidence of one witness, Professor Robert Gazzale (“Professor Gazzale”), an
Associate Professor whose course the Student was in who provided his evidence
by affidavit, which was accepted by the Panel pursuant to Rule 61 of the University
Tribunal’s Rules. Professor Gazzale also testified at the hearing to supplement his
affidavit.
After careful deliberation, and having considered all the evidence, the Panel found
that on the balance of probabilities the evidence is sufficiently clear, cogent and
convincing to discharge the burden of proof on the University and found that the
Student had committed academic misconduct.
The Evidence
The contents of Professor Gazzale’s affidavit (without Exhibits) is set out below along with
any pertinent evidence from his examination in chief.
a) Evidence of Professor Gazzale
Professor Gazzale’s affidavit provides as follows:
1.

I am an Associate Professor, Teaching Stream in the Department of Economics at
the University of Toronto. As such, I have personal knowledge of the matters set
out in this affidavit. Where I do not have personal knowledge of a matter, I state
the source of my information and I believe it to be true.

A.

The Course

2.

In Fall 2020, Professor Abdollah Farhoodi and I taught ECO101H1F: Principles of
Microeconomics (the “Course”). The Course is an introductory course on
microeconomics that aims to introduce students to the economist way of thinking.
I have attached a copy of the syllabus to my affidavit as Exhibit A.

3.

was a student in the Course.

14

4.

The syllabus stated that students were required to read the Code of Behaviour on
Academic Matters. The syllabus also contained a specific direction that students
were not permitted to receive assistance on any assessment or activity that
counted for their course grade:
8

Academic Integrity

The over-arching rules is simple. For an assessment or activity that counts towards
your course grade:
•

You may not receive assistance from another individual. This includes, but is
in no way limited to, any online forum or other digital communications as well
as any tutoring or assistance service.

[…]

5.

Students in the Course were evaluated based on: participation (worth 20%), entry
tasks (worth 1%), quizzes (worth 16%), 5 term assessments (each worth 10.5%),
and a final assessment (worth 10.5%).

B.

Term Assessment 2

6.

When I created Term Assessment 2, I wrote 77 different questions. 40 questions
were multiple-choice, and 37 questions required students to provide a numeric
answer. I organized the 77 questions into 17 question pools according to subject
matter. A question pool contained anywhere from 3 to 10 questions. Quercus
randomly selected one or more questions from each pool, and assigned those
questions to a student.

7.

Each student received 23 questions for Term Assessment 2. The first question on
every assessment was the same—it asked students to confirm that they
understood that they must complete their rough work on paper, and upload a scan
of their rough work to Crowdmark within 30 minutes of completing the assessment
on Quercus. The remaining 22 questions were randomly assigned from the 17
question pools.

8.

On October 18 and 19, 2020, students in the Course were required to write Term
Assessment 2, which was worth 10.5% of the final grade in the Course. Students
had 90 minutes from the time they chose to start to write the assessment between
October 18, 2020 at 7:00 p.m. and October 19, 2020 at 7:00 p.m. Students only

15

gained access to the Term Assessment 2 questions when they began the
assessment. I have attached a copy of the Term Assessment 2 instructions to my
affidavit as Exhibit B.
9.

Term Assessment 2 was an open book assessment. The instructions stated that
the following aids were allowed:
Allowed Aids: non-programmable calculator, class material including textbook,
videos, problem sets, tutorial material etc.

10.

The instructions also contained a lengthy statement on academic integrity, which
included the following statement:
•

11.

This is an individual assignment. You CANNOT discuss ANY graded work with
ANYONE–this includes classmates, friends, family, tutors (paid or unpaid),
neighbours, literally anyone. Checking websites for answers, posting your work for
others to use, collaborating, soliciting/receiving answers, stating false or
misleading information related to assessments, etc., are examples of actions
violate Academic Integrity. Unintentional mistakes or confusion is not a defence.
Ask us if you're unsure.

On or about October 18, 2020 at 8:02 p.m.,
2.

took 63 minutes to complete Term Assignment 2. I have attached a copy

of
12.

Term Assessment 2 to my affidavit as Exhibit C.

On or about October 18, 2020,
have attached a copy of

13.

submitted his Term Assignment

submitted his rough work to Crowd Mark. I
rough work to my affidavit as Exhibit D.

received a grade of 52 out of 60 on his Term Assignment 2.

C.

Easy Edu

14.

On October 19, 2020, a student in the Course notified me that she attended a
review session that provided solutions to questions that were similar to the
questions on Term Assessment 2 (the “Review Session”). I met with the student
on Microsoft Teams and she told me that Easy Edu, a commercial tutoring service,
held the Review Session and provided students with a copy of a study package.
After we met, the student sent me a copy of the study package, which contains 22
questions (the “Study Package”). I have attached a copy of the study package to
my affidavit as Exhibit E.

16

15.

I reviewed the Study Package and found that each one of the 22 questions in the
Study Package corresponded directly with one of the questions that I had written
for Term Assessment 2. The questions in the Study Package were substantially
the same as the questions that I wrote, but contain superficial differences. For
example, whereas one of my questions asks about the marginal cost of phone
plans, the corresponding question in the Study Package asks about the marginal
cost of Netflix plans.

16.

At the time when I reviewed the Study Package, only 849 students out of the 1831
students in the Course had written Term Assessment 2.

17.

After I had matched the 22 questions in the Study Package with the questions that
I wrote, I downloaded the Term Assessment 2 files for these 849 students from
Quercus. I ran these files through a statistical software program called Stata to
determine who had received which questions.

18.

was the only student of these 849 students who had been assigned each
one of the 22 questions that corresponded with the Easy Edu Study Package.
While other students in the Course received one or more of the 22 questions in the
Study Package on their version of the assessment, only

version of the

assessment contained all 22 questions in the Study Package. I have attached an
excerpt from my academic integrity report on

that compares the questions

received and the questions in the Study Package to my affidavit as Exhibit
F.
19.

After all 1831 students in the Course submitted Term Assessment 2, I performed
the same analysis to determine whether any other students had been assigned the
same 22 questions as

I downloaded all of the student’s files from Quercus

and ran them through Stata to determine who had received which questions.
Again,

was the only student in the entire Course that had been assigned

each of the 22 questions that corresponded with the Easy Edu Study Package.
20.

On October 19, 2020, I emailed

, stating that a version of Term Assessment

2 was provided to a commercial tutoring service, and that I had concerns about the
similarity of the assessment that he completed and the commercial tutoring
service’s study guide.

17

21.

sent me an email on October 22, 2020, in which he admitted that he paid
a tutor to check his answers during the assessment period.

stated:

Dear professor
I feel so sorry that I missed the email last time. I had really struggling life this period
of time.
Firstly I want to say I didn't know anything about commercial tutoring service
providing term assessment 2.
I was a little overwhelmed with this course, and missing term assessment 1 and
missing numerous quiz and tutorials, I felt like I needed some extra help with this
test. So I paid for a tutor to check my answers as I did the assessment. But I didn't
know if he is part of any relationship that you mentioned in the email.
I know this is wrong and I honestly regret it. But I don't know anything about
commercial tutoring service. I am trying very hard in this course and struggling as
well. I know now to not get tutor help during test time, but this course is very
important to me and I want to work on it honestly. I really hope you can give me a
second chance.

[Emphasis added]

22.

I have attached a copy of

email to my affidavit as Exhibit G.

D.

The Study Package and the Review Session

23.

Later that week, a student emailed me a link to a YouTube video of the Easy Edu
Review Session. The YouTube video shows that Easy Edu held the Review
Session via Zoom at 9:08 p.m. EST on October 18, 2020, which was within the
assessment period. Based on the Zoom attendance list, at least 180 students
attended at least part of the Review Session. I have attached a screen shot of the
Review Session that shows the session began at 9:08 p.m. EST on October 18,
2020 to my affidavit as Exhibit H.

24.

The document properties of the Study Guide show that it was created on October
18, 2020 at 8:46 p.m. The document properties show that there are four different
authors: Kevin, Amy, Bruce, and Elvin. The author’s last names are not provided.
I have attached a copy of the document properties to my affidavit as Exhibit I.

25.

In my view, four people could have easily modified the questions from the form in
which they appear on

assessment to the form in which they appear in the

Study Guide in one hour. In my view, one proficient person could complete this

18

same task in an hour. The questions on Term Assessment 2 were first year
economics questions, and the changes to the questions were superficial. For
example, whereas Question 2 on

Term Assessment 2 asks about the

marginal cost of phone plans, the corresponding question in the Study Package
asks about the marginal cost of Netflix plans. Each of the superficial similarities
can be seen in my academic integrity report that is attached to my affidavit as
Exhibit G.
26.

In addition, four people could easily come up with solutions to the 22 questions in
one hour for the Review Session. Again, one proficient person could complete this
task in an hour. I gave students 90 minutes to complete Term 2 Assessment on
the assumption that they were somewhat new to the study of microeconomics. In
any event,

completed Term Assessment 2 in 63 minutes.

E.

The instructor meeting

27.

I met with

28.

The matter was subsequently forwarded to the Student Academic Integrity office.

F.

Course performance

29.

on October 26, 2020 to discuss his Term Assessment 2.

only completed one out of the five term assessments (Term Assessment
2), and one of the twelve quizzes in the Course. He also received a grade of
6.67/100 for his participation grade.

completed no other academic work in

the Course. I have attached a copy of

grades on Quercus to my affidavit

as Exhibit J.

In addition to his affidavit, Professor Gazzale also testified in chief that:
(a)

He has been with the University since 2012 and received his PhD from the
University of Michigan in 2004.

(b)

The instructions for Term Assessment #2 were clear and were designed to
ensure that those who took it would not discuss it with those who took it
later so that they could have an advantage.

19

(c)

All the questions on Term Assessment #2 were new questions that year.

(d)

Prior to Term Assessment #2 there were five quizzes held along with
tutorials every week. However, the Student’s only participation was in one
tutorial where he received a partial participation mark of one-third of the
participation credit. In addition, the Student only completed one of the
quizzes before taking Term Assessment #2.

(e)

He had reviewed the Quercus logs for the Student and up to the week prior
to Term Assessment #2, the Student had not accessed the website for this
Course and only did so in the week before Term Assessment #2 during
which time there was a reasonable amount of activity, but not an extremely
high amount.

(f)

In Professor Gazzale’s view, given that the Course was taught at a high
level and idiosyncratic, unless a student entered the Course with a strong
knowledge in the subject area, given this level of preparation in Quercus, it
would be highly unlikely that a student could do well on Term Assessment
#2.

(g)

The student who contacted him on October 19, 2020 did so by email and
expressed her concerns that by attending the Easy Edu review session she
would be considered to have committed an academic offence.

(h)

By the evening of October 19, 2020, only seventy students had completed
Term Assessment #2, so there were many who could still have obtained an
advantage from the Easy Edu review session.

(i)

The Easy Edu review session started at 9:00 p.m. which was two hours after
the permitted start time for Term Assessment #2. He was able to view the
recording of the review session and to take screenshots from it. These
screenshots allowed him to identify the fact that there was up to one
hundred and eighty different people using different names registered and
attending the review session. He then proceeded to match the names with

20

the student roster in his Course and this led to over one hundred students
from it who were at the review session. Because Term Assessment #2 was
worth more than 10% of the Course mark, the sanctions involved were
above the economics department’s level and so over one hundred cases
were sent to the Dean to be dealt with. Most acknowledged their conduct
and received a zero in the Course and a temporary notation on their
transcript.
(j)

In Professor Gazzale’s view, it would have been fairly straightforward to
have made the modifications to the questions in the time that was available.
The only variable would be the number of people who would have to be
involved, but certainly one or two people could come up with the minor
variations to the questions which were made. In that regard, his review of
the Easy Edu document shows that there were four individuals identified as
the authors of it.

The Panel had no questions for Professor Gazzale and this concluded the
University’s evidence.
University’s Submissions
Assistant Discipline Counsel submitted that Professor Gazzale’s evidence along
with the Student’s admissions, support a finding on the balance of probabilities that
the Student committed the academic offences as alleged. In that regard, the Panel
was asked to draw the inference that the Student provided his twenty-two
questions from Term Assessment #2 to Easy Edu, a commercial tutoring service
and that it was more likely than not that the Student knew or ought to have known
that it would use this to assist other students to cheat.
Standard of Proof
The onus is on the University to establish, based upon clear and convincing
evidence on a balance of probabilities, that the academic offences charged have
been committed.

21

Decision of the Tribunal
Based on the evidence and the submissions by counsel for the University, the
Student was found guilty of one count of knowingly using or possessing an
unauthorized aid or obtaining unauthorized assistance in Assessment #2 in
ECO101H1F (20209) (the “Course”), contrary to section B.I.1.(b) of the Code and
of one count of knowingly engaging in a form of cheating, academic dishonesty or
misconduct, fraud or misrepresentation not otherwise described in the Code in
order to obtain academic credit or other academic advantage of any kind in
connection with Assessment #2 in the Course, contrary to section B.I.3(b) of the
Code as alleged in Charges 1 and 2 filed by the Provost on October 14, 2021.
Reasons for Decision
Although Term Assessment #2 was an open book assessment, the instructions
provided to students for it clearly stated which aids were allowed and also
contained a lengthy statement on academic integrity which clearly instructed the
students that it was an individual assignment which they could not discuss with
anyone including their classmates, friends, family, tutors (paid or unpaid),
neighbours, literally anyone, and that posting the work for others to use,
collaborating, soliciting/receiving answers, were all examples of actions which
would violate academic integrity. Students were also instructed to ask if they were
unsure.
When Professor Gazzale was advised by another student to the fact that Easy
Edu, a commercial tutoring service had held a review session and provided
students with a copy of a study package for Term Assessment #2, a copy of which
he obtained, Professor Gazzale was able to determine that of the twenty-two
questions contained in the study package, they were essentially identical to the
questions which he had prepared for Term Assessment #2. In addition, he was
able to determine that it was only the Student who had received these twenty-two
random questions. When Professor Gazzale contacted the Student by email to
confront him with respect to the concerns he had, the Student responded with an

22

email on October 22, 2020 in which he admitted that he had paid a tutor to check
his answers during the assessment, that he knew that this was wrong and that he
regretted it.
On October 18, 2020 at 8:02 p.m., the Student submitted his Term Assessment #2
which had taken him only 63 minutes to complete, which is 2.86 minutes per
answer. For this he received a grade of 52 out of 60 (86%).
Prior to Term Assessment #2, the Student had a very low GPA and was on
academic probation. His highest mark ever had been 61%, yet despite this and
using only two-thirds of his allotted time to take Term Assessment #2, he was able
to achieve a mark of 86% and to answer the questions in 2.86 minutes each.
Further, the evidence clearly established that the Student had only logged into the
Course website one week before he took Term Assessment #2.
It was also clear from the evidence that Easy Edu had more than sufficient time
following the 63 minutes it took the Student to complete Term Assessment #2, to
revise the twenty-two questions and to prepare the study package which was then
distributed to other students in the Course who were attending the Easy Edu
review session for Term Assessment #2.
The Student clearly knew that he was not allowed to use the assistance of anyone
including a commercial tutoring service to aid him in completing Term Assessment
#2 nor was he to provide a copy of it to anyone.
Despite this, the evidence establishes and the Student has clearly admitted that
he used the services of Easy Edu, a commercial tutoring service to assist him in
completing Term Assessment #2. In addition, the Panel was satisfied that Easy
Edu in turn, used the Student’s copy of Term Assessment #2 to prepare its study
package which was then distributed to other students in the Course for the review
session which Easy Edu provided to them and that the Student knew or ought
reasonably to have known that by his actions, Easy Edu would aid others in the
taking of Term Assessment #2 using his copy of it.

23

As such, the Panel was satisfied on the balance of probabilities that the Student
committed the academic offences of knowingly using or possessing an
unauthorized aid or obtaining unauthorized assistance in Assessment #2 in
ECO101H1F (20209) (the “Course”) contrary to section B.I.1(b) of the Code and
that he also knowingly engaged in a form of cheating, academic dishonesty or
misconduct, fraud or misrepresentation not otherwise described in the Code in
order to obtain academic credit or other academic advantage of any kind in
connection with Assessment #2 in the Course, contrary to section B.I.3(b) of the
Code as alleged in Charges 1 and 2 filed by the Provost on October 14, 2021.
Sanction
The University’s Evidence
The University provided the Panel with a Book of Documents re: Sanction
containing a number of prior decisions of this Tribunal and a chart summarizing
them.
The University’s Submissions
Counsel for the University submitted that the proper sanctions to be imposed on
the Student should be:
(a)

a final grade of zero in ECO101H1F (20209);

(b)

a suspension from the University for five years from the date the Tribunal
makes its order;

(c)

a notation of the offence on his academic record and transcript for six years
from the date of the Tribunal’s order; and

(d)

that the Tribunal further order that this case be reported to the Provost for
publication of a notice of the Tribunal’s decision and the sanction imposed,
with the Student’s name withheld.

24

Assistant Discipline Counsel reviewed with the Panel the chart summarizing the
sanctions which have been given to students by this Tribunal in prior similar cases.
The first eight involved the purchasing of essays, while the remaining seven
involved personation. They all demonstrated that the sanctions imposed were in a
narrow range of either a five year suspension or expulsion, particularly where there
had been prior offences or the student did not admit the offence.
Assistant Discipline Counsel then reviewed with the Tribunal the principles relative
to sanction as set out in The University of Toronto and Mr. C. (Case No. 1976/773, November 5, 1976) (“Mr. C.”), namely:
(a)

The character of the Student;

(b)

The likelihood of a repetition of the offence;

(c)

The nature of the offence committed;

(d)

Any extenuating circumstances;

(e)

The detriment to the University caused by the misconduct; and

(f)

The need for general deterrence.

Assistant Discipline Counsel submitted that by having provided Term Assessment
#2 to a commercial tutoring service, this enabled it to help over one hundred other
students cheat and the Student knew or ought to have known that his actions might
aid others.
Further purchasing academic work is the most serious conduct a student can
commit. As well, the detriment to the University and the need for general
deterrence were the most important factors. However, there were mitigating factors
as the Student had no prior offences and did admit to his conduct early on in his
email in response to Professor Gazzale, and as such, a five year suspension was
appropriate.

25

Sanction Decision
After deliberations, the Tribunal ordered that the following sanctions shall be
imposed on the Student:
(a)

a final grade of zero in ECO101H1F (20209);

(b)

a suspension from the University for five years from the date the Tribunal
makes its order;

(c)

a notation of the offence on his academic record and transcript for six years
from the date of the Tribunal’s order; and

(d)

that the Tribunal further order that this case be reported to the Provost for
publication of a notice of the Tribunal’s decision and the sanction imposed,
with the Student’s name withheld.

An Order was signed at the hearing by the Panel to this effect.
Reasons for Sanction
The Tribunal considered the factors and principles relevant to sanction in Mr. C,
supra, as set out above.
In addition to these factors, the Panel considered the other decisions of this
Tribunal involving similar misconduct as contained in the University’s Book of
Documents on Sanction and the sanctions imposed. However, the Panel remained
cognizant of the fact that no two cases are identical and that it is not bound by past
decisions of this Tribunal. However, the Tribunal does try to develop a consistent
body of cases so that students are treated fairly and consistently in similar
circumstances.
By cheating on Term Assessment #2, the Student undermined the grades-based
system of evaluation and broke the honour code that is essential to modern
learning. In that regard, the pandemic and the resulting required online learning
provides more opportunities for students to cheat, requiring the University to go to

26

considerable lengths to detect and uncover students’ misconduct. Further, by
providing it to a commercial tutoring service, he permitted it to assist over one
hundred other students to cheat.
In today’s online world, it is easy for students to find new ways to access
unauthorized assistance and so any sanction must denounce cheating on tests
and deter others in order to protect the academic integrity of the University.
Students must understand that this kind of misconduct will have serious
repercussions, so that they will be dissuaded from the temptation to consider
cheating.
The Panel accepted the University’s submission that by using a paid commercial
tutoring service, the Student committed a serious form of academic misconduct,
however, the Panel was satisfied that despite this aggravating factor, given the
circumstances of this case including the Student’s remorse as demonstrated in his
interaction with Professor Gazzale where he admitted his conduct, while
considering the range of sanctions provided by prior decisions of this Tribunal in
similar circumstances, a five year suspension of the Student from the University
rather than expulsion was appropriate.
Dated at Toronto, this

17th day of March 2022

Original signed by:
______________________________________
Mr. Christopher Wirth, Chair
On behalf of the Panel

27

