Case 1239

   DATE:

   March 17, 2022

   PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v. Y.L. ("the Student")

   HEARING DATE:

   February 8, 2022, via Zoom

   PANEL MEMBERS:

   Mr. Christopher Wirth Chair
   Professor Ernest Lam, Faculty Panel Member
   Ms. Jihyun Kwon, Student Panel Member

   APPEARANCES:

   Ms. Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg
   Rothstein LLP
   Mr. William Webb, Co-Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg Rothstein LLP

   NOT IN ATTENDANCE:

   The Student

   HEARING SECRETARY:

   Ms. Krista Kennedy, Administrative Clerk & Hearing Secretary, Office of
   Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances

   The‚ØStudent‚Øwas charged under s. B.i.1(b) of the‚ØCode of Behaviour
   on Academic Matters, 1995‚Ø(the ‚Code‚) on the basis that he knowingly
   used or possessed an unauthorized aid or aids, or obtained unauthorized
   assistance in a term assessment. In the alternative, the Student was
   charged under s. B.i.3(b) of the Code on the basis that he knowingly
   engaged in a form of cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud
   or misrepresentation in order to‚Øobtain academic credit or other
   academic advantage‚Øin connection with a term assessment.

   Neither the Student nor a representative for the Student appeared at
   the hearing. The Panel waited 15 minutes to afford the Student an
   opportunity to attend. When the Student did not appear, the University
   requested that the Panel proceed in the absence of the Student. The
   Panel noted that pursuant to rule 16 of the University Tribunal‚s Rules
   of Practice and Procedure (‚Rules‚) a notice of electronic hearing must
   contain a statement that if a person does not attend the hearing, the
   Panel may proceed in the person‚s absence. Furthermore, rule 17
   outlines that where a notice of electronic hearing was given to a
   person and that person does not attend, the Panel may proceed in their
   absence. The Panel further noted that rules 16 and 17 conform to the
   notice requirements outlines in ss. 6 and 7 of the Statutory Powers
   Procedure Act (‚SPPA‚). The Panel outlined that in accordance with the
   University‚s Policy on Official Correspondence with Students a student
   is responsible for maintaining a current and valid mailing and email
   address in the University‚s Repository of Student Information (‚ROSI‚).
   Furthermore, a student is expected to monitor and retrieve their email
   on a frequent and consistent basis. Rule 9 outlines that a notice of
   hearing may be served on a student by various means, including by way
   of email to a student‚s email address as provided in ROSI. The
   University‚s evidence on service outlined that the Student had not
   responded to email correspondence nor had his email account been
   accessed since his meeting with his Professor regarding the alleged
   academic misconduct. The Panel noted that the University attempted to
   reach the Student via telephone at the number listed in ROSI but they
   were unable to reach the Student. Furthermore, the University couriered
   a copy of the charges, notice of hearing and a letter from Assistant
   Discipline Counsel to both the mailing and permanent address for the
   Student provided in ROSI but in both instances the courier company
   could not deliver the package directly to the Student. In considering
   the evidence on notice, the Panel outlined that the Student did not
   receive actual notice of the charges, the notice of electronic hearing
   nor a copy of the disclosure. The Panel further outlined that the Rules
   do not require actual notice and the University did everything it
   reasonably could have done to contact the Student. Based on the
   foregoing, the Panel was satisfied that the Student had been given
   reasonable notice of the hearing in compliance with the notice
   requirements of the SPPA and the Rules. The Panel proceeded to hear the
   case on its merits in the absence of the Student.

   Regarding the charges laid under ss. B.i.1(b) and B.i.3(b) of the Code,
   the Panel considered affidavit and testimonial evidence of the
   Professor who taught the course for which the term assessment in
   question was submitted. The Panel noted that the Professor‚s affidavit
   outlined that another student in the course notified him that they
   attended a review session that provided solutions to questions that
   were similar to those on the term assessment. This student provided the
   Professor a copy of the package they received which contained solutions
   to various questions (‚Study Guide‚). The Professor outlined that the
   Study Guide contained 22 questions that corresponded directly with
   those on the term assessment. The Professor used a statistical software
   program to compare the questions in the Study Guide to those of the
   students in the course. The Student was the only student who had
   received all 22 questions from the Study Guide in his version of the
   term assessment. The Panel noted that subsequent to this, the Professor
   emailed the Student advising that a version of the term assessment had
   been provided to a commercial tutoring service and that he was
   concerned about the similarity of the Student‚s assessment with the
   Study Guide. In his response to the Professor, the Student admitted
   that he paid a tutor to check his answers during the assessment period.
   In his testimony, the Professor stated that all the questions on the
   term assessment were new questions for that year and the Student had
   not been active in the course or the course related material until a
   week before the term assessment. The Panel noted that the evidence
   established that the Student used a commercial tutoring service to
   assist him in completing the term assessment to which he clearly
   admitted in his email to the Professor. The Panel was also satisfied
   that the commercial tutoring service used the Student‚s copy of the
   term assessment to prepare its Study Guide which was then distributed
   to other students in the course, and that by his actions, the Student
   knew or ought reasonably to have known that the tutoring service would
   use his copy of the term assessment to aid others taking the term
   assessment. The Panel found on a balance of probabilities the evidence
   sufficiently clear, cogent and convincing to discharge the burden of
   proof on the University. The Panel found the Student guilty of
   knowingly using or possessing an unauthorized aid or obtaining
   unauthorized assistance contrary to section B.i.1(b) of the Code, and
   of knowingly engaged in a form of cheating, academic dishonesty or
   misconduct, fraud or misrepresentation not otherwise described in the
   Code, contrary to section B.i.3(b) of the Code.

   In determining sanction,‚Øthe‚ØPanel considered the factors for
   determining an appropriate sanction as outlined in the University of
   Toronto v. Mr. C (Case No. 1976/77-3, November 5, 1976). In additional
   to these factors, the Panel considered other decisions of the Tribunal
   involving similar conduct which were provided by the University. The
   Panel noted that no two cases are identical, and it is not bound by
   past decisions of the Tribunal. However, the Tribunal does attempt to
   develop a consistent body of cases so that students are treated fairly
   and consistently in similar circumstances. In their decision on
   sanction, the Panel outlined that by cheating on the term assessment,
   the Student undermined the grades-based system of evaluation and broke
   the honour code that is essential to modern learning. Furthermore, by
   providing the term assessment to a commercial tutoring service, the
   Student permitted it to assist over 100 other students to cheat. The
   Panel noted that in today‚s online world, it is easy for students to
   find new ways to access unauthorized assistance and so any sanction
   must denounce cheating and deter others in order to protect the
   academic integrity of the University. Furthermore, students must
   understand that this type of misconduct will have serious
   repercussions, so they will be dissuaded from the temptation to cheat.
   The Panel accepted the University‚s submission that by using a paid
   commercial tutoring service, the Student committed a serious form of
   academic misconduct, however, the Panel was satisfied that despite this
   aggravating factor, given the Student‚s admissions and remorse, a
   five-year suspension was appropriate. The Panel imposed the following
   sanctions: final grade of zero in the course; five-year suspension;
   six-year notation on transcript; and a report to the Provost for
   publication.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/30363
