UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
GOVERl'IING COUNCIL

Repo1i #341 of the Academic Appeals Committee
July 20, 2010
The Academic Appeals Committee rep01is that it held a hearing on Monday, June 21, 2010, at
which the following were present:
Assistant Dean Kate Hilton, Chair
Professor Ellen Hodnett
Dr. Chris Koenig-Woodyard
Professor Louise Lemieux-Charles
Mr. Ken Davy
Mr. Christopher Lang, Director, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances
Mr. M. F., the Student, not in attendance
This appeal was conducted on the basis of documentary evidence only. There were no parties
present.

I.

The Appeal

The Student is appealing the decision of the UTSC Subcommittee on Academic Appeals dated
March 13, 2009, denying him an extension of time to pay his fees to write a defe1Ted
examination in the Fall 2008 course ECMC32H.
II.

Facts

The Student commenced his studies at UTSC in the Fall 2005 session. Since that time, the
Student has maintained continuous enrolment in his program, and has remained in good
academic standing. As of the date of this appeal, the Student has completed 14 credits towards
his degree.
In the Fall 2008 session, the Student enrolled in ECMC32H3. However, he did not write the
final exam in the course, and subsequently petitioned to write a deferred exam during the April
2009 exam period. On January 8, 2009, the Student was advised, via e-service (a web-based
email service run by the University), that his petition was successful, and that he was required to
pay the $70.00 deferred examination fee "immediately and not later than 2009-01-16". Records
provided by the University's web manager indicate that the Student accessed thee-service site on
January 8, several hours after the notice was posted.
The Student did not pay the defe1Ted examination fee prior to the January 16 deadline.

On January 20, a second notice was posted on e-service, informing the Student that his payment
was overdue and that the payment deadline had been extended until January 22, 2009. The
notice stated that his deferred exam would be cancelled if payment was not received by the
extended deadline.
On Wednesday, January 21, the UTSC Registrar's Office phoned the Student's home and left a
voicemail message reminding him of the new payment deadline.
The Student did not submit payment prior to January 22, 2009. His deferred exam was cancelled
and his original failing grade in the course was reinstated.

III.

Previous Decisions

On February 15, 2009, the Student renewed his request for a deferred exam. On February 17,
2009, the Registrar's Office advised the Student that his request was denied, on the basis that he
had failed to make his deferred examination payment by the extended deadline of January 22,
2009.
On February 19, 2009, the Student appealed the denial of his petition to the UTSC Subcommittee
on Academic Appeals. The Student argued that he had not received the email or voicemail
communications from the Registrar's Office. He stated that he had failed to read the email and
that his parents had failed to pass along the voicemail message. The Subcommittee denied the
appeal. In its decision, dated March 12, 2009, the Subcommittee wrote the following:
The committee felt that you should have been proactive in paying your fees. As
soon as you initiated the deferral, you knew that these fees would be due. The
information about deadlines was posted on the Registrar's web site and it could
have been accessed at any time. The committee agreed with your final selfassessment: the failure was yom own fault, and there were no reasonable grounds
on which to grant your appeal.
On June 7, 2009, the Student appealed to the Academic Appeals Committee of the Governing
Council.
IV.

Decision

UTSC policy clearly states that students seeking to write defened examinations are required to
pay a fee by a specific deadline. These deadlines are clearly set out, as are the consequences of
failure to pay by the deadline. Moreover, students are permitted to pay by a variety of methods,
both in person and online.
This Committee is of the view that the Student knew or ought to have known about the required
fee and the deadline for payment. This Committee believes that the Registrar's Office took all
appropriate steps to notify the Student and cannot be held responsible for the Student's failme to
check messages relating to a process which he initiated. In the materials submitted before this
Committee, the Student offered a slightly different account of his failure to pay, stating that he

2

had, in fact, opened the original notice on January 8, and had attempted to pay the money owed,
but that the electronic payment button was not working at the time. However, this Committee
believes that the Student's attempt to pay electronically was insufficient and that he had an
obligation to make the $70.00 payment before the deadline elapsed, either by re-attempting an
electronic payment or by visiting the Registrar's Office to make the payment in person. This
Committee agrees with the UTSC Subcommittee that the student's failure to complete the
payment was entirely his own. Since it is clear that the UTSC policy on deferred examinations
was applied fairly in this case, there is no basis for allowing the appeal.
However, this Committee wishes to note that it was left with some reservations about the UTSC
policy on deferred examinations, which struck us as unduly harsh. While it is outside the scope
of our jurisdiction to assess the validity of the deferred examination policy, this Committee
invites the division to consider whether the penalty required by this policy (cancellation of the
deferred examination and reinstatement of the failing grade) is prop011ionate to the offence
(failure to pay a $70.00 fee by the required deadline).
The appeal is denied.

3

