Report #341

   DATE: July 20, 2010
   PARTIES: M.F.Â  (the Student) v. UTSC
   Hearing Date(s): June 21, 2010
   Committee Members:
   Assistant Dean Kate Hilton, Chair
   Professor Ellen Hodnett
   Dr. Chris Koenig-Woodyard
   Professor Louise Lemieux-Charles
   Ken Davy
   UTSC â extension of time to pay fees â deferred examination â failure
   to pay deferred examination fee â deferred examination fee deadline â
   extension of deadline â notified via e-mail â voicemail message â
   cancelled deferred exam â original failing grade reinstated â UTSC
   policy on deferred examinations â Student knew or ought to have known
   about required fee and deadline for payment â appropriate steps for
   notification â policy applied fairly â unduly harsh policy â outside
   scope of jurisdiction to assess validity of policy â appeal dismissed
   Appeal of a decision of the UTSC Subcommittee on Academic Appeals to
   deny the Student his petition for a request for a deferred exam. The
   Student had previously petitioned and was granted a deferred
   examination for a course. The Student was advised via the University
   e-mail service that his petition for a deferred examination was
   successful and that he was required to pay the $70.00 deferred
   examination fee by a certain date. Records indicate the Student
   accessed the e-mail services several hours after the notice was posted.
   The Student failed to pay the examination fee prior to the deadline. A
   second notice was posted that informed the Student that his payment was
   overdue and that the deadline had been extended by one week. The notice
   stated that the deferred exam would be cancelled if the payment was not
   received by the deadline. A day before the deadline, the UTSC
   Registrarâs Office phoned the Studentâs home and left a voicemail
   message reminding the Student of the new payment deadline. The Student
   did not submit payment prior to the second deadline. The deferred exam
   was cancelled and the Studentâs original failing grade in the course
   was reinstated. The Studentâs argued that he had not received the
   e-mail or voicemail communications from the Registrarâs office. The
   Subcommittee denied the appeal stating there were no reasonable grounds
   on which to grant the Studentâs appeal. The Committee reviewed the UTSC
   policy regarding deferred examinations and payment of fees. The
   Committee found that the deadlines and consequences of failure to pay
   by the deadlines were clearly set out. The Committee held that the
   Student knew or ought to have known about the required fee and deadline
   for payment. The Committee found the Registrarâs Office took all
   appropriate steps to notify the Student and could not be held
   responsible. The Committee agreed with the Subcommitteeâs submission
   that the Studentâs failure to complete the payment was entirely his
   own. The Committee noted, though, that the UTSC policy on deferred
   examinations seemed unduly harsh. The Committee further noted it was
   outside the Committeeâs jurisdiction to assess the validity of the
   policy. The Committee concluded by inviting UTSC to consider whether
   the penalty of cancelling a deferred examination and reinstating a
   failing grade was proportionate to the offence and dismissed the
   Studentâs appeal. Appeal dismissed.
   [1]View Report

References

   1. file:///media/12590
