UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
University Tribunal
IN THE MATTER of the University of Toronto Act, 1971, S.O. 1971, c. 56, as amended;
AND IN THE MATTER of the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters,
1995;
AND IN THE MATTER of disciplinary charges against Ms. Z. B.

Members of the panel:
• Kirby Chown, Co-Chair
• James Rini, Faculty Panel Member
• Adrian Asselin, Student Panel Member
Appearances:
• Lily L Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel, for the University
•

[ 1]

[2]

Joy Anne Cohen, Counsel for the Student

BACKGROUND
The Trial Division of the University Tribunal was convened on September 4, 2007 to
consider charges brought under the Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters, 1995 laid
against Ms. Z. B. by letter dated December 5, 2006 from the Vice President and Provost,
Academic, Professor Edith Hillan.
The Jetter contained the following charges:
1. On or about April 27, 2006, you knowingly represented as your own an idea or
expression of an idea or work of another in connection with your take-home final
examination submitted for academic credit in BlO332Y, contrary to Section B. l. l(d) of
the Code;
2. On or about April 27, 2006, you knowingly submitted your take-home final examination
containing a purported statement of fact or reference to a source which has been
concocted, contrary to Section B.1.l(f) of the Code;
3. In the alternative, on or about April 27, 2006, you knowingly engaged in a form of
cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or misrepresentation not otherwise
described in the Code in order to obtain academic credit or other academic advantage or
other academic advantage of any kind, in connection with your take-home final
examination submitted for academic credit in BIO332Y, contrary to Section B.1.3.(b) of
the Code;
4. On or about January 30, 2006, you knowingly represented as your own an idea or
expression of an idea or work of another in connection with your essay entitled "Review:
Detection of a Human Influence on North American Climate" submitted for academic
credit in GGR377H5S, contrary to Section B.1.l(d) of the Code; and

-2-

5. In the alternative, on or about January 30, 2006 you knowingly engaged in a form of
cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or misrepresentation not otherwise
described in the Code in order to obtain academic credit or other academic advantage of
any kind, in connection with your essay entitled "Review: Detection of a Human
Influence on North American Climate" submitted for academic credit in GGR377H5S,
contrary to Section B. 1.3.(b) of the Code.
[3]

The particulars were provided in the same letter from Professor Hillan.

[4]

At the commencement of the hearing, the Student pied guilty to charges 1 and 4 and the
University withdrew the other charges.

THE FACTS
[5]

The parties submitted an Agreed Statement of Facts, the details of which are summarized
here:
• The Student is an undergraduate student who commenced an Honours Bachelor of
Arts and Science program in the Fall of 2001.
• In the Winter 2006 academic term, she was enrolled in Global Climate Change and
Freshwater Biology.

Global Climate Change
• In this course, the Student was required to write an essay worth 15% of the course
mark.
• A detailed course outline was provided to all students, which included a section on
penalties that could be imposed for misconduct including specific reference to
plagiarism.
• For the essay assignment, the students were asked to comment upon the same article
(the "Karoly a1ticle"). They were provided with a handout entitled "Paper Review
Guidelines" which set out the requirements of the review assignment. The handout
had attached to it a document entitled "How Not to Plagiarize" which specifically
cautioned students about plagiarism. Students were provided with hard copies of
these documents in class. If they missed the class, they were expected to obtain the
materials themselves. The Student was not in class when the handout was presented.
• On or about January 30, 2006, she submitted her essay entitled "Review: Detection
of a Human Influence on North American Climate" commenting on the Karoly
article. Portions of her essay contained text that had been copied directly from the
Karoly article without quotation marks or other form of citation or attribution. She
did, however, cite the Karoly article in her bibliography.
• Her professor notified her that he suspected plagiarism and met with her on February
15, 2006 to discuss.

Freshwater Biology

-3•

•

•

•

[6]

[7]

[8]

The course outline, which had been provided to all students, indicated that all
assignments would be submitted to the 'Turnitin" website for the detection of
plagiarism. Turnitin is an internet based software programme that scans and
compares work compared by students with material stored in its database.
As part of the course, the Student was required to complete a final take-home exam
worth 15% of her mark. She received a handout about the final exam, which
contained a warning about plagiarism and a reminder the exam would be subject to a
comparative analysis by Turnitin.
On or about April 27, 2006, the Student transmitted an electronic copy ofber final
exam to Turnitin as well as a hard copy to her professor. The Student copied
significant portions of her answers from internet sources that she did not reference
properly or otherwise acknowledge cmTectly in the body of the exam. She failed to
provide a complete bibliography.
In June 2007, the Student had two meetings with the Dean's Designate, Professor
Scott Graham, to discuss the two allegations of academic misconduct in the Global
Climate Change essay and the Freshwater Biology take-home exam. In each case
she signed an admission that she was guilty of the offences of plagiarism as alleged.

The panel accepted the Student's plea and entered a verdict of guilty.

THE PENALTY
The parties submitted a Joint Submission on Penalty in which they jointly recommended:
I) that the Student be suspended from attendance at the University of
Toronto for a period of2 years, from the date of hearing;
2) assignment of a grade zero in:
i. GG377H5 (Global Climate Change) for the 2006 Winter term; and
ii. BTO332Y5 (Freshwater Biology) for the 2006 Winter term;
3) a notation on the Student's transcript from the date of the hearing for a
period of 3 years, or her graduation from the University, whichever
occurs first, to the effect that she was sanctioned for academic
misconduct; and
4) the Tribunal report this case to the Provost who may publish a notice of
the decision of the Tribunal and the sanction or sanctions imposed with
the Student's name withheld.
In support of the joint submissions on penalty, the parties put forward further evidence as
follows:
• a Supplementary Agreed Statement of Facts which indicated that the Student had
plagiarized portions of an essay in Winter 2005 in the course GGR345HS Environment Issues in the Developing World worth 20% of her course mark. She
met with Professor Scott Graham, Dean's Designate, on June 16, 2005 to discuss
allegations of plagiarism in this essay. At that meeting, she asked him to provide her
with clarification about what constituted plagiarism after which she admitted she had
committed the academic offence of plagiarism. Her mark for the course was reduced
to 50% and a notation was placed on her transcript indicating "Mark reduced in

-4-

•

•

•
•

[9]

GGR345H5S due to academic misconduct" from June I, 2005 until December I,
2005.
Ms. Cohen, counsel for the Student, filed a report from Dr. Mini Mamak,
psychologist, dated May 23, 2007 together with Dr. Mamak's curriculum vita. The
psychological report described the Student as a rather naive individual who seems
"genuinely perplexed by her own behaviours that have led to her current
predicament". Dr. Mamak's report indicated that the Student advised her that poor
time management coupled with an overwhelming workload and need to assist her
father at the mosque contributed to her acts of plagiarism. The Student told Dr.
Mamak that she did not intend to deceive and did not consciously plagiarize.
Ms. Cohen also filed a letter dated August 27, 2007 from Shabbir Beawarwala,
secretary of the Anjuman-e-Fakhri (Mississauga). This letter confirmed that the
Student had provided voluntary services to this charitable organization over the last
several years.
The panel was also advised that the Student entered into an arranged marriage in July
of 2007 and was involved in preparations for same in Winter 2006.
The Student was sworn and testified that she had no intention of purposely
plagiarizing and felt under a great deal of pressure in the Winter of 2006. She
indicated she had made mistakes and was truly sorry.

In support of the Joint Submission on Penalty, the parties put forward the following factors:
• The Student co-operated with the Dean's Designate in 2005 and 2006. She has
acknowledged her guilt. She has co-operated with the prosecution before the
Tribunal and has pied guilty.
• The Student has admitted she was sorry for her mistakes.
• The Student appears now to understand what constitutes plagiarism.

REASONS FOR SANCTION
(delivered orally)
We consider this a very serious case. Plagiarism of any kind is a serious blow to the academic
integrity of the University and plagiarism from the internet is an increasing problem for the
University. We believe that plagiarism must be dealt with in a way that will not only deter the
individual charged but will also provide general deterrence to the University community.

We carefnlly considered the Joint Submission on Penalty. We have taken into account the
submissions of counsel, the further documents filed and the evidence that the Student herself gave
during the penalty phase of this hearing.
We acknowledge that the Student has cooperated with the University. She has pied guilty. She and
her counsel have cooperated with the University in putting before us an Agreed Statement of Facts
and a Supplementary Agreed Statement of Facts, which have been very helpfnl in allowing this
hearing to proceed in a more expeditious manner. The Student has said that she is sorry for her
conduct before us tonight both directly in her testimony and through her counsel. We have also
considered the report filed by Dr. Mamak, who provided a psychological assessment of the Student.

-5-

However, the panel must say that it is troubled by a number of features in this case. In the first
place, there was a prior incident of plagiarism by the Student in Winter 2005. At that time, on the
evideuce before us, we understand that the Student asked for clarification as to what constituted
plagiarism. She received that clarification and acknowledged that she had committed plagiarism and
a sanction was imposed. We considered this to have been a fair and significant warning to her, not
only as to what plagiarism was but also as to how it was wrong and how it should not be repeated.
The two matters that are before us occurred just one year later in the 2006 Winter term. In each
course, the course material contained very clear warnings about plagiarism: what it was and how it
was to be avoided. That material was either given to or was accessible by the Student.
Secondly, the panel was also troubled by the fact that the Student was advised by her professor of
suspected plagiarism in February 2006 but then she went on to commit a third offence in April 2006,
a mere three months later. This track record of being advised about plagiarism, and going on to
repeat her offence is concerning.
Thirdly, it appeared to the panel that even at the hearing, despite all the material the student had
reviewed on plagiarism and the individual warnings she had received, that she was still unclear as to
what plagiarism was. In her testimony at the hearing, through questioning, she was finally able to
identify all the elements of plagiarism. We think that this is important on a go-forward basis that all
those elements are acknowledged and understood by her as constituting the offence of plagiarism.
Fourthly, we were also quite puzzled about the manner in which the Student committed her
plagiarism. By citing sources in some instances, she appeared to try to indicate that she had taken
material from elsewhere. However, she did not put any of the third party material she had copied in
quotes. Overall, this did not seem to indicate an intention to deceive, but we remain troubled as to
how she could not have acknowledged that she was not properly and completely declaring and
identifying when she took material from others.
We heard evidence from the Student and her counsel about extenuating circumstances. 111e panel
did not find this evidence compelling and did not place much weight on it in corning to its decision
on penalty.
We considered the Joint Recommendation on Penalty and we agree with counsels' submission that
we should place significant weight on a joint recommendation.
We considered the cases to which we were referred and accept that the suggested penalty is within
the range for similar cases. We also looked at the Joint Recommendation with respect to this
particular case because that is also an important feature: was it appropriate on the facts of this
particular case''
We also took into account the criteria for penalty as first proposed by the late and former Mr. Justice
Sopinka in the case of Mr. C. Those factors have been outlined and both counsel have made
submissions with respect to them.
In light of all that, we have accepted the Joint submission on penalty and accordingly the penalty that
we impose is the following:

-6-

I. That the Student be suspended from attendance at the University ofToronto for a period of two
years from the date of hearing.
2. That the Student be assigned a grade of O in:
(a)
(b)

GGR377H5S, Global Climate Change, for the winter term 2006 and
BIO332Y5Y, Fresh Biology, for the 2006 winter term;

3. That a notation be made on her transcript from the date of this hearing for a period of three years
or her graduation, whichever comes first, to the effect that she was sanctioned for academic
misconduct; and
4. We recommend that this case be reported to the Provost to publish the decision of the tribunal
and the sanctions imposed with the name of the Student withheld.

I certify this is the decision of the panel.
,

Date

Kir~C~

