Case #487

   DATE: January 22, 2008
   PARTIES: University of Toronto v.Â  Ms. Z.B.
   Hearing Date(s): September 4, 2007
   Panel Members:
   Kirby Chown, Co-Chair
   James Rini, Faculty Panel Member
   Adrian Asselin, Student Panel Member
   Appearances:
   Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel for the University
   Joy Anne Cohen, Council for the Student
   Trial Division - s. B.i.1(d) and s. B.i.1(f) of Code - plagiarism â
   course work and take-home exam â guilty plea to charge under s.
   B.i.1(d) of Code â Agreed Statement of Facts - Joint Submission on
   Penalty â decanal sanction for prior plagiarism offence - psychological
   report - poor time management, overwhelming workload, volunteering at
   mosque and preparations for arranged marriage - inability to grasp
   content of offence despite warnings â Joint Submission accepted -
   two-year suspension; grade assignment of zero for two courses;
   three-year notation on transcript or until graduation; and report to
   Provost
   Student charged under s. B.i.1(d), s. B.i.1(f) and alternatively, s.
   B.i.3(b) of the Code. The charges related to allegations that the
   Student knowingly submitted a plagiarized essay in one course that
   contained text copied from a source article without citation or
   attribution, and a plagiarized take-home final examination in another
   course that contained improperly referenced text copied from the
   internet. The Student pleaded guilty to the charges under s. B.i.1(d).
   The Matter proceeded on an Agreed Statement of Facts. The Panel
   accepted the Studentâs plea and entered a verdict of guilty. The
   parties submitted a Joint Submission on Penalty and a Supplementary
   Agreed Statement of Facts. The Student had previously been sanctioned
   at the Decanal level for plagiarism and received guidance on how not to
   plagiarize. The Student submitted a psychological report that described
   her as a naive individual who was perplexed by her own behaviour. The
   Student claimed that her poor time management and overwhelming workload
   in addition to volunteering at her mosque and her preparations for an
   arranged marriage contributed to her acts of plagiarism. The parties
   claimed that the Student had acknowledged her guilt, cooperated with
   the proceedings, apologized and had learned about what constituted
   plagiarism. The Panel acknowledged the mitigating circumstances and
   considered the Studentâs psychological assessment. The Panel stated
   that it was concerned with the Studentâs repeated conduct of
   plagiarism, her inability to understand the offence and the manner in
   which the Student had plagiarized. The Panel found that the evidence of
   extenuating circumstances was not compelling. The Panel considered
   precedent cases and accepted that the suggested penalty was within the
   range for similar cases. The Panel considered and the parties
   submissions with respect to the criteria for penalty as described in
   the case of Mr. C. and accepted the Joint Submission on Penalty. The
   Panel imposed a two-year suspension; a grade assignment of zero in the
   two courses; a three-year notation on the Studentâs academic record and
   transcript (or until graduation, whichever was to occur first); and
   that a report be issued to the Provost.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12703
