THE UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO

IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Act, 1971, S.O. 1971, c. 56 as amended S.O. 1978,
C. 88

AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic Matrers,
1995;

BETWEEN:

THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
• and Ms.R. W.

Members of the Panel:
• Ms. Jane Pepino, Chair
• Professor lkuko Komuro-Lee, Faculty Panel Member
• Ms. Candace Ikeda-Douglas, Student Panel Member

Appearances:
• Ms. Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel for the University
•

Ms. R. W ., Student, did not attend

Preliminary
[I]

The Trial Division of the University Tribunal was convened on April 17, 2007 to consider
charges under the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters, 1995 (the
"Code'') laid against the student by leller dated November 13, 2006 from Professor Edith
Hillan, Vice-Provost, Academic.

[2]

The Student did not attend the hearing and was not represented by counsel.

Notice of Hearing and Charges
[3]

The Notice of Hearing was dated January 22, 2007. At the commencement of the hearing,
Counsel for the University, Ms. Lily Harmer. reviewed the University's efforts to notify the
Student of the hearing and to facilitate the Student's presence at the hearing.

[4]

After reviewing evidence pertaining to Notice, including an email from the Student informing
Ms. Harmer that she no longer resided in Canada and, therefore, could not attend the hearing,
the panel permitted the hearing to proceed in the Student's absence.

[5]

The charges are as follows:
I. In or about April 2006, you did knowingly forge or in any other way alter or falsify an
academic record, and/or did alter, circulate or make use of such forged, altered or falsified
record, whether the record be in print or electronic form, namely a document purporting to
be a certificate from the University of Toronto dated June I 7, 1994, indicating that you
have fulfilled the requirements of the University of Toronto and have been admitted to the
degree of Bachelor of Arts, contrary to Section B. I .3(a) of the Code ol Behaviour on
Academic Matters, 1995 (the Code).
2. In or about April 2006, you did knowingly forge or in any other way alter or falsify an
academic record, and/or did alter, circulate or make use of such forged, altered or falsified
record, whether the record be in print or electronic form, namely a document purporting to
be a certified transcript of the University of Toronto, contrary to Section B. I .2(a) of the
Code.
3. In the alternative, in or about April 2006 you did knowingly engage in a form of cheating,
academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or misrepresentation not otherwise described in
order to obtain academic credit or other academic advantage of any kind contrary to Section
B. l.3(b) of the Code.

[6]

Particulars of the charges are as follows:
l. You were a student at the University of Toronto at Scarborough in the fall of 1994 and
winter of 1995.
2. In or about April 2006 you submitted a document to an employer and/or a potential
employer that purported to be a certificate from the University of Toronto certifying that
you have fulfilled the requirements of the University of Toronto and have been admitted
under the authority of the Governing Council of the University of Toronto to the degree of
Bachelor of Arts.
3. In or about April 2006 you submitted a document to an employer and/or a potential
employer that purported to be a University of Toronto transcript containing information
about the courses you had taken, the credits earned, and your cumulative GPA.
4. Neither document accurately reflected the information contained on your official University
of Toronto transcript and academic record.
5. Rather, both documents that you created and/or submitted to an employer and/or a potential
employer misrepresented, altered and falsified the information contained on your official
University of Toronto transcript and academic record.

2

Agreed Statement of Facts
[7]

The panel was provided with an Agreed Statement of Facts, signed by the Student and Counsel
for the University. In summary, the Student admitted that the she had forged a degree
certificate and transcript from the University of Toronto and that she had submitted these
documents to HireRight, a California company specializing in academic background checks on
behalf of prospective employers, for the purpose of securing employment.

[8]

The Student pleaded guilty to charges l and 2. The University withdrew charge 3.

[9]

Counsel for the University led the panel through the Agreed Statement of Facts.

Decision of the Tribunal

[!OJ

Based on the Agreed Statement of Facts and the Student's guilty plea, the Tribunal found the
Student guilty of charges 1 and 2.

Sanction and Reasons
[11]

The University presented to the panel a Joint Submission on Penalty, signed by the Student,
which submitted that the appropriate penalty in the circumstance is as follows:
1. That the Tribunal recommend to the President of the University of Toronto
that he recommend to Governing Council that the Student be expelled
from the University
2. That, pending the decision of the Governing Council, the Student be
suspended for five years
3. That a permanent notation be placed on the Student's transcript to the
effect that the Student was expelled from the University for academic
misconduct
4. That a report of the decision be made to the Provost for publication in the
University's newspaper with the Student's name withheld

[ 12]

The University placed a Book of Authorities before the panel so that it might have an
opportunity to review several decisions of other panels of the University Tribunal in similar
cases. In particular, the panel reviewed the criteria for sanction first proposed by the late and
former Mr. Justice Sopinka in the matter of the appeal of Mr. C. (November 5, 1976).
According to these guidelines, the Tribunal should consider the following six criteria when
deciding on an appropriate sanction:
a) the character of the person charged;
b) the likelihood ofa repetition of the offence;
3

c) the nature of the offence committed;
d) any extenuating circumstances surrounding the commission of the offence;
e) the detriment to the University occasioned by the offence;
f) the need to deter others from committing a similar offence.

[13]

In its submissions on penalty, the University focused on the nature of the offence, the detriment
to the University and the significance of general deterrence.

[14]

The University highlighted the extraordinary lengths to which the Student went in order to
provide forged documents to an American employer, believing that her actions would not be
detected by the University, particularly after so many years had passed since her last
registration. The panel was reminded that forging an academic record is one of the most
egregious acts a student or alumnus can commit, since it undermines the integrity of the
University's records. For the purpose of general deterrence, the University argued that a severe
penalty is appropriate, since it is important for members of the University community and
society at large to be aware of the seriousness with which the University deals with such
behaviour.

[15]

Following the University's submissions on penalty. the panel deliberated.
the Joint Submission on Penalty and recommended that:

The panel accepted

I. the Tribunal recommend to the President of the University of Toronto that
he recommend to Governing Council that the Student be expelled from the
University
2. pending the decision of the Governing Council, the Student be suspended
for five years
3. a permanent notation be placed on the Student's transcript to the effect that
the Student was expelled from the University for academic misconduct
4. a report of the decision be made to the Provost for publication in the
University's newspaper with the Student's name withheld
[ 16]

The panel accepted the University's analyses of similar cases heard previously by the Tribunal,
particularly that of Mr. M.S. (June 2006). The following reasons were read orally at the
hearing:
We agree that the offence in question was one of: if not the most. serious offence under
the Code. We agree with the panel in the above referenced case when. quoting the
preamble to the Code, it spoke of the responsibilities of all parties to maintain the
integrity of the teaching and learning relationship and underscored the necessity of
having honesty and fairness inform the relationship. We particularly note that the
integrity of the University as an educational institution and as a degree-granting body is
a fundamental part of this relationship. Members of the public, other degree-granting

4

institutions, companies and other employers rely on transcripts and degree certificates
for what they represent. The oral reasons given by the panel in the case of Mr. M.S. are
adopted in their entirety by this panel and are hereby included in the record: "the panel
was concerned about the elements of premeditation and deceit, the nature of the offence
and the way it was committed. In particular, the panel noted that the accused spent
considerable time to create a false academic record by altering marks and listing courses
that had never been taken." Substantial changes were made when the transcript was
altered and, as in the case referenced, the Student went on to create a false certificate
attesting to graduation from the University of Toronto, when, in fact, only one course
from the University and a total of five, including transfer credits, had been completed.
We know that degree certificates from the University of Toronto are relied on not only
in Ontario but across North America, as borne out by the facts in this case. The
falsification of documents not only undermines the credibility of the University but also
all other students who achieve their degrees legitimately. The penalty, therefore, is as
set out in the Joint Submission on Penalty.
[ 17]

The panel thanked discipline counsel for her efforts in creating an eflicient and accessible
record of this history and in seeking the support of the Student for both the Statement of Fact
and Submission on Penalty.

~
DA TED at Toronto this\\

day of April, 2008.

5

