Case #502

   DATE: April 18, 2008
   PARTIES: University of Toronto v. Ms. R.W.
   Hearing Date(s): April 17, 2008
   Panel Members:
   Ms. Jane Pepino, Chair
   Prof. Ikuko Komuro-Lee, Faculty Panel Member
   Ms. Candace Ikeda-Douglas, Student Panel Member
   Appearances:
   Ms. Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel for the University
   Ms. R.W., the Student, did not attend
   Trial Division - s. B.i.3(a) and s. B.i.2(a) of the Code - forged
   academic records â forged degree certificate and transcript â hearing
   not attended - Student responded to Notice of Hearing - Agreed
   Statement of Facts â guilty plea â Joint Submission on Penalty -
   credibility of University and students undermined byÂ  falsification of
   documents â see case of Mr. M.S. â Joint Submission on Penalty accepted
   - recommendation that the Student be expelled as per s. C.ii.(b)(i) of
   Code; five-year suspension pending expulsion decision; permanent
   notation on academic record; and report to Provost
   Student charged under s. B.i.3(a) and s. B.i.2(a), and alternatively,
   s. B.i.3(b) of the Code. The charges related to allegations that the
   Student forged a University degree certificate and transcript, and
   submitted the documents to a company specializing in employee
   background checks. The Student did not attend the hearing. The Panel
   reviewed the Studentâs response to the Notice of Hearing and permitted
   the hearing to proceed in the Studentâs absence. The matter proceeded
   on an Agreed Statement of Facts and a Joint Submission on Penalty. The
   Student pleaded guilty to the charged under s. B.i.3(a) and s.
   B.i.2(a). The University withdrew the alternative charge. The Panel
   found the Student guilty of the charges. In its submission on penalty,
   the University submitted a Book of Authorities and focused on the
   nature of the offence, the detriment to the University and the
   significance of general deterrence. The Panel accepted the Joint
   Submission on Penalty. The Panel accepted the Universityâs analysis of
   the case of Mr. M.S. and found that the integrity of the University is
   a fundamental part of the teaching and learning relationship. The Panel
   adopted the oral reasons given by the Panel in the case of Mr. M.S. and
   found that the falsification of documents undermined the credibility of
   the University and all other students who achieved their degrees
   legitimately. The Panel imposed a recommendation to the President,
   further to s. C.ii.(b)(i) of the Code, that the Student be expelled; a
   five-year suspension pending the expulsion decision; a permanent
   notation on the Studentâs academic record and transcript; and that a
   report be issued to the Provost.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12712
