Case 1198

   DATE:

   March 29, 2022

   PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v. M.M.H. ("the Student")

   HEARING DATE:

   January 5, 2022, via Zoom

   PANEL MEMBERS:

   Ms. Sabrina Bandali, Chair
   Professor Marc Laflamme, Faculty Panel Member
   Ms. Lauren Membreno-Lepore, Student Panel Member

   APPEARANCES:

   Ms. Tina Lie, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg
   Rothstein LLP
   Mr. William Webb, Co-Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg Rothstein LLP
   Ms. Adrianna Mills, Representative for the Student, Downtown Legal
   Services
   The Student

   HEARING SECRETARY:

   Mr. Christopher Lang, Director, Office of Appeals, Discipline and
   Faculty Grievances

   The‚ØStudent‚Øwas charged under s. B.i.1(b) of the‚ØCode of Behaviour
   on Academic Matters, 1995‚Ø(the ‚Code‚) on the basis that he knowingly
   used or possessed an unauthorized aid or aids, or obtained unauthorized
   assistance in a final exam. In the alternative, the Student was charged
   under s. B.i.1(d) of the Code on the basis that he knowingly
   represented as his own an idea or expression of an idea or work of
   another in a final exam. In the further alternative, the Student was
   charged under s. B.i.3(b) of the Code on the basis that he knowingly
   engaged in a form of cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud
   or misrepresentation in order to‚Øobtain academic credit or other
   academic advantage‚Øin connection with a final exam.

   The hearing proceeded on the basis of an Agreed Statement of Fact
   (‚ASF‚). The ASF outlined that the Professor who taught the course for
   which the final exam in question was submitted discovered that nine
   questions from the exam were posted on Chegg.com. The Professor
   suspected that the Student had posted the questions because all nine of
   the questions on Chegg.com had been assigned to the Student through the
   question pools. The ASF indicated that the Student met with the Dean‚s
   Designate at which time he admitted to posting the nine questions from
   the final exam on Chegg.com and that he copied the answer to one of the
   questions on the final exam. The Panel noted that the ASF outlined that
   the Student admitted to accessing Chegg.com to obtain unauthorized
   assistance during the final exam, posting nine questions on Chegg.com
   and requesting answers to those questions, viewing answers that had
   been posted to Chegg.com, and using answers that had been posted to
   answer a question on the exam. The Panel noted that the onus is on the
   University to establish on a balance of probabilities, using clear and
   convincing evidence, that one or more of the academic offences charged
   was committed by the Student. The Panel further moted that the Student
   admitted and pled guilty to the first charge. The Panel was satisfied
   that the Student‚s admissions were voluntary, informed and unequivocal.
   Furthermore, the evidence contained in the ASF and supporting
   documentation provided a clear evidentiary basis for a finding of
   guilt. The Panel concluded that the first charge had been proven with
   clear and convincing evidence on a balance of probabilities and
   accepted the guilty plea of the Student in respect of that charge. The
   University withdrew the second and third charges.

   The Panel received a Joint Submission on Penalty (‚JSP‚). The Panel
   noted that it was aware of the value in respecting and deferring to a
   JSP. In accordance with the Discipline Appeals Board decision in
   University of Toronto and M.A. (Case No. 837, December 22, 2016), a
   joint submission may be rejected by a panel only in circumstances where
   to give effect to it would be contrary to public interest or would
   bring the administration of justice into disrepute. The Panel
   considered the factors and principles relevant to sanctions set out by
   the Tribunal in University of Toronto and Mr. C (Case No. 1976/77-3,
   November 5, 1976). The Panel considered the serious nature of the
   offence, and the need for general deterrence, especially in the context
   of the shift to online learning. Balanced against these factors were
   the Student‚s cooperation in the process, early admission of the
   misconduct, and entry into the ASF and JSP, which demonstrated insight
   and that he is taking responsibility for his actions. The Panel noted
   that in its view, the JSP in this case was reasonable. The Panel
   imposed the following sanctions: a final grade of zero in the course,
   28-month suspension, a notation on the transcript until graduation, and
   a report to the Provost for publication.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/30473
