Case 1335 - APPEAL

   [1]Case 1335 - Tribunal

   DATE:

   February 16 2024

   PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v. I.M. ("the Student")

   HEARING DATE:

   January 10, 2024, via Zoom

   PANEL MEMBERS:

   Paul Michell, Chair
   Dr. Allan Kaplan, Faculty Panel Member
   Samantha Chang, Student Panel Member

   APPEARANCES:
   Tina Lie, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg
   Rothstein LLP
   William Webb,Â Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg
   Rothstein LLP
   The Student

   HEARING SECRETARY:

   Christopher Lang, Director, Office of Appeals, Discipline and Faculty
   Grievances

   The Trial Division of the University Tribunal (the âTribunalâ) found
   the Student guilty of plagiarism and forgery or falsification, contrary
   to sections B.i.1(d) and B.i.3(a) of the Code of Behaviour on Academic
   Matters, 2019. On appeal before the Discipline Appeals Board (âBoardâ),
   the Student asserted that the Tribunalâs decision and finding of guilty
   were unreasonable and that it had imposed a sanction was unreasonable
   and inconsistent with prior sanctions imposed by the Tribunal in
   similar circumstances.

   At the outset of the hearing, the Panel noted that the notice of appeal
   was broad and did not identify specific grounds for appeal. The Panel
   further noted the Student had failed to deliver any written submissions
   before the hearing or to provide oral submissions at the hearing that
   could be of assistance in identifying any errors in the Tribunalâs
   decision that could provide the Board with a basis to intervene.

   At the hearing, the Panel heard oral submissions from the Student and
   counsel for the University. In addition, the Panel reviewed the
   Tribunal decision and the record that was before the Tribunal. The
   Panel concluded that the Student had not identified any basis on which
   the Board should interfere with the Tribunalâs decision on liability,
   and noted that there were no errors in the Tribunalâs reasons. The
   Panel further found that the Student failed to identify any basis that
   would otherwise permit the Board to intervene in the Tribunalâs
   sanctioning decision. In particular, the Panel noted that the Tribunal
   had considered the sanctioning factors in Mr. C and applied them to the
   evidence, and noted that the Tribunalâs recommendation of expulsion, in
   the absence of any mitigating factors or join recommendations on
   sanction, was appropriate in view of earlier decisions and the
   Studentâs commission of multiple offences.

   After the hearing had concluded, the Student emailed further
   submissions to the Office of Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances
   and to counsel for the University. The Panel did not review the
   submissions and noted that the Student had an opportunity to make
   written submissions prior to the hearing, and found that there was no
   basis for the Student to make such submissions after the close of the
   hearing.

   The Studentâs appeal was dismissed.
   [2]View Case

References

   1. https://governingcouncil.utoronto.ca/case-summary/case-1335
   2. file:///media/31495
