THE UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
Tl-IE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO

IN THE MATTER OF charges of academic dishonesty made on July 8, 2009;
AND IN THE i\lATTER OF the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic
,Hatters, 199 5;
Al'ID IN THE i\lATTER OF the University of Toronto Act, 1971, S.O. 1971, c. 56 as
amended S.O. 1978, c. 88

BETWEEN:
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO

- and-

I

J

Hearing Date: October 6, 2009
Members of the Panel:

•
•
•

Ms. Janet Minor, Barrister and Solicitor, Chair
Professor Graham Trope, Faculty Panel Member
Ms. Elena Kuzmin, Student Panel Member

Appearances:

•
•
•
•
•

Ms. Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel for the University, Paliare Roland
Barristers
Ms. Betty-Ann Campbell, Law Clerk, Paliare Roland Barristers
Professor Ryan Balo!, Department of Political Science, Political Theory
Ms. Larissa Atkinson, Teaching Assistant, Department of Political Science
Dr. Tamara Jones, Academic Integrity Officer, Office of Student Academic Integrity

In Attendance:

•
•

Professor Sam Solecki, Dean's Designate, Office of Academic Integrity
Ms. Natalie Ramtahal, Coordinator, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances,
Office of Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances

•

I

.J

, the Student, not in attendance

Transcription of Oral Reasons Delivered by the Chair at the Conclusion of the
Hearing

[l] We have had an opportunity to review the evidence and we have heard from
Professor Balot and Teaching Assistant Atchison. We have also reviewed the paper
provided by Mr. J
. There are internet sources provided to us by the University and
also a purchased essay from donotreply@l23helpme.com.
[2] We are satisfied that significant portions, if not, the entire paper, provided Nfr. J
in this course was plagiarised. It has verbatim passages from the purchased essay and
online sources. It also has passages which have slight changes, either editorial or word
changes. However, on review of the totality of the paragraphs, the phraseology is similar,
the content is similar, huns of phrase are similar, leaving us no doubt that these portions
are also plagiarised.
[3] We are satisfied that the University has demonstrated that Charge 1 has been made
out and we find the Student to have committed plagiarism contrary to the Code of
Academic Conduct. The University has withdrawn all the other charges in this matter.
[4] We have concluded that the appropriate sanction in this case is a zero in the course, a
four-year suspension from the University running after the Student completes his
academic suspension for poor performance, a notation on his record for five years
commencing the date of this suspension, and a recommendation to the Provost that the
decision be published with the Sh1dent's name withheld.
[5] We have reviewed the matter taking into account the principles on sanction which are
outlined in the C
case and note the following: The paper submitted by the Student
was plagiarized. No meaningful academic work was done by the Student. The paper was
either verbatim or mildly edited, primarily from a paper which was available online for
purchase. However, there was in addition one paragraph which was virhially verbatim
from another online source.
[6] The Student did not attend this hearing. As a result, we have received no character
evidence, no explanation of any potentially extenuating circumstances, and no indication
of either insight or remorse from the Student.
[7] The offence of plagiarism has been commented upon by other panels hearing
discipline matters. We note the comments of Chair Lax in the University of Toronto vs.
1l,LH.H. (January 12, 2009, Case No. 521) I am quoting from paragraph 29:
Other panels have noted that the seriousness of the offence of plagiarism is
that it undermines the relationship of trust which must exist between the
University and its sh1dents.

[8] That Panel referred to the U11iversity ofToro11to vs. S.B. (November 24, 2007, Case
No. 488) and quotes:

It hardly needs to be said that the credibility and academic mission of the
University and the degrees it awards students can be greatly hanned by the
commission of offences such as plagiarism and concoction.
[9] Likewise, the Panel refened to the U11iversity of Toronto and A.K. (October 12,
2007, Case No. 481), noting among other things that in recent years plagiarism has been a
patiicular problem for the University and Tribunals.
[10] In University of Toronto vs. V. W.S.L. (April 6, 2006, Case No. 440), that Panel
commented that the enterprise of purchasing work for submission to the University is
emblematic of the highest and greatest detriment to the University community.
[11] We also note the description of plagiarism in the Code of Behaviour on Academic
Matters. The description of plagiarism is at once a perversion of originality and the
denial of the interdependence and mutuality which are at the hemi of scholarship itself
and hence of the academic experience.
[12] We are aware that the recommended penalty for plagiarism where a student submits
the work of another is two years and that the recommendation when a student has
submitted purchased work is expulsion. We accept the submission of the University that
the bulk of the paper was likely purchased and that the remainder was plagiarized from
another source.
[13] In these circumstances, we accept the recommendation of the University that a fouryear suspension be imposed. We are of the view that this is appropriate in all the
circumstances.
[14] As I have noted above, the Panel orders:
1) A four-year suspension, which should run from the time that the three-year
suspension for poor perfo11'llance is completed;
2) A notation on record should continue for a year after this suspension had been
completed.
3) The Student should receive a grade of zero in the course; and,

4) The matter should be refened to the Provost for publication, ifhe sees fit, and
that publication would be without be the Student's name being disclosed.

I certify that this is the decision of the Panel

Date

Janet Minor, Banister and Solicitor (Chair)

