Case #573

   DATE: April 15, 2010
   PARTIES: University of Toronto v. I.J.
   Hearing Date(s): October 6, 2009
   Panel Members:
   Janet Minor, Chair
   Professor Graham Trope, Faculty Member
   Elena Kuzmin, Student Member
   Appearances:
   Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel for the University
   Betty-Ann Campbell, Law Clerk
   Professor Ryan Balot, Course Instructor
   Larissa Atkinson, Teaching Assistant
   Dr. Tamara Jones, Academic Integrity Officer
   In Attendance:
   Professor Sam Solecki, Deanâs Designate, Office of Academic Integrity
   Trial Division â s. B.I.1(d) and s. B.I.3(b) of Code â plagiarism â
   significant portions of an essay plagiarised â hearing not attended â
   reasonable notice of hearing - finding on evidence of guilt â
   sentencing principle â see University of Toronto v. M.H.H.Â  â see
   University of Toronto v. S.B. â see University of Toronto and A.K. â
   see University of Toronto v. V.W.S.L. â University submission on
   penalty accepted â grade assignment of zero for course; four-year
   suspension; five-year notation on transcript; and report to Provost
   Student charged with two offences under s. B.I.1(d) and s. B.I.3(b) of
   the Code. Charges relate to the allegations that the Student
   plagiarised an essay from a purchased essay and online sources. The
   Panel found evidence presented by the Professor and the Teaching
   Assistant for the course supported this charge. The Student did not
   attend the hearing. The Panel was satisfied that the University had
   demonstrated that the charge had been made out and found the Student
   had committed plagiarism. The University withdrew the second charge
   under s. B.I.3(b). The Panel did not hear any character evidence,
   explanation of potential extenuating circumstances, or remorse from the
   Student. The Panel referred to University of Toronto v. M.H.H and
   University of Toronto v. S.B. in characterizing the seriousness of the
   offence of plagiarism. The Panel further referred to University of
   Toronto and A.K. and noted that in recent years plagiarism had been a
   particular problem for the University and the Tribunal. The Panel
   further noted the case of University of Toronto v. V.W.S.L. and
   commented the enterprise of purchasing work for submission was
   emblematic of the highest and greatest detriment to the University
   community. The Panel accepted the submission of the University that the
   bulk of the paper was likely purchased and the remainder was
   plagiarized. The Panel imposed a grade assignment of zero for the
   course, a four-year suspension, a five-year notation on the Studentâs
   transcript and that a report to the Provost be issued.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/13007
