Case #963

   DATE: September 10, 2018
   PARTIES: University of Toronto v. Q.W. (âthe Studentâ)
   Hearing Date(s):Â  Â  August 22, 2018
   Panel Members:
   Ms. Breese Davies, Chair
   Professor Ian Crandall, Faculty Panel Member
   Ms. Morgan Watkins, Student Panel Member
   Appearances:
   Ms. Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel for the University,
   Paliare Roland
   Ms. Wanda Restivo, Deanâs Designate, Office of the Vice-Principal
   (Academic) and Dean, University of Toronto Scarborough
   In Attendance:
   Ms. Krista Osbourne, Administrative Clerk and Hearing Secretary, Office
   of Appeals,
   Discipline, Faculty Grievances
   Mr. Sean Lourim, IT Support, Office of the Governing Council
   Not in Attendance:
   The Student
   Trial Division - s. B.i.3(a) â forging or falsifying an academic
   recordÂ  Â â forged transcriptÂ  â student did not attend hearingÂ  Â â
   reasonable notice provided on the basis of emails, attendance at case
   management conference â recommendation of expulsion, suspension ofÂ  up
   to five years pending expulsion; permanent notation on transcript; that
   the decision be reported to the Provost with the Studentâs name
   withheld.
   The Student was charged with three charges of forging or falsifying an
   academic record contrary to s.B.i.3(a) of the Code , or in the
   alternative three charges of academic dishonesty not otherwise
   described contrary to s. B.i.3(b) of the Code . The charges related to
   the Studentâs application to be a transfer student at the University
   which contained transcripts and other documentation that were forged.
   The Student did not attend the hearing. However, the Tribunal found
   that the matter could proceed in the absence of the Student and that
   reasonable notice of the hearing had been provided pursuant to Rule 17
   of the Rules of Practice and Procedure and s. 7 of the Statutory Powers
   Procedure Act because the Student had responded to the Universityâs
   email that had the Notice of Hearing attached to it and had engaged in
   planning the conference in a number of correspondences with the
   University thereafter (e.g. a case management conference, setting the
   hearing date, setting up his Skype).Â  On the basis of affidavits which
   showed that the Student had applied to the University with a forged
   transcript and had lied when questioned about his attendance at another
   institution (which he had not, in fact attended) the Tribunal found the
   Student to be guilty of three charges of forging or falsifying an
   academic record contrary to s.B.i.3(a) of the Code. The University
   withdrew the alternative charges.
   The University sought an order that the Student: (a) be suspended for
   up to five years pending expulsion; (b) that the Tribunal recommend
   that the Student be expelled from the University; (c) a permanent
   notation on the Studentâs academic record and transcript; (d) that the
   decision be reported to the Provost with the Studentâs name withheld.
   In accepting the proposed sanction, the Tribunal referred to the case
   University of Toronto v. Y.X. (Case No. 952; April 4, 2018) for the
   proposition that forgery or falsification of academic records is among
   the most serious academic offences because it is deliberate, difficult
   to detect, and poses considerable harm to the reputation and integrity
   of the University. The Tribunal referred to a number of other cases
   that ordered expulsion where a transcript had been forged ( Z.Z . (Case
   No. 958; April 17, 2018), A.B . (Case No. 917; June 13, 2017) at para.
   18, J.F .(Case No. 915; May 29, 2017) at para. 14, J.Z . (Case No. 928;
   June 5, 2017) at para. 22, and Y.X ., supra at para. 39).Â  The Student
   did not attend the hearing; the Tribunal proceeded as though it were
   his first offence.Â  Though the Student had participated in a case
   management conference, he had not participated in a Deanâs meeting, nor
   was there an explanation for the Studentâs absence at the hearing. The
   Panel ordered that the Student: (a) be suspended for up to five years
   pending expulsion; (b) a recommendation that the Student be expelled;
   (c) a permanent notation on the Studentâs academic record and
   transcript; (d) that the decision be reported to the Provost with the
   Studentâs name withheld.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12974
