Case No.963
THE UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
IN THE MATTER OF charges of academic dishonesty filed on January 16, 2018
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters, 1995,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Act, 1971, S.O. 1971, c. 56 as am. S.O. 1978, c. 88

B E T W E E N:
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
- and -

--

Q

W

REASONS FOR DECISION
Hearing Date: August 22, 2018
Members of the Panel:
Ms. Breese Davies, Chair
Professor Ian Crandall, Faculty Panel Member
Ms. Morgan Watkins, Student Panel Member
Appearances:
Ms. Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel for the University, Paliare Roland
Ms. Wanda Restivo, Dean’s Designate, Office of the Vice-Principal (Academic) and Dean,
University of Toronto Scarborough
In Attendance:
Ms. Krista Osbourne, Administrative Clerk and Hearing Secretary, Office of Appeals,
Discipline, Faculty Grievances
Mr. Sean Lourim, IT Support, Office of the Governing Council

--

Not in Attendance:
Mr. Q
W
, the Student

2

A. Charges
1. On August 22, 2018, this panel of the University Tribunal held a hearing in the absence

--

of Q

W

(“the Student”) to consider the charges brought against him by the

University of Toronto under the Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters, 1995 (“the
Code”).
2. The charges were detailed in a letter to the Student from Professor Nelson, ViceProvost, Faculty & Academic Life, dated January 16, 2018, as follows:
1.

On or about April 4, 2016, you did knowingly forge or in any other way alter

or falsify an academic record, and/or did utter, circulate or make use of such
forged, altered or falsified record, whether the record be in print or electronic form,
namely an application for admission to the University (“Application”), contrary to
section B.I.3(a) of the Code.
2.

On or about April 4, 2016, you did knowingly forge or in any other way alter

or falsify an academic record, and/or did utter, circulate or make use of such
forged, altered or falsified record, whether the record be in print or electronic form,
namely an Official Transcript from Saint Mary’s University submitted with your
Application, contrary to section B.I.3(a) of the Code.
3.

On or about June 15, 2016, you did knowingly forge or in any other way

alter or falsify a document or evidence required by the University, and/or did utter,
circulate or make use of such forged, altered or falsified document, namely a letter
that you sent to the University to clarify your activities during September 2014January 2015 for purposes of supporting your Application, contrary to section
B.I.1(a) of the Code.

3

4.

In the alternative to paragraphs 1 and 2, on or about April 4, 2016, you did

knowingly engage in a form of cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud
or misrepresentation not otherwise described in the Code, in order to obtain
academic credit or other academic advantage of any kind, contrary to section
B.I.3(b) of the Code, by submitting:
(a) the Application falsely claiming that you had attended Saint Mary’s
University from September 2009 to December 2015; and
(b) an Official Transcript from Saint Mary’s University which was forged,
altered or falsified.
5.

In the alternative to paragraph 3, on or about June 15, 2016, you did

knowingly engage in a form of cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud
or misrepresentation not otherwise described in the Code, in order to obtain
academic credit or other academic advantage of any kind by submitting a letter in
support of your Application to the University in which you falsely claimed to have
finished your last course at St. Mary’s University in December 2015, contrary to
section B.I.3(b) of the Code.

B. Hearing in the Absence of the Student
3. The Student did not attend the hearing and was not represented by counsel. Assistant
Discipline Counsel asked that the Tribunal order that the hearing proceed in the
absence of the Student pursuant to Rule 17 of the Tribunal’s Rules of Practice and
Procedure (“the Rules”) and s. 7 of the Statutory Powers Procedure Act (“the Act”).
4. Rule 17 allows the Tribunal to proceed in the absence of a party if notice of the hearing

4

has been given in accordance with the Rules and if the person does not attend.
5. Rule 9 provides a number of alternative means by which a Notice of Hearing may be
served on a student. In addition to personal service, Rule 9 permits service by courier
or by email. Rule 13 requires that all parties be provided with reasonable notice of a
hearing. Rule 14 specifies the information that must be included in the Notice of
Hearing, including the date, time, place and purpose of the hearing. Rule 14(c)
requires the Notice to contain a statement that if the person notified does not attend
at the hearing, the panel may proceed in the person’s absence and the person will not
be entitled to any further notice of the proceeding.
6. The Student’s hearing was originally scheduled to proceed on March 22, 2018 at 9:45
am. A Notice of Hearing was sent to the Student by email on March 2, 2018. The
email was sent to the email contained in ROSI as well as two other emails that appear
to be associated with the Student. Attached to the email was also a copy of three
affidavits the University intended to rely on at the hearing.
7. A copy of the original Notice of Hearing was not provided to the Tribunal so we are
unable to determine whether the original Notice complied with the requirements in the
Rules. Nevertheless, on March 5, 2018, the Student responded to the email to which
the Notice of Hearing was attached. He stated that he was in China. He also said he
did not understand why the University was charging him and did not know how he
should deal with the charges.
8. A case management conference call was held on March 20, 2018 before Co-Chair,
Nader Hasan. The Student requested an adjournment of his hearing to allow him to
retain counsel. The University consented to the adjournment request. A request was

5

also made for the hearing to proceed electronically. Mr. Hasan made an order
adjourning the hearing. He also ordered that the Student provide Assistant Discipline
Counsel with contact information for his lawyer by June 7, 2018 and that a new date
for the hearing be selected by June 20, 2018.
9. On March 20, 2018, Virginia Fletcher, a law clerk working with Assistant Discipline
Counsel, sent an email to the Student and provided him with information about
Downtown Legal Services as well as the names of three lawyers who had previously
represented students before the Tribunal.
10. On June 8, 2018, Ms. Fletcher sent another email to the Student asking him to advise
whether he had retained counsel and reminding the Student that a new date for the
hearing needed to be selected by June 20, 2018. The Student responded on June 8,
2018 and advised that he had not retained a lawyer. He also wrote “I will join the
hearing by myself by Skype.”
11. Ms. Fletcher sent a further email to the Student in which she provided the following
five possible dates for the hearing:
Monday, July 9, 2018 at 5:45 p.m.
Tuesday, July 31, 2018 at 9:45 a.m.
Wednesday, August 1, 2018 at 1:45 p.m.
Wednesday, August 22, 2018 at 9:45 a.m.
Thursday, August 23, 2018 at 5:45 p.m.
Ms. Fletcher asked the Student to advise if he was available to attend the hearing on
any of the dates provided. Ms. Fletcher also attached a copy of the four affidavits that
the University intended to rely on at the Hearing. Ms. Fletcher also asked the Student

6

to advise if he wished to cross-examine any of the affiants at the hearing.
12. The Student responded to Ms. Fletcher’s by email, writing “August 22 will be good for
me, and I think no need to cross-examination.”
13. On June 15, 2018, Krista Osbourne, Administrative Clerk & Hearing Secretary,
Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances, sent the Student a Notice of Hearing by
email. The Notice of Hearing was sent to the email contained in ROSI for the Student
as well as to the email address the Student had used to communicate with the
University and Assistant Discipline Counsel’s office. According to Ms. Osbourne’s
email and the Notice of Hearing, a copy was also sent by courier to the Student at an
address in Markham, Ontario.
14. The content of the Notice of Hearing sent on June 15, 2018 complies with Rule 14. It
states that the hearing was scheduled for Wednesday, August 22, 2018 at 9:45 a.m.
in room 107 of the McMurrich Building at the University of Toronto. The Notice also
states as follows:
You may choose to attend the hearing with or without representation, or not to
attend at all. If you do not attend, the hearing may take place without you and you
will not be entitled to further notice in the proceedings. If you do not attend you will
be notified in writing of the decision.
In the email that accompanied the Notice of Hearing, Ms Osbourne also wrote as
follows:

-

As previously communicated to you, Mr. W
you are permitted to participate
electronically through Skype during your hearing. Please ensure you email me
directly, with your Skype username as well as phone number. I will email you
separately to set up a date/time to test your Skype connection in advance of the
hearing.
15. On June 17, 2018, the Student responded to Ms. Osbourne’s email of June 15, 2018

7

and provided her with his Skype ID. The Student did not provide a phone number as
requested.
16. On June 18, 2018, Ms. Osbourne sent an email to the Student proposing a number of
dates and times to test his Skype connection in advance of the hearing. She also
asked the Student again to provide a phone number.
17. On June 18, 2018, the Student responded to Ms. Osbourne’s email and selected one
of the dates proposed for the Skype test, writing “August 17 10:30am-noon would be
good.” The Student also provided Ms. Osbourne with his phone number.
18. On June 18, 2018, Ms. Osbourne sent a further email to the Student confirming the
Skype test would proceed on Friday August 17th at 10:30 am.
19. On August 7, 2018 a Revised Notice of Hearing was sent to the Student by email.
According to the Notice, it was sent to the email address contained in ROSI for the
Student as well as to the email address the Student used on June 18, 2018 to
communicate with Ms. Osbourne. A Revised Notice of Hearing was sent because the
Faculty and Student members of the Tribunal had changed since the June 15, 2018
Notice of Hearing was sent. In all other respects, the August 7, 2018 Notice of Hearing
was the same as the June 15, 2018 Notice of Hearing.
20. On August 16, 2018, Ms. Osbourne sent the Student an email reminding him of the
Skype test on August 17, 2018 at 10:30 am. This email was sent to the email address
the Student used on June 18, 2018 to communicate with Ms. Osbourne.

Ms.

Osbourne sent a second email reminder to the Student at 9:50 a.m. on August 17,
2018.
21. On August 17, 2018, several attempts were made to contact the Student by Skype.

8

The Student did not answer or accept any of the calls made to him through Skype. An
email was sent to the Student at 10:47 am on August 17, 2018 advising that several
attempts had been made to contact him through Skype.
22. On August 17, 2018 at 11:37 am, Ms. Osbourne sent an email to Assistant Discipline
Counsel advising that the Student had failed to participate in the Skype test at the
arranged time. Ms. Osbourne’s email was copied to two email addresses associated
with the Student, including the email address the Student used to select the date and
time for the Skype test.
23. The Student did not respond to either of the emails sent on August 17, 2018.
24. The Tribunal convened the hearing at 9:45 am on August 22, 2018 as scheduled.
Three unsuccessful attempts were made to reach the Student by Skype. The Tribunal
then recessed the proceedings briefly. During the adjournment, a message was sent
to the Student through Skype. Assistant Discipline Counsel also sent an email to the
Student at 9:59 am asking him to contact the Tribunal through Skype or to accept the
Skype call to him. The Tribunal re-convened at 10:05 am. At that time, three further
attempts were made to reach the Student by Skype, all of which were unsuccessful.
The Tribunal also attempted to reach the Student by telephone using the number he
provided in his June 18, 2018 email to Ms. Osbourne but there was no answer.
25. The Tribunal found that the Student had notice of the hearing and the charges against
him. He participated in a case management call on March 20, 2018 at which time he
requested, and was granted, an adjournment of the original hearing date. In June
2018, he communicated that he did not intend to retain counsel but would attend the
hearing by Skype. He participated in selecting the date and time for the hearing. He

9

responded to the June 16, 2018 email to which the Notice of Hearing confirming the
August 22, 2018 date was attached and provided his Skype ID. He selected the date
and time to test his Skype connection to ensure he could participate in the hearing
electronically.
26. The Tribunal is satisfied that the University complied with the Rules and the Act. The
Student was given reasonable notice of the hearing and did not attend. The Tribunal,
therefore, ordered that the hearing should proceed in the Student’s absence.

C. Affidavit Evidence
27. The Provost sought to adduce three affidavits in evidence: an affidavit of Lynda
Onorati affirmed February 27, 2018, a supplementary affidavit of Lynda Onorati
affirmed March 16, 2018, an affidavit of Carol Farquhar sworn March 16, 2018 and an
affidavit of Nisha Panchal affirmed March 6, 2018. As set out above, all of these
affidavits were provided to the Student.
28. The Tribunal concluded that this was an appropriate case in which to admit evidence
by way of affidavit pursuant to Rule 61 of the Rules. In the absence of the Student,
the affiants would not be subject to cross-examination even if they were called to
testify. We note that the Student had previously advised Assistant Discipline Counsel
that he did not intend to cross-examine the affiants at the hearing.
29. We did advise Assistant Discipline Counsel that if the panel had questions after
reviewing the affidavits, we might revisit our ruling that the hearing could proceed by
affidavit evidence only, but that did not prove necessary.

10

D. Finding of Liability
30. In April 2016, the Student applied for admission to University of Toronto Scarborough
Campus (UTSC) as a transfer undergraduate student through the Ontario University
Application Centre. In his application, the Student indicated that he attended St.
Mary’s University (“SMU”) in Halifax from March 2009 to May 2012. In support of his
application, the Student submitted what purported to be an official transcript from St.
Mary’s University. The Student was required to provide an official transcript to the
University from SMU as part of the application process.
31. The transcript submitted by the Student has no credits earned between April 2014 and
January 2015. The transcript also shows that the last credits earned by the Students
were during the fall term in 2015. The Student was asked to provide a signed and
dated letter indicating what he was doing between September 2014 and January 2015
and since December 2015.
32. On or about June 7, 2016, the Student uploaded an unsigned letter dated June 2,
2016 which said that between September 2014 and December 2015 he was sick and
returned home to China to seek medical attention. In terms of what he had been doing
since December 2015, the letter states: “After I finished my last course at St. Mary
[sic] which was on December 2015, I decided to start my application to U of T, I was
studying English at home and collecting document [sic] for my application.” The
University asked the Student to send a signed copy of his letter.
33. On or about June 16, 2016, the Student uploaded a signed letter dated June 15, 2016.
The content of the signed letter was the same as the unsigned letter dated June 2,
2016.

11

34. On the strength of his application, the Student was admitted to UTSC in the Honours
Bachelor of Arts program with a Major Program in Mathematics, and a Minor Program
in Economics for Management Studies. He accepted the offer of admission on June
29, 2016 and enrolled in courses for the Fall 2016 semester.
35. On July 11, 2016, Enrolment Services sent out an automated email to all applicants
for whom the University had not received official transcripts as required as a condition
of their offer of admission. Follow up emails were sent to the Student requesting an
official transcript on August 25, 2016 and October 26, 2016. The Student never
provided the University with an official transcript from SMU.
36. On October 18, 2016, the Student requested a transfer credit application and paid the
fee to have his credits from SMU assessed. On October 19, 2016, Carol Farquhar,
Admissions and Transfer Credit Assessor at UTSC, sent the Student a letter via email
advising him that his request for transfer credits would be finalized once the University
received detailed course outlines for specific courses he purportedly completed at
SMU and an official transcript from SMU. In response to Ms. Farquhar’s email, the
Student sent another copy of the same SMU transcript submitted with his application.
The transcript was sent from a scanner at UTSC. The Student never provided an
official transcript or course outlines.
37. The Student attended UTSC for one semester from September to December 2016.
He registered for three courses. He passed one course and 0.5 academic credits with
a cumulative grade point average of 0.67. The Student has not enrolled in any courses
at the University since December 2016.
38. On December 2, 2016, Lynda Onorati, Senior Admissions Specialist, sent an email to

12

Paul Dixon at SMU requesting that they verify the authenticity of the Student’s SMU
transcript. Mr. Dixon responded that the transcript submitted by the Student was a
forgery.
39. On January 15, 2018, Ms Onorati sent another email to Mr. Dixon at SMU asking if
the Student was ever registered at SMU. Ms Onorati attached to her email another
copy of the SMU transcript submitted by the Student with his application, which
includes the Student’s name, date of birth and a student number. On January 22,
2018, Dave Peters, Assistant Registrar, Systems and Records at SMU, confirmed that
SMU has “no student or applicant” with the Student’s name.
40. Evidence was also led that the Student applied to the UTSC as a high school applicant
in 2014 but was denied admission to the University.
41. Following deliberations at the conclusion of the liability hearing, the Tribunal found the
Student guilty on counts one, two and three. In light of our findings, the Provost
withdrew counts four and five. The Tribunal indicated we would provide reasons for
our decision. The following are those reasons.
42. Based on the evidence presented, the Tribunal found that the SMU transcript
submitted with the Student’s application for admission is a forgery. The emails from
Mr. Dixon and Mr. Peters provide clear evidence that the transcript is forged and the
Student was never registered at SMU. The Tribunal also found that the reference to
the Student attending SMU from September 2012 until December 2015 in his OUAC
application was false. Finally, the Tribunal found that the statement in the signed and
dated letter submitted electronically by the Student on June 15, 2016 that he went
back to China to study English “after I finished my last course at St. Mary [sic] which

13

was on December 2015” was also false.
43. For the offences charged to be made out, the University must not only prove that the
documents in question are forged or contain false statements. The University must
also prove that the student “knowingly” forged, falsified or made use of a forged or
falsified document.

As set out in the Code, whenever an offence requires the

University to prove it was done knowingly, “the offence shall likewise be deemed to
have been committed if the person ought reasonably to have known.”
44. In an email to Ms. Fletcher dated March 5, 2018, the Student suggested that he had
used a third party to assist him with his application to the University. He also suggested
that it was the third party who submitted the false information in the application. Had
the Student wanted to advance as a defence that he did not knowingly falsify or make
use of falsified documents, he could have done so. Having not participated in the
hearing, the University had no opportunity to test this claim.
45. Nonetheless, because the burden is on the University to prove the allegations, the
Tribunal was required to consider all the evidence to determine if the Student knew or
ought to have known the documents used in support of his application and transfer
credit application were forged or falsified.
46. The Tribunal found that the evidence clearly establishes that the Student knew the
SMU transcript submitted with his application was forged. As set out above, the
Student was never enrolled at SMU. Any document that suggested the Student
attended SMU and completed courses there was false. We are also satisfied that the
Student submitted the forged application himself or knew the forged transcript was
submitted with his application. Before he was offered admission to the University, he

14

was asked to account for his activities between September 2014 and January 2015
and after December 2015. The Student provided the University with a signed and
dated letter explaining what he had done during those relevant periods. In the letter,
he says he returned to China and studied English “after I finished my last course at
St. Mary [sic]”.

The reference to SMU in the letter was also false and clearly

establishes that the Student knew an SMU transcript with a gap between September
2014 and January 2015 was submitted with his application.
47. The Student also submitted the same forged transcript from SMU with his transfer
credit assessment after he enrolled at the University. This copy of the SMU transcript
was submitted from a scanner at UTSC, where the Student was enrolled.
48. During the transfer credit assessment process, the Assessment Officer sent him a
letter, which states, in part, as follows “You may be entitled for transfer credit for your
studies at St. Mary’s University but before a decision can be reached you must send
a final and official transcript to this office.” The letter also specifies that the Student
may be entitled to credit for six courses listed on the transcript submitted but detailed
course outlines were required for each court.
49. Had the SMU transcript been submitted with the Student’s application without his
knowledge, at some point during the admission or transfer credit process he would
have corrected the University’s understanding. He never did so. In fact, he
perpetuated the lie by submitting a letter that purports to explain why he was not at
SMU during the Fall 2014 term.

On the basis of all the evidence, we find that the

Student knowingly made a false statement on his application to UTSC that he
attended SMU, he knowingly submitted the forged SMU transcript with his application

15

and he knowingly submitted a falsified letter with his application stating he finished his
last course at SMU in December 2015.

E. Sanction
50. The Provost sought an order imposing the following sanctions on the Student:
• He be immediately suspended from the University for up to five years;
• The Tribunal recommend to the President of the University that he recommend
to the Governing Council that the Student be expelled from the University;
• A permanent notation be placed on the Student’s academic record and transcript;
and
• The decision be reported to the Provost, for publication of a notice of the decision
of the Tribunal and the sanctions imposed, with the Student’s name withheld.
51. After deliberations, the Tribunal accepted the Provost’s submissions on penalty and
signed an Order to that effect. These are our reasons for that decision.
52. It goes without saying that the falsification of an academic transcript or academic
record threatens the integrity of the University’s admission process and tarnishes the
reputation of the University. It misrepresents a student’s accomplishments and may
result in a student obtaining a benefit that he or she does not deserve, thereby
depriving a deserving student of that benefit.
53. In University of Toronto v. Y.X. (Case No. 952; April 4, 2018), the Tribunal dealt with
very similar allegations. In that case, the Tribunal articulated a number of principles
to be considered in cases involving the forgery or falsification of an academic record:
• Forgery or falsification of academic records is among the most serious academic

16

offences
• Forgery may be difficult to detect, so that deterrence is a significant consideration
• By its nature, forgery is only rarely the product of negligence or inadvertence.
More commonly, it is the product of planning and knowing participation.
54. It is clear from a number of recent decisions of this Tribunal that the usual sanction for
forgery or falsification of academic transcripts is a recommendation for expulsion: Z.Z.
(Case No. 958; April 17, 2018), A.B. (Case No. 917; June 13, 2017) at para. 18, J.F.
(Case No. 915; May 29, 2017) at para. 14, J.Z. (Case No. 928; June 5, 2017) at para.
22, and Y.X., supra at para. 39. It is an accepted principle of sentencing that like cases
should be treated alike.
55. We heard no evidence of any prior record of academic offences and we proceeded
on the basis that these were the Student’s first offences.
56. We received evidence that the Student failed to schedule a meeting with the Academic
Integrity Office when the matter was first under investigation. The Student did not
attend a Dean’s meeting.
57. Although the Student participated in a case management call in March, he did not
participate in the hearing. We, therefore, have no explanation for his conduct. We
also have no evidence of any mitigating circumstances that might exist.
58. Having no evidence or submissions from the Student, we have no basis for departing
from the sanction ordinarily imposed for these serious offences.
59. For these reasons, the Tribunal accepted the Provost’s submissions and signed an
Order imposing the following sanction:

17

1.

THAT the Student be immediately suspended from the University for a period of

up to five years;
ii.

THAT the Tribunal recommends to the President of the University that he

recommend to the Governing Council that the Student be expelled from the
University;
iii.

THAT a permanent notation shall be placed on the Student's academic record and

transcript; and

1v.

THAT this case shall be reported to the Provost for publication of a notice of the

decision of the Tribunal and the sanction or sanctions imposed , with the name of
the student withheld .

Prior to these Reasons being finalized, Justice Breese Davies was appointed a judge of the
Superior Court of Justice of Ontario. Therefore these reasons were issued by the remaining
two Panel members.
Dated at Toronto this

f+i-1 day of September, 2018

sor Ian Crandall, Faculty Panel Member

Ms. Morgan Watkins, Student Panel Member

17

i.

THAT the Student be immediately suspended from the University for a period of
up to five years;

ii.

THAT the Tribunal recommends to the President of the University that he
recommend to the Governing Council that the Student be expelled from the
University;

iii.

THAT a permanent notation shall be placed on the Student’s academic record and
transcript; and

iv.

THAT this case shall be reported to the Provost for publication of a notice of the
decision of the Tribunal and the sanction or sanctions imposed, with the name of
the student withheld.

Prior to these Reasons being finalized, Justice Breese Davies was appointed a judge of the
Superior Court of Justice of Ontario. Therefore these reasons were issued by the remaining
two Panel members.
Dated at Toronto this 10th day of September, 2018

__________________________________________
Professor Ian Crandall, Faculty Panel Member

__________________________________________
Ms. Morgan Watkins, Student Panel Member

