Report 386

DATE:

   August 10, 2016

PARTIES:

   V.S. (âthe Studentâ) v. the School of Graduate Studies (âSGSâ)

Hearing Date(s):

   Wednesday, May 25, 2016
   Thursday, June 16, 2016

Committee Members:

   Emily Orchard (Chair)
   Professor Paul Kingston, Faculty Governor
   Ms. Susan Froom, Student Governor

Secretary:

   Mr. Chris Lang, Director, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances
   (May 25, 2016)
   Ms. Tracey Gameiro, Associate Director, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty
   Grievances (June 16, 2016)

Appearances:

For the Student Appellant:

   Mr. V.S. (âthe Studentâ) (via Skype)
   Ms. Ejona Xega, Law Student, Downtown Legal Services
   Ms. Rabiya Mansoor, Observer, Downtown Legal Services (June 16, 2016)

For School of Graduate Studies:

   Mr. Rob Centa, Counsel
   Professor Jay Malcolm Graduate Coordinator, Faculty of Forestry (May
   25, 2016)
   Professor Mohini Sain, Dean, Faculty of Forestry, (May 25, 2016 - in
   person; June 16, 2016 - via Skype)
   Professor Sanjay Nayak, Director-General, CIPET (June 16, 2016 - via
   teleconference)
   Ms. Deborah Paes Graduate Administrator, Faculty of Forestry (May 25,
   2016)
   Ms. Emma Thacker, Associate Director, Graduate Affairs, School of
   Graduate Studies (May 25, 2016)
   Professor Luc de Nil, Vice-Dean, Students, SGS (May 25, 2016)
   Ms. Josie Lalonde, Associate Director, Student Services - Student
   Systems and Records, SGS (June 16, 2016)

   Appeal from the SGS Graduate Academic Appeals Boardâs (GAAB) decision
   to terminate the Studentâs enrolment in in the Faculty of Forestryâs
   Ph.D. program (the âProgramâ) and a request for reinstatement in the
   Program. The Student alleged that his progress in the Program was
   impeded by ongoing illness; a lack of adequate supervision; and/or his
   registration in the program was terminated prematurely.

   On the first ground of appeal, by the Studentâs own admission, he
   neither told his supervisors or anyone else at the University that he
   continued to be unwell nor submitted any documentation to support this
   claim. The Studentâs failure to disclose his illness absolved the
   Faculty of the duty to accommodate it.Â  The Panel found that there was
   no evidence that the Faculty knew, or ought to have known, that the
   Student was sick and the Faculty could not have accommodated an illness
   of which it was unaware. The lack of any kind of evidence supporting an
   ongoing illness was fatal to the Studentâs suggestion that his illness
   ought to have been accommodated by the Division and, ultimately, to the
   first ground of his appeal.

   On the second ground of appeal, the lack of adequate supervision, the
   Panel found it telling that the first time that this ground of appeal
   had been raised was when the Student commenced his appeal.Â  The Panel
   found that the failure to mention this issue with supervision was part
   of a much larger failure on the Studentâs part to communicate with his
   supervisors about his illness, his struggles in the program, and his
   need for more support.Â  The Panel refused to interfere with the GAABâs
   evaluation of the Studentâs performance in the absence of new evidence
   that might warrant the Panelâs interference.

   Finally, the Panel held that while it may feel compassion towards one
   adversely affect by its decision, it could not modify the GAABâs
   decision on this ground.

   Appeal dismissed.
   [1]View Report

References

   1. file:///media/12632
