Case 718

DATE:

   February 25, 2015

PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v O.K.

Hearing Date(s):

   November 8, 2013 & January 24, 2014

Panel Members:

   Julie Rosenthal, Chair
   Markus Bussmann, Faculty Member
   Adel Boulazreg, Student Member

Appearances:

   Tina Lie, Assistant Discipline Counsel
   Janet Poole, Course Instructor
   Sara Osenton, Graduate Student
   Lisa Smith, Academic Integrity Officer
   Don Dewees, Deanâs Designate

In Attendance:

   Sinead Cutt, Administrative Assistant, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty
   Grievances

   The Student did not attend the hearing but the Panel accepted several
   affidavits that the Student had been notified, by email and post, in
   accordance with the Rules of Practice and Procedure of the University
   Tribunal. The Panel proceeded after a fifteen minute wait.

   Student charged with three offences under s. B.i.1(b) , three offences
   under s. B.i.1(d) , and in the alternative, four offences under s.
   B.i.3(b) of the Code . The charges related to four acts in one class.

   The first set of charges related to an assignment on class readings.
   The instructor testified that she was notified by an assistant that the
   Studentâs paper was very similar to a scholarly article, and upon
   further research by the instructor, another article was found with
   virtually identical sentences. The second set related to a make-up quiz
   the Student took with a graduate student supervising. The supervisor
   testified that she saw the Student trying to hide something under her
   paper. When the supervisor reached for her paper, the Student pulled
   them away. The supervisor testified there was another smaller paper
   with text in a very small font on the paper. The third and fourth sets
   related to a draft and final draft of an essay the Student was required
   to complete for the class. The instructor was suspicious of the
   Studentâs paper as it was not to be a research paper and the Student
   discussed ideas that had not been mentioned in class. Further, the
   writing styles of the Studentâs paper and the in class work were
   markedly different. Finally, the author of the paper in Microsoft Word
   was not the Student, it was a man who shared the name of a professional
   essay writer.

   The Student met with the Deanâs Designate and the course instructor
   where she admitted to plagiarism on the first charge. Regarding the
   second charge, the Student admitted to typing the notes but claimed she
   did not intend to use them and lacked intent to cheat. Regarding the
   third and fourth charges, the Student admitted to having a peer editor
   help her with her essay and it was clear she did not understand some of
   the words used in her essay. When the name of the author was brought up
   the Student initially denied knowing him before admitting that he
   helped with the paper.

   The Panel found the Student guilty of plagiarism on the first charge as
   she had represented ideas that were not her own as her own. Â The Panel
   also found the Student guilty on the second charge for possessing an
   unauthorized aid. On the third and fourth charges the Panel did not
   find enough of a connection between the name of the author and the
   professional essay drafter to find that the Student had purchased the
   essay. Further, they did not find that the Student was guilty of
   plagiarism as she did not take the ideas without permission, and found
   plagiarism had to have this as an element because the definition in the
   Code contained the word âpurloiningâ. The Panel did find the Student
   guilty of using unauthorized aid on the third and fourth charges and
   the alternative charges were dropped.

   The Panel considered the penalty factors from the Mr. C case,
   considering the Studentâs partial admission and high likelihood for
   repetition. The Panel also noted the seriousness of the offence, need
   for deterrence, and detriment to the University. The Panel considered
   like cases with a prior offence and found the penalties to range from
   four to five year suspensions.

   The Panel ordered a penalty of a zero in the courses in question, a
   suspension of five years, a notation be placed on her academic records
   until graduation, and that the case be reported to the Provost for
   publication.

   NOTE: This case was appealed by the Student (2015-2016);
   theÂ appealÂ was denied.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12870
