Case 684 - Appeal

   [1]Case 684 - Finding
   [2]Case 684 - Sanction

DATE:

   June 3, 2014

PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v C.A.M.

Hearing Date(s):

   December 3, 2013

Panel Members:

   Patricia Jackson, Chair
   Elizabeth Peter, Faculty Member
   Beth Martin, Student Member
   Michael Dick, Student Member

Appearances:

   David Cousins, for the Appellant
   Robert Centa, Assistant Discipline Counsel

In Attendance:

   The Student
   Majority - Student convicted with one offence under s. B.i.1(a) and the
   Panel imposed a final grade of zero in the course, a recommendation
   that the Student be expelled from the University, a suspension of five
   years or until the Governing Council makes a decision on expulsion,
   whichever comes first, and ordered that the case be reported to the
   Provost for publication. The Student appeals the sentence imposed and
   asserts it was excessively harsh having regard to a number of personal
   factors, but did not appeal the conviction.
   The conviction relates to the Studentâs second offense where the
   Student attempted to receive credit from a test written by another
   student. The Student admitted to the offence at the Deanâs meeting but
   withdrew his admission when he was informed about the sanction. The
   Student was partially represented by counsel at the liability hearing.
   Ultimately, the original panel did not believe the Studentâs evidence
   and found him guilty. At the hearing on sanction the Student was no
   longer represented by counsel. The University agued it was an
   aggravating factor for the Student to suggest in defense that there was
   a âsystem errorâ but the Panel disagreed and stated that one must be
   able to bring forward evidence without fear of reprisals.
   On this appeal the Student sought to bring fresh evidence relating to
   academic, work, and of a personal and familial nature. The Panel
   considered s. E.8 of the Code , theÂ case and the test for admitting
   fresh evidence on an appeal. The test includes if the evidence was
   available, relevant, and credible, was there a reasonable explanation
   for the failure to adduce it, and could the evidence have reasonably
   been expected to have affected the initial decision. The Panel allowed
   the evidence to be brought but disqualified all of the evidence because
   it was irrelevant and would not have affected the decision below.
   The Majority affirmed its jurisdiction to alter panel decisions under
   s. E.4 of the Code . The Majority cited cases to modify a decision
   where there is an error of law or fact and when the sanction is
   inconsistent with other decisions. The Majority considered the factors
   in the Mr. C case and stated that the two substantial factors in this
   case were the seriousness of the offense and detriment to the
   University, both of which the Dean believed would have been addressed
   with a mark of zero. The issue then was whether the remaining factors
   warranted an escalation to expulsion. The Majority concluded that the
   Studentâs conduct warranted an escalated penalty but that it did not
   warrant expulsion. The Majority allowed the appeal and imposed a final
   grade of zero in the course, a suspension of five years from the date
   from the order, a permanent notation on the Studentâs transcript, and
   ordered that the case be reported to the Provost for publication.
   Dissent â Elizabeth Peter
   The Dissent disagreed with the weight given to the decanal and tribunal
   penalties and stated that little weight should be given to decanal
   decisions. Further, the Dissent felt that the Studentâs evidence was
   not an issue as all members of the Tribunal and Appeals Board believed
   it to be false. The Studentâs character was determined to be dishonest
   by the Tribunal and issues of credibility should attract deference.
   Taking into account the factors in the Mr. C case, the Student showed
   no remorse, committed a planned and deliberate offense and provided no
   extenuating circumstances to warrant a more lenient sanction. The
   Dissent would dismiss the appeal.
   [3]View Case

References

   1. http://live-the-office-of-the-governing-council.pantheonsite.io/media/12805
   2. http://live-the-office-of-the-governing-council.pantheonsite.io/media/12806
   3. file:///media/12853
