Case No.: 948
THE UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
IN THE MATTER OF charges of academic dishonesty file on September 14, 2017, and revised on June
29, 2018,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters, 1995,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Act, 1971, S.O. 1971, c. 56 as amended S.O. 1978,
c. 88

BETWEEN:
UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO

- and -

S

(

W

INTERIM DECISION
Hearing Date: September 12, 2018
Members of the Panel:
Mr. Nader R. Hasan, Co-Chair
Professor Pascal van Lieshout, Faculty Panel Member
Ms. Yusra Qasi, Student Panel Member
Appearances:
Ms. Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland
Ms. Lauren Pearce, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland
Mr. Lorne Sabsay, Counsel for Ms. S
(
W
, the Student
Ms. Jennifer Jackson, Assistant to Mr. Lorne Sabsay, Counsel for the Student
Ms. S
(
W
, the Student (via Skype)
Hearing Secretary:
Ms. Krista Osbourne, Administrative Clerk & Hearing Secretary, Appeals, Discipline and
Faculty Grievances, University of Toronto

2

[1] This is an academic discipline matter in which the Student, S

(

W

(“the Student”), has been charged with academic misconduct. The charges were
filed by the Provost of the University of Toronto (“the University”) against the Student
under the University’s Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters, 1995 (“the Code”)
on September 14, 2017. At the crux of the charges is the allegation that the Student
submitted fraudulent transcripts to support her transfer application to the University.
The Student vigorously denies those allegations. There is no dispute among the
parties that fraudulent transcripts were submitted on the Student’s behalf. The only
dispute is whether the Student was aware of the fraudulent nature of the transcripts.
[2] These are the decisions in relation to motions brought at the hearing held on

September 12, 2018.
[3] The September 12, 2018 motions dealt with:

(a)

The Student’s motion to preclude the Provost’s witness, Mr. Yifan
Liu, from testifying in these proceedings;

(b)

The Provost’s motions seeking an order declaring that:
(i) the Judgment in Mr. Liu’s criminal trial, per Maxwell J., is
admissible in the hearing on the merits of the charges against the
Student;
(ii) portions of the transcripts from Mr. Liu’s criminal trial, attached to
the Provost’s Notice of Motion as Appendix “A” (the “Transcripts”)
are admissible in the hearing on the merits of the charges against
the Student; and
(iii) the Transcripts are admissible for the purpose of impeaching Mr.
Liu or the Student during their respective cross-examinations.

3

[4] Oral reasons dismissing the Student’s motion were delivered on September 12,

2018. I advised the parties at that time that I may edit or supplement those
reasons in writing.
[5] I reserved on the Provost’s motions after reviewing the facta, motion records and

hearing oral submissions from counsel for the parties. 1
(A)

The Motion to Preclude Mr. Liu from Testifying
[6] The Provost intends to call as a witness Mr. Yifan Liu, the ex-boyfriend of the

Student.

Mr. Liu is expected to testify about the extent of the Student’s

knowledge about the fraudulent transcripts. Mr. Sabsay, counsel to the Student,
asserts that it would be a violation of the Student’s rights under the Canadian
Charter of Rights and Freedoms (the “Charter”) to have Mr. Liu testify. He also
submits it would violate her rights under the Ontario Human Rights Code. He
asserts not only that a portion of Mr. Liu’s evidence should be excluded but that
the Provost should be precluded from calling him altogether. He submits that
allowing him to testify would amount to a violation of the Student’s Charter rights.
[7] This motion presented a threshold issue of whether the Charter applies to

university discipline proceedings.

The Provost vigorously contests the

application of the Charter to these proceedings.

As I indicated in my oral

reasons, it is not necessary to decide that issue because even if the Charter did
apply, generally, the Student’s motion must be dismissed.
[8] The Student’s motion is novel in almost every respect, which Mr. Sabsay

appears to concede. There is no reasonable dispute that Mr. Liu’s evidence
would be relevant, as his proposed evidence goes to the heart of the issues:
whether the Student had knowledge of the fraudulent nature of the transcripts.
[9] Mr. Sabsay provided no authority for the proposition that the Tribunal has the

power to preclude a witness with relevant evidence from testifying because of the

1

Although these motions were argued before a full panel, the decision was made by the
Chair alone, as these motions involve questions of law.

4

emotional impact that her or his testimony may have on another party. Nor am I
aware of any such authority.
[10]

I note also that while Mr. Sabsay asserts that the Student would be

traumatized by having Mr. Liu testify, Mr. Sabsay has not tendered any evidence
in that regard (i.e., affidavit or viva voce evidence from a physician, from the
Student or from any other person that would support the proposition that she
would be traumatized).
[11]

Without an evidentiary foundation, it is difficult to contemplate how such

extraordinary relief could be granted, or what measures might properly mitigate
or limit the amount of emotion duress that the Student would face. Yet even if
one were to assume that having Mr. Liu testify would be difficult or even
traumatic for the Student, the Panel is not persuaded that having him testify
would amount to a Charter rights violation or a Human Rights Code violation. At
least not one that could not be accommodated in some way.
[12]

After the conclusion of my oral reasons, I invited Mr. Sabsay to seek

alternative relief in the form of accommodation of the Student to deal with the
anticipated emotional duress.

Following the hearing, I was advised that the

parties had agreed that the Student could be accommodated. Since the Student
is appearing in these proceedings by way of Skype, the parties agree that Mr. Liu
should testify immediately below the screen upon which the Student appears.
Given the position of the camera, neither of Mr. Liu nor the Student would be
able to see each other. This is a sensible approach.
(B)

Admissibility of the Judgment from Mr. Liu’s Criminal Trial
[13]

The Provost seeks admission of the Judgment from Mr. Liu’s criminal trial.

The Provost is not asking the Tribunal to adopt Maxwell J.’s findings or analysis
in relation to the Student’s credibility.

Instead, the Provost is tendering the

Judgment to provide the Tribunal with “contextual information that is relevant to
these Tribunal Proceedings”.

5

[14]

The Provost relies principally on the Supreme Court of Canada’s decision

in British Columbia (Attorney General) v. Malik, 2 and on s. 15(1) of the Statutory
Powers and Procedure Act (“SPPA”).
[15]

The Provost cites Malik for the proposition that a judgment in a prior civil

or criminal case may be admissible as evidence in a subsequent proceeding,
including administrative or disciplinary proceedings, as proof of its findings and
conclusions.
[16]

Malik is of limited applicability. The primary finding and conclusion of

Maxwell J.’s Judgment is that the Crown had not proven its case against Mr. Liu
beyond a reasonable doubt and that Mr. Liu must be acquitted. Nobody disputes
that this was the result of the criminal proceeding. (If that does become a
contested issue of fact, then the Judgment can be admitted for that limited
purpose.)
[17]

It is true that, in the context of rendering the Judgment, Maxwell J. did

make adverse findings of credibility against the Student (and, to some extent, Mr.
Liu). Generally, one trier of fact’s assessment of a witness’ credibility in one
proceeding is not relevant to another tribunal’s assessment of that witness’
credibility in a subsequent proceeding. 3

It is for this Tribunal to independently

assess and come to its own conclusions with respect to the Student’s credibility
— a fact that the Provost appears to acknowledge. 4
[18]

The Provost states that it does not seek to rely on the Judgment for the

findings on the Student’s credibility, but rather for “context”. Upon reviewing the
Provost’s submissions and during oral argument, it was not clear to me what the
Provost could mean by “context”. As the Supreme Court notes in Malik, to the
extent that a party seeks to rely on a previous judgment, it must specify the
purpose for which it is tendered, and that purpose must be a permissible one.

2

British Columbia (Attorney General) v. Malik, 2011 SCC 18.
R. v. Ghorvei, 1999 CanLII 2475 at para. 31 (ON CA).
4
Factum of the Provost, para. 20.
3

6

Tendering a judgment for “context” lacks the specificity to allow this Tribunal to
make an informed decision as to whether the purported purpose is a permissible
one.
[19]

I must also consider subsection 15(1) of the SPPA. That section provides

in relevant part:
15. (1) Subject to subsections (2) and (3), a tribunal may admit as
evidence at a hearing, whether or not given or proven under oath or
affirmation or admissible as evidence in a court,
(a) any oral testimony; and
(b) any document or other thing,
relevant to the subject-matter of the proceeding and may act on such
evidence, but the tribunal may exclude anything unduly repetitious.
[20]

Section 15(1) thus provides for the relaxation of the rules of evidence and

gives greater scope to the admission of evidence by a tribunal.
[21]

The section is permissive; it affords a tribunal latitude in admitting

evidence that may not be admissible in a criminal or civil proceeding.
[22]

While section 15(1) enlarges the ambit of admissible evidence, it is not

without limitation. The evidence must be relevant to the proceeding. It must also
not lead to unfairness. 5
[23]

In determining whether admission of the evidence could lead to

unfairness, I can be guided by those rules of evidence that are aimed at ensuring
fairness in legal proceedings. Under the rules of evidence, even where evidence
is otherwise admissible, it can be excluded where its probative value is
outweighed by its prejudicial effect. 6
[24]

The risk of prejudice here is significant. The criminal courts are expert in

the evaluation of credibility of witnesses.
5
6

Maxwell J. assessed and made

Bartashunas v. Psychology Examiners, [1992] O.J. No. 1845 (Ont. Div. Cut.).
R. v. Seaboyer, [1991] 2 S.C.R. 577.

7

negative credibility findings with respect to the Student. This Tribunal will be
asked to perform a similar exercise. But Maxwell J.’s findings have the potential
to overwhelm this Tribunal. Although the members of the Tribunal would no
doubt direct themselves to not be unduly influenced by Maxwell J.’s findings,
given the overlap between the issues, the risk of prejudice is high.
[25]

On the other side of the ledger, I must consider probative value. As noted

above, one trier’s of fact’s assessment of a witness’ credibility is not relevant to a
subsequent tribunal’s assessment of that witness’ credibility. It is for this Tribunal
to independently assess and come to its own conclusions with respect to the
Student’s credibility.
[26]

Given its slight probative value and its high potential for prejudice, the

Judgment is inadmissible.
(C)

Admissibility of the Transcripts from Mr. Liu’s Criminal Trial

[27]

Different considerations apply with respect to the Provost’s motion to

tender the Transcripts from Mr. Liu’s criminal trial. Although the Transcripts are
hearsay for purposes of these proceedings, the Provost submits that they satisfy
the “party admissions” and “statements against interest” exceptions to the rule
against hearsay. I agree. It is established law that an out-of-court statement
made by a party to a proceeding that is adverse to her or his interest in that
proceeding may be tendered by an opposing party to prove the truth of the facts
contained in the statement.
[28]

Even if I am wrong in the regard, I would admit the Transcripts under s.

15(1) of the SPPA. In my view, the balancing of probative value and prejudicial
effect with respect to the Transcripts is different from the Judgment.

The

probative value of admitting the Transcripts thus outweigh its prejudicial effects.

8

[29]

Although Transcripts are hearsay statements, they contain the hallmarks

of reliability. 7

The Transcripts are the testimony from taken under oath and

subject to cross-examination.

The Transcripts therefore have the indicia of

reliability. They are reliable evidence of what the witnesses did in fact say about
matters that are directly relevant to these proceedings.
[30]

Further, as counsel for the Provost points out, the Student is not a

compellable witness in these proceedings. She may or may not testify. If she
chooses not to testify, then the Transcripts from Mr. Liu’s criminal trial would be
the only evidence in these proceedings of what the Student has said about the
nature and genesis of the fraudulent academic transcripts — a key issue in these
proceedings.
[31]

In light of the foregoing, the risk that the admission of the Transcripts

would result in unfairness is attenuated, and I may exercise my discretion under
s. 15(1) to admit those statements.
(D)

Use of Transcripts for Impeachment Purposes
[32]

The Provost seeks an order that the Transcripts can be used for the

purposes of impeaching the Student should she choose to testify.
[33]

It is well-established at common law and under the Ontario Evidence Act,8

that parties may be cross-examined on their prior statements.

A witness,

including a respondent charged with misconduct (or even a criminal accused),
can be cross-examined on prior statements.

Cross-examination on a prior

inconsistent statement may be used to impeach the credibility of the witness, or
in an attempt to have the witness adopt the prior statement as true. 9

7

See R. v. Bradshaw, 2017 SCC 35 at paras. 26-58 (for discussion of factors to consider in
determining whether out-of-court statements are sufficiently reliable to overcome hearsay
dangers).
8
Evidence Act, R.S.O. 1990, c. E.23, s. 21.
9
R. v. Hill, [2015] O.J. No. 4758 at para. 43 (C.A.).

9

[34]

There is no basis here for interfering with these long-established principles

and none has been put forward.
(E)

Decision and Order
[35]

Ms. W

’s motion to preclude Mr. Liu from testifying is dismissed.

[36]

The Provost’s motion is allowed in part:
a. The Judgment is inadmissible.
b. The Transcripts are admissible in the hearing on the merits of the charges
against the Student.
c. The Transcripts may be used for the purpose of cross-examination.

Dated at Toronto, this 21st day of December, 2018

Nader R. Hasan, Chair

