Case 948 - Interim Decision

   [1]Case 948 - Finding
   [2]Case 948 - Sanction
   DATE : December 21, 2018
   PARTIES : University of Toronto v. S.W.
   HEARING DATE : September 12, 2018

   Panel Members :
   Mr. Nader R. Hasan, Co. Chair
   Professor Pascal van Lieshout, Faculty Panel Member
   Ms. Yusra Qazi, Student Panel Member

   Appearances :
   Ms. Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg
   Rothstein LLP
   Ms. Lauren Pearce, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland
   Rosenberg Rothstein LLP
   Mr. Lorne Sabsay, Counsel for the Student
   Ms. Jennifer Jackson, Assistant to Mr. Lorne Sabsay, Counsel for the
   Student
   S.W., the Student (via Skype)

   In Attendance :
   Ms. Krista Osbourne, Administrative Clerk and Hearing Secretary,
   Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances

   The Student was charged with academic misconduct under the Code of
   Behaviour on Academic Matters, 1995 (the â Code â) on the basis that
   she allegedly submitted fraudulent transcripts to support her transfer
   application to the University. There was no dispute between the parties
   that fraudulent transcripts were submitted on the Studentâs behalf; the
   dispute was whether the Student was aware of the fraudulent nature of
   the transcripts. The Provost intended to call as a witness Y.L., the
   ex-boyfriend of the Student, who was expected to testify about the
   Studentâs knowledge of the fraudulent transcripts. In advance of the
   hearing on the merits, the Student brought a motion before the Panel to
   preclude Y.L. from testifying in the proceedings. The Provost in turn
   sought an order declaring that the judgment and portions of the
   transcript from Y.L.âs criminal trial be admissible in the hearing on
   the merits of the charges against the Student. The Provost further
   sought an order that the transcripts from Y.L.âs criminal trial be
   admissible for the purpose of impeaching Y.L. or the Student during
   their respective cross-examinations before the Panel.

   Counsel for the Student asserted that it would be a violation of the
   Studentâs rights under the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms (the
   â Charter â) and the Ontario Human Rights Code to have Y.L. testify,
   and that not only should a portion of Y.L.âs evidence be excluded, but
   that the Provost should be precluded from calling him altogether.
   Counsel for the Student argued that the Student would be traumatized by
   having Y.L. testify. The Panel noted that this motion presented a
   threshold issue of whether the Charter applies to University discipline
   proceedings, which assertion the Provost contested. The Panel held that
   it was not necessary to decide this issue because even if the Charter
   did apply, the Studentâs motion must be dismissed. It noted that Y.Lâs
   evidence went to the heart of the issues (whether the Student had
   knowledge of the fraudulent nature of the transcripts) and that Counsel
   for the Student had provided no authority for the proposition that the
   Tribunal had the power to preclude a witness with relevant evidence due
   to the emotional impact on another party. Neither did Counsel for the
   Student tender any evidence from a physician or otherwise that
   supported the proposition that the Student would be traumatized by
   having Y.L. testify. The Panel invited Counsel for the Student to seek
   alternative relief in the form of accommodation for the Student to deal
   with the anticipated emotional issues, which accommodation was
   ultimately reached between the parties.

   With regard to the admissibility of the judgment from Y.L.âs criminal
   trial (in which adverse findings of credibility were made against the
   Student and to some extent Y.L.), the Panel noted that generally, a
   trier of fact's assessment of a witness' credibility in one proceeding
   is not relevant to another tribunal's assessment of that witness'
   credibility in a subsequent proceeding. The Panel was satisfied that it
   was for it to independently assess and come to its own conclusions with
   respect to the Student's credibility. It noted subsection 15(1) of the
   Statutory Powers and Procedure Act (the â SPPA â) which permits a
   tribunal to admit as evidence at a hearing any oral testimony and
   document relevant to the proceeding, and to exclude anything unduly
   repetitious. The Panel noted that this subsection affords it latitude
   in admitting evidence that may not be admissible in a civil or criminal
   proceeding, but that evidence must be relevant and must not lead to
   unfairness. Guided by the rules of evidence, under which evidence can
   be excluded where its probative value is outweighed by its prejudicial
   effect, the Panel noted that the risk of prejudice here was
   significant. Although the Panel would no doubt direct itself not to be
   unduly influenced by the judgment delivered in the criminal trial, the
   findings in that trial had the potential to overpower the Panel. Given
   the slight probative value and the high potential for prejudice, the
   Panel ruled that the judgment was inadmissible.

   The Panel was satisfied that different considerations applied to the
   transcripts from Y.L.âs criminal trial, noting that it is established
   law that an out-of-court statement made by a party to a proceeding that
   is adverse to their interest in that proceeding may be tendered by an
   opposing party to prove the truth of the facts contained in the
   statement. Even if it were wrong in this regard, the Panel decided, it
   would admit the transcripts under subsection 15(1) of the SPPA . The
   Panel stated that the probative value of admitting the transcripts
   outweighed its prejudicial effects and noted that although transcripts
   are hearsay statements, they contain the hallmarks of reliability. The
   Panel also noted that the Student was not a compellable witness in the
   proceedings before it and if she chose not to testify, the transcripts
   would be the only evidence of what she had said about the fraudulent
   academic transcripts. The Panel therefore ruled that the transcripts be
   admitted.

   Finally, in ordering that the transcripts could be used for
   cross-examination, the Panel stated that it had no basis to interfere
   with the long established principle that parties may be cross-examined
   on their prior statements. The Panel accepted that cross-examination on
   a prior inconsistent statement may be used to impeach the credibility
   of the witness.

   The Studentâs motion to preclude Y.L. from testifying was dismissed.
   The Universityâs motion was allowed in part; the judgment from Y.L.âs
   criminal trial was held inadmissible, but the transcripts were held to
   be admissible in the hearing on the merits of the charges against the
   Student and were permitted to be used for the purpose of
   cross-examination.
   [3]View Case

References

   1. https://governingcouncil.utoronto.ca/sites/default/files/university-tribunal-decisions/948_Redacted.pdf
   2. https://governingcouncil.utoronto.ca/sites/default/files/university-tribunal-decisions/Case%20948%20-%20Sanction.pdf
   3. file:///media/28798
