Case #559

   DATE: October 16, 2009
   PARTIES: University of Toronto v. G.H.J.L.
   Hearing Date(s): December 16, 2009
   Panel Members:
   Ms. Roslyn Tsao, Chair
   Prof. Louis Florence, Faculty Member
   Mr. Jamon Camisso, Student Member
   Appearances:
   Ms. Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel for the University
   Ms. Betty-Ann Campbell, Law Clerk
   Prof. Janet Poole, Department of East Asian Studies
   In Attendance:
   Prof. Donald Dewees, Dean's Designate, Office of Academic Integrity
   Dr. Tamara Jones, Academic Integrity Officer, Office of Student
   Academic Integrity
   Mr. Christopher Lang, Director, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty
   Grievances
   Ms. Natalie Ramtahal, Coordinator, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty
   Grievances

   Trial Division â s. B.i.1(b), B.i.1(d) , and B.i.3(b) of Code â
   unauthorized aid â plagiarism â academic dishonesty or misconduct â
   Student did not attend - reasonable notice â s.6(3)(b) of the SPPA â
   reasonable notice given â clear warnings against plagiarism given to
   Student â finding of guilt â University submission on penalty accepted
   â notation length varied â grade of zero in course; two year
   suspension; two year transcript notation; and report to Provost

   The Student was charged under B.i.1(b), B.i.1(d) , and, alternatively,
   B.i.3(b) of the Code . The Student did not attend the hearing. The
   University met the onus of showing that âreasonable noticeâ of the
   Hearing had been given to the Student, pursuant to the Code and the
   Statutory Powers Procedure Act ( SPPA ) . The Tribunal found that
   reasonable notice was provided to the Student and that a warning
   pursuant to s.6(3)(b) of the SPPA had been provided to the Student. The
   Professor testified that clear warnings against plagiarism were given,
   and that parts of the Studentâs answers on a quiz contained material
   taken verbatim from online sources. The Tribunal found the Student
   guilty of plagiarism under B.i.1(d) and dropped the two other charges.
   The Tribunal varied the Universityâs request for an extended three year
   transcript notation, and imposed a two year notation given that it was
   a first time offence and given that the Student was in second year. The
   Tribunal imposed a penalty of a zero in the course; a two year
   suspension; a two year transcript notation; and an order for
   publication.

   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12998
