Case 01-02-06

DATE:

   April 24, 2002

PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v. D.F.

Hearing Date(s):

   April 2, 2002

Panel Members:

   Sherry Liang, Co-Chair
   Philip Berger, faculty member
   Penny Schincariol, student member

Appearances:

   D. F., representing himself
   Linda R. Rothstein and Robert A. Centa, for the University

In Attendance:

   Ian McDonald, Associate Dean, UTSC
   Sherylin Biason, UTSC
   Heather Pagan, UTSC

   Student charged with two offences under s. B.ii.1(a)(iv) and one
   offence under s. B.i.3(b) of the Code. The charges related to
   allegations that the Student attempted to bribe a course instructor in
   return for an increased course grade. The Student pleaded guilty to
   three charges. The Panel considered the email in which the alleged
   bribe was communicated and found the Student guilty of the two offences
   under s. B.ii.1(a)(iv) and not guilty under s. B.i.3(b) of the Code
   because the Student had been found guilty of academic misconduct. The
   Student had been sanctioned previously for a prior academic offence.
   The Panel found that general deterrence was not critical on the facts
   of the case because the type of conduct was likely rare. The Panel
   found the Studentâs conduct to be serious, although it did not place
   the conduct at the farthest end of the spectrum. The Panel found
   extenuating facts in the Studentâs favour to justify leniency. The
   Panel found that a five-year suspension along with a ten-year notation
   was substantial and that the ten-year notation would serve as a
   reminder and would reduce the likelihood of re-occurrence. The Panel
   found that given the Studentâs young age, there was potential for
   rehabilitation to a standard of academic conduct compatible with the
   Universityâs expectations. The Panel imposed a five-year suspension; a
   ten-year notation on the Studentâs academic record and transcript; and
   that a report be issued to the Provost. The Panel recommended that the
   Student seek professional guidance and counseling during his
   suspension.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/30724
