Report 370

DATE:

   March 27, 2014

PARTIES:

   Ms. V.M. (the Student) v. the School of Graduate Studies

Hearing Date(s):

   March 25, 2014

Committee Members:

   Ms. Andrea Russell (Chair)
   Professor Elizabeth Cowper
   Ms. Mainawati Rambali

Secretary:

   Mr. Christopher Lang, Director, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty
   Grievances

Appearances:

For the Student Appellant:

   Ms. V.M., the Appellant (âthe Studentâ)

For the School of Graduate Studies:

   Mr. Robert Centa, Lawyer for the Division
   Ms. Jane Alderdice, Director, Quality Assessment and Governance
   Professor Luc De Nil, Deanâs Designate
   Professor Harry Elsholtz (LMP)

   Appeal from the SGSâs decision to terminate the Studentâs registration
   in the Ph.D program in the Department of Laboratory Medicine and
   Pathobiology. The Student appealed the termination to the Graduate
   Academic Appeals Board (GAAB), which dismissed the appeal. The Student
   then appealed to the Academic Appeals Committee. The Committee
   dismissed the appeal. The Committee noted that the Student raised no
   new evidence in her oral or written submissions that was either
   persuasive or relevant to the Appeal; all of the evidence raised at the
   hearing had either been addressed in the GAABâs decision, or was
   irrelevant to the question of the reasonableness of the GAAB decision
   and of the SGSâs decision to terminate the Studentâs registration. The
   Committee found that the Studentâs allegation that the GAAB was biased
   against her was completely unsubstantiated, noting that the GAAB
   decision was thoroughly argued, reasonable, and substantiated by the
   evidence. The Committee noted that it found the decision of the SGS to
   terminate the Studentâs registration to be entirely reasonable,
   particularly as the record indicated that this decision came only after
   numerous clear written and verbal warnings to the Student that her
   academic standing in her program was in jeopardy. The Committee also
   noted that the SGSâs policy at issue in this appeal was reasonable and
   its application of the policy was justified in this case. Appeal
   dismissed.
   [1]View Report

References

   1. file:///media/12617
