Report 377

DATE:

   December 11, 2014

PARTIES:

   Mr. F.Z. (the Student) v. the University of Toronto

Hearing Date(s):

   October 30, 2014

Committee Members:

   Ms. Sara Faherty, Chair
   Ms. Caitlin Campisi
   Professor William Gough

Secretary:

   Ms. Sinead Cutt, Office of Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances

Appearances:

For the Student Appellant:

   Mr. F.Z., the Appellant (âthe Studentâ)
   Mr. Patrick Hartford, Downtown Legal Services

For the Faculty of Arts and Science:

   Professor Anne-Marie Brousseau, Associate Dean, Undergraduate Programs,
   Faculty of Arts and Science
   Professor Adrienne Hood, Associate Dean, Undergraduate Programs,
   Victoria College, History
   Dr. Helen Slade, Student Life Coordinator, Student Retention Services
   at University of Toronto
   Ms. Cheryl Shook, Registrar, Woodsworth College

   Request for a second deferral of an examination. The Student was more
   than 30 minutes late for his deferred exam. The Student appealed to the
   Academic Appeals Board (AAB), citing five separate reasons for his
   lateness (his need to eat between his two exams, his right to contest
   an adverse decision made by an invigilator at his morning exam,
   extremely inclement weather, and public transportation timing). The AAB
   accepted the Studentâs explanation for his lateness, but concluded that
   the Studentâs decision not to seek any immediate remedy was
   unreasonable and denied the appeal.

   The Student then appealed to the Academic Appeals Committee. The
   Committee noted that the Student had a long history of petitions and
   problems in the Faculty. The Committee noted the onus on the Student to
   behave responsibly and with good judgment. The Committee stated that
   the most reasonable step for the Student to have taken would have been
   to go to the Registrarâs office once he realized that he was late for
   the examination; however, given the missing instructions addressing
   what steps students should take if more than fifteen minutes late for
   an exam from the Academic Calendar, that was not the only reasonable
   step the Student could have taken (especially given the general rules
   for petitions for examinations, which set the deadline for petitions as
   being within one week of the end of the examination period). The
   Committee concluded that strictly following the written policy as it
   appeared in the Calendar, the Student should be permitted to sit for
   his exam. Appeal allowed.
   [1]View Report

References

   1. file:///media/12691
