Case #802

   DATE: September 28, 2015
   PARTIES: University of Toronto v Y.G.
   Hearing Date(s): July 14, 2015
   Panel Members:
   Sarah Kraicer, Chair
   Joel Kirsh, Faculty Member
   Simon Czajkowski, Student Member
   Appearances:
   Robert Centa, Assistant Discipline Counsel
   Emily Home, Summer Student, Paliare Roland
   In Attendance:
   Martha Harris, Academic Integrity Officer
   Anthony Lombardo, Instructor of the Course
   Christopher Lang, Office of Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances
   Yehuda Levi, Observer, Office of Appeals, Discipline and Faculty
   Grievances
   Trial Division â s. B.i.1(d) of the Code â plagiarism â Student created
   the Essay by stringing together copied blocks of text from unattributed
   sources â hearing not attended â reasonable notice of hearing provided
   pursuant to the Statutory Powers Procedure Act â finding on evidence â
   finding on guilt â University submission on penalty accepted â grade
   assignment of zero in the Course; 2-year suspension; 3-year notation on
   the Studentâs academic record and transcript; case reported to Provost
   for publication
   Student charged under s. B.i.1(d) , s. B.i.1(f) and, in the
   alternative, s. B.i.3(b) of the Code . The charges related to
   allegations that the Student knowingly represented the ideas, the
   expression of ideas, and verbatim or nearly verbatim text from articles
   as her own work, and that the Student knowingly submitted academic work
   that contained a reference to a source that had been concocted. The
   University withdrew the concoction charge at the hearing. The Student
   was not present at the hearing. The Panel found that reasonable notice
   of the hearing had been provided in accordance with the Statutory
   Powers Procedure Act , and the hearing continued in the absence of the
   Student.
   Student was found guilty with respect to the charge of plagiarism. The
   Panel found it clear that the Essay was largely created by stringing
   together copied blocks of text from other, unattributed sources. The
   alternative charge of academic dishonesty not otherwise described was
   then withdrawn by the University. The Panel took into account as an
   aggravating factor that the Student did not participate at any stage of
   the discipline process. The Panel also noted that this was the
   Studentâs first academic offence. The Panel accepted the Universityâs
   submission on penalty. The Panel imposed a grade assignment of zero in
   the Course; a 2-year suspension; a 3-year notation on the Studentâs
   academic record and transcript; and that the case be reported to the
   Provost for publication.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12879
