THE UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
IN THE MATTER OF charges of academic dishonesty filed on April 8, 2015,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters, 1995,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Act, 1971, S.O. 1971, c. 56 as amended S.O. 1978,
c.88

BETWEEN:
UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO

-and-

REASONS FOR DECISION

Hearing Date: July 14, 2015

Members of the Panel:
Ms. Sarah Kraicer, Barrister and Solicitor, Chair
Dr. Joel Kirsh, Faculty Panel Member
Mr. Simon Czajkowski, Student Panel Member

Appearances:
Mr. Robert Genta, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland, Barristers
Ms. Emily Home, Summer Student, Paliare Roland, Barristers
In Attendance:
Dr. Martha Harris, Academic Integrity Officer, Office of the Dean, Faculty of Arts and
Science
Dr. Anthony Lombardo, Instructor, University College, University of Toronto
Mr. Christopher Lang, Office of Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances
Mr. Yehuda Levi, Observer, Office of Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances
Not In Attendance:
Ms. ~ (9, Student

2

1.

The Trial Division of the University Tribunal was convened on July 14, 2015, to
consider charges brought by the University of Toronto ("the University'') against
M s . ~ ~ ("the Student") under the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour
on Academic Matters, 1995 ("the Code").

Preliminary Issue: Proceeding in the Absence of the Student

2.

The Tribunal waited until 5:47 p.m. to commence the hearing. Neither the
Student, nor a representative of the Student, appeared.

3.

Pursuant to sections 6 and 7 of the Statutory Powers Procedure Act ("the Act"),
and Rule 17 of the University Tribunal Rules of Practice and Procedure ("the
Rules"), where reasonable notice of an oral hearing has been given to a party in
accordance with the Act and the party does not attend at the hearing, the
Tribunal may proceed in the absence of the party and the party is not entitled to
any further notice in the proceeding. The University requested that the Tribunal
proceed with this hearing

4.

A notice of hearing may be served on a student by personal service, "by sending
a copy of the document by courier to the student's mailing address contained in
ROSI" [Repository of Student Information], "by emailing a copy of the document
to the student's email address contained in ROSI" or "by other means authorized
under the University's Policy on Official Correspondence with Students" (the
"Policy") (Rules 9 (b) (c) and (d)).

5.

The Policy states that Students are responsible for maintaining on ROSI a
current and valid postal address and a University~issued email account. Students
are expected to monitor and retrieve their mail, including electronic messaging
accounts issued to them by the University, on a frequent and consistent basis.

3

6.

The onus of proof is on the University under the Act and the Rules to establish
that it provided the Student with reasonable notice of the hearing in accordance
with these provisions.

7.

The University filed evidence from Natalie Ramtahal, Coordinator, Appeals,
Discipline and Faculty Grievances, with the Office of the Governing Council of
the University, that she served a Notice of Hearing on Friday May 8, 2015, by
email to the Student at the email address she had provided on ROSI:
(a

8.

.ga@mail.utoronto.ca).

The University also filed evidence from Susan Murphy, Executive Secretary and
Office Manager, in the office of Professor Sioban Nelson, Vice-Provost, Faculty &
Academic Life, at the University of Toronto, that on April 8, 2015, she emailed a
letter from Professor Nelson to the Student, dated April 8, 2015, which set out the
Charges against the Student. The Notice of Hearing served on May 8, 2015 also
included a copy of Professor Nelson's letter and the Charges.

9.

The Student did not respond to these communications from the University.

10. In addition, counsel for the University advised that his office had attempted to
reach the Student by phone and email at the number and address provided by
the Student in ROSI and did not receive any response.
11. The Tribunal has reviewed the evidence and the submissions of counsel for the
University and has concluded that the Student has been given reasonable notice
of the hearing in compliance with the notice requirements of the Act and the
Rules. The content of the Notice of Hearing complies with the requirements of
the Act and the Rules. The Notice of Hearing and the Charges were sent to the
Student via email to her email address listed in ROSI, in compliance with the
Rules and Policy on Official correspondence.

4

12. The University has proven that it provided reasonable notice of the hearing to the
Student. The Tribunal therefore determined that it would proceed to hear the
case on its merits in the absence of the Student.
The Charges and Particulars

13.

The Charges and Particulars are as follows:
1.
On or about December 5, 2014, you knowingly represented the ideas of
another, or the expressions of the ideas of another as your own work in an
untitled essay (the "Essay") that you submitted in partial completion of the course
requirements in UNl209H {the "Course"), contrary to section B.l.1(d) of the Code.
2.
On or about December 5, 2014, you knowingly submitted in the Course
academic work that contained a reference to a source that had been concocted,
contrary to section B.1.1 (f) of the Code.
3.
In the alternative, on or about December 5, 2014, by submitting the Essay,
you knowingly engaged in a form of cheating, academic dishonesty or
misconduct, fraud or misrepresentation not otherwise described in the Code to
obtain academic credit or other academic advantage of any kind, contrary to
section B. I.3(b) of the Code.
The particulars for the charges are as follows:
(a}

At all material times you were a student registered at the University
of Toronto.

(b)

In Session 20149, you enrolled in the Course, which was titled
Introduction to Health: Determinants of Health and Health Care and
which was taught by Anthony Lombardo.

(c)

The Course requirements included a final essay assignment, which
was worth 45% of the final grade in the Course.

(d)

On or about December 5, 2014, you submitted the Essay in partial
completion of the Course requirements and to obtain academic
credit.

5

(e)

You submitted the Essay knowing that it contained ideas, the
expression of ideas, and verbatim or nearly verbatim text from
articles (the "Sources"), including but not limited to:

14.

(i)

Wikipedia, "Health Policy'';

(ii)

123helpme.com, "Comparing
Health Care Systems";

(iii)

UKessays.com, "Major Problems in Today's Healthcare Health and Social Care Essay'';

(iv)

Webspier.com, "Health Care Reform";

(v)

Webspier.com, "Compare US and Canada's Health Care
Delivery System";

(vi)

Webspier.com, "The Legal Implications of Private Healthcare
in Canada"; and

(vii)

ReviewEssays.com, 'The Legal Implications of Private
Healthcare in Canada."

Canadian

and

American

(f)

You knew that you had not properly referenced the ideas, the
expression of ideas, and the verbatim or nearly verbatim text that
you took from the Sources and Included in the Essay;

(g)

You submitted the Essay knowing and intending that when your
instructor evaluated the Essay he would conclude that the Essay
contained your own ideas that you had expressed in your own
words.

(h)

You submitted the Essay knowing that it contained references to
secondary sources that you did not use in researching or
composing the Essay and that you inserted for the purposes of
giving your essay an academic appearance and making it more
difficult to determine that you had committed plagiarism.

Counsel for the University advised that the University was withdrawing Charge 2
and was only proceeding with Charges 1 and 3. He further advised that if the
Tribunal were to find the Student guilty of Charge 1, the University would
withdraw Charge 3.

6

The Evidence

15.

The Tribunal heard evidence from Anthony Lombardo PhD, the Instructor of
Introduction to Health: Determinants of Health & Health Care (UNl209H), a
course offered as part of the Health Studies Program in the Fall 2014 session.
Dr. Lombardo has taught this course every Fall since 2011.

16.

At the outset of the course, Dr. Lombardo distributed and discussed the Course
Syllabus for UNl209H, which set out the course evaluation methods, guidelines
for submitting assignments, a description of the course assignments, and course
and academic policies.

17.

The course evaluation was based on three assignments. The third assignment
consisted of a final scholarly discussion essay, worth 35-45% of the grade. The
Student did not submit an optional outline, so her Essay was worth 45% of the
total course grade.

18.

Students in UNl209H were required to submit their assignments both in hard
copy and in an electronic copy. In the Syllabus and in class lecture slides and
discussions, students were advised that their assignments would be subject to
"Turnitin" plagiarism detection software, which detects textual similarity and
identifies possible plagiarism.

19.

Dr. Lombardo provided students in UNl209H with information about the
University's Academic Integrity Policy on plagiarism and also prepared and
presented lecture slides on the topic of "Avoiding Plagiarism". These slides
provided concrete examples of what did and did not constitute plagiarism in a
paper, and were presented in class, discussed, and posted to the course
website.

20.

The Student submitted an Essay for her final assignment on December 5, 2014.
The Essay was submitted to Turnitin.com and was flagged by that website as

7

having a similarity index of 56%. This level of similarity triggered a review by the
University of the Student's Essay for potential plagiarism.
21.

The University has provided an annotated version of the Student's Essay and a
number of sources it asserts have been copied verbatim or nearly verbatim in the
Student's paper without reference to the source or quotation marks.

22.

The Tribunal has reviewed the Student's Essay and compared it to the sources
and finds as follows:

(a)

The Student's Essay contains a verbatim passage (approximately 2 lines of text)
found in the Wikipedia site entitled "Health Policy".

(b)

The Student's Essay contains a verbatim passage (approximately 10 lines of
text) that is found in the website 123helpme.com.

(c)

The

Student's

Essay contains verbatim

or almost verbatim

passages

(approximately 33 lines of text) found in "Major Problems in Todays [sic] Health
and Social Care Essay'', a document from the website ukessesays.com. Some of
the passages in the Essay repeat typos found in the source document (e.g.
"revived" rather than "received").
(d)

The Student's Essay contains a nearly verbatim passage {approximately 13 lines
of text) found in "Essay Topic: Health Care Reform," a document from the
website webspier.com.

{e)

The Student's Essay contains nearly verbatim passages (approximately 8 lines of
text) found in "Essay Topic: Compare US and Canada's Health Care Delivery
System" a document from the website webspier.com.

8

(f)

The Student's Essay contains a nearly verbatim passage (approximately 5 lines)
found in "Essay Topic: The Legal Implications of Private Healthcare In Canada" a
document from the website webspier.com.

(g)

The Student's Essay contains a nearly verbatim passage (approximately 6 lines)
found in "The Legal Implications of Private Healthcare in Canada" a document
from the website reviewessays.com.

(h)

The Student's Essay contains a verbatim passage (approximately 2 lines) found
in

"Essays

on

Substandard

Care",

a

document

from

the

website

cyberessays.com.
23.

None of these passages in the Essay contains citations to these website
sources, and none is in quotation marks. None is listed in the list of references at
the end of the Essay.

Decision of the Tribunal on the Charges

24.

The onus is on the University to establish on clear and convincing evidence on a
standard of probabilities that the academic offence charged has been committed.
The Student is charged under Charge 1 with knowingly representing the ideas or
the expressions of the ideas of another as her own work. The Code provides that
"knowingly" includes where a person ought reasonably to have known.

25.

The Tribunal is of the view that the documentary evidence and the testimony of
Dr. Lombardo establish that the Student knowingly represented the ideas or
expression of ideas of another as her own work in the final Essay. The Tribunal
has reviewed the Essay and compared it with the text of other documentary
sources put in evidence by the University. It is clear that the Essay was largely
created by stringing together copied blocks of text from other, unattributed
sources. The Student included extensive verbatim and virtually verbatim
passages found in various online sources, including "essay'' websites, without

9

citation, without quotation marks, or any other indication that the text was copied
from other sources. The sources of these passages were not listed in the
reference page for the Essay. The Student sought to represent the ideas of
others as her own in these plagiarized passages.
27.

The rules about what constitutes plagiarism are set out in the University's Code
of Behaviour. In addition, students in UNl209H had these rules further highlighted
and explained to them by Dr. Lombardo in the course Syllabus and in the lecture
slides and discussions regarding "Avoiding Plagiarism".

28.

The evidence establishing the offence is cogent and compelling and has met the
University's burden of proof with respect to Charge 1. The Tribunal finds that the
Student is guilty of Charge 1.

29.

Charge 3 was therefore withdrawn by the University.

Decision of the Tribunal on Penalty

30.

The University sought the following sanctions:
(a)

a final grade of zero in the course UNl209H

(b)

a suspension from the University of Toronto from the date of this order for
a period of two years, ending July 14, 2017; and

(c)

a notation of the sanction on her academic record and transcript from the
date of this order for a period of three years, ending on July 14, 2018; and

(d)

that this case be reported to the Provost for publication of a notice of the
decision of the Tribunal and the sanction imposed, with the Student's
name withheld.

10

31.

The University did not lead any additional evidence with respect to the
sanction.

32.

The Tribunal has considered the principles and factors relevant to sanction set
out in University of Toronto and Mr. C (Case No. 1976/77-3, November 5,
1976). The determination of an appropriate penalty in every case by the
Tribunal will depend on an assessment of these principles and factors in the
individual circumstances of the case. At the same time, it is important that there
is general consistency in the approach of Tribunals to sanction, so that students
are treated fairly and equitably. (Discipline Appeal Board, University of Toronto v.
D.S., Case No. 451, August 24, 2007).

33.

The University has presented a number of cases to support their argument that
there is a general standard for a two year suspension for a first offence of
plagiarism. The Tribunal does not consider itself bound by any such general
standard. (See University of Toronto v. F.A., Case No. 766, June 16, 2015, and
University of Toronto v. D.S. at para. 49, which stated that students who are first

time offenders committing one act of plagiarism, generally have received
sanctions in a range of one to two years).
34.

However, for the reasons set out below, and based on a consideration of all of
the relevant principles and factors, the Tribunal considers the sanctions proposed
by the University, including a two year suspension, to be appropriate and
reasonable in the circumstances of this case.

35.

The Student has not participated at any stage of the discipline process and has
not responded to any communications from the University regarding these issues
and allegations of misconduct. There is accordingly no evidence before us of
mitigating or extenuating circumstances, good character, remorse or insight.

36.

Plagiarism is a very serious offence that strikes at the heart of academic integrity
at the University and that undermines the relationship of trust, learning and

11

teaching between all students and the University. The threat that plagiarism
poses to academic integrity warrants a strong penalty. In addition, the sanction
must serve as an effective general deterrent to others, as plagiarism is an
ongoing issue for the University.
37.

The extent of the plagiarism here was significant, as the majority of the Student's
Essay was plagiarized text. The Essay was a major component of the course
assignments, worth 45% of the total course grade.

38.

On the other hand, this is a first offence by the Student. It is a single incident
involving a single piece of academic work. The evidence does not disclose a
pattern of conduct that would suggest that she will repeat the offence.

39.

Our review of the Tribunal cases presented to us indicates that a two year period
of suspension is generally consistent with the sanctions administered to other
students in similar circumstances. In particular, in University of Toronto v. H-S. M
(Case No. 788, February 18, 2015) and in University of Toronto v. G.E. (Case
No. 782, April 15, 2015), the Tribunal ordered a two year suspension for a first
offence of plagiarism where the students had not participated in the discipline
process.

40.

In all of the circumstances, and with regard to the factors identified in the C.
case, the Tribunal is satisfied that the University's proposed sanctions are fair
and appropriate.

Order of the Tribunal

40.

The Tribunal issued the following Order on July 14, 2015:
1. THAT the hearing may proceed in the absence of Ms. ~ ;

12

2. THAT Ms <1111 is guilty of the academic offence of plagiarism, contrary
section B.1.1.(d) of the Code;
3. THAT the following sanctions shall be imposed on Ms. <1111:
(a)

she shall receive a final grade of zero in the course UNl209H;

(b)

she shall be suspended from the University for 2 years from the date of
this order for a period of two years (July 14, 2017); and

(c)

the sanction be recorded on her academic record and transcript for 3
years from the date of this Order (July 14, 2018);

4. THAT this case be reported to the Provost for publication of a notice of the
decision of the Tribunal and the sanction imposed, with Ms. <1111's name
withheld.

Dated at Toronto this 2 fday of September, 2015

Ms. Sarah Kraicer, Co-Chair

