Case 367

DATE:

   August 24, 2005

PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v. M.M.

Hearing Date(s):

   August 11, 2005

Panel Members:

   Melanie L. Aitken, Co-Chair
   Professor Ikuko Komuro-Lee, Faculty Member
   Joan Saary, Student Member

Appearances:

   Christopher Burr, for M. M.
   Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel for the University

   Student charged under s. B.i.1(d) and s. B.i.1(f), and alternatively,
   under s. B.i.3(b) of the Code. The charges related to allegations that
   the Student submitted an essay, portions of which she did not write
   and/or properly cite, and in which some or all of the citations and
   references were concocted. The Student pleaded guilty to the charges
   under s. B.i.1(d) and s. B.i.1(f) of the Code. The parties submitted an
   Agreed Statement of Facts. The Panel considered the Agreed Statement of
   Facts and the submissions of the parties and accepted the Studentâs
   plea. The parties submitted an Agreed Summary of Facts with respect to
   the sanction. The Student had two prior convictions for plagiarism. The
   Panel found that it was significant that the recommendations as to
   sanction were joint and that the Student cooperated with the University
   and pleaded guilty to the charges. The Panel found that the proposed
   sanction was within the range of sentences previously imposed in
   similar cases and that it properly accounted for the gravity and nature
   of the offence, particularly in light of the Studentâs prior academic
   misconduct. The Panel accepted the Joint Recommendation on Sentence
   subject to one modification. The Panel found that extending the
   five-year notation on the Studentâs academic record beyond graduation,
   should the Student do so within five years, was not justified. The
   Panel found that while the University had an interest in being able to
   access the information in the notation for a period of five years,
   irrespective of a matriculation, to further the interest of protection,
   there was not enough to be gained by way of deterrence or reformation
   to justify it. The Panel imposed a grade of zero in the course; a
   three-year suspension; a five-year notation on the Studentâs academic
   record and transcript, or until graduation; and that a report be issued
   to the Provost.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/13054
