REPORT NUMBER 256 OF THE ACADEMIC APPEALS COMMITTEE
April 3rd, 2001
To the Academic Board,
University of Toronto.
Your Committee reports that it held a hearing on Tuesday April 3rd, 2001, at which the
following were present:
Assistant Dean Bonnie Goldberg, Acting Chairperson
Mr Muhammad Basil Ahmad
Professor Christopher Barnes
Professor Vivek Goel
Professor Kenneth Sevcik
Ms Susan Girard, Acting Secretary, Academic Appeals Committee
In Attendance:
Mr Barry Stagg, for the Appellant
Mr R. R., the Appellant
Dr K. R., father of the Appellant
Ms Sari Springer, for the University of Toronto, Faculty of Arts and Science
Associate Dean William Michelson, for the University of Toronto, Faculty of Arts
and Science
Ms Karel Swift, University Registrar, University of Toronto
Ms Susan McDonald, Registrar, University of Toronto, Victoria College
The student appealed a decision of the Academic Appeals Board (the “Board”) of the
Faculty of Arts and Science (the “Faculty”) dated October 24th, 2000. The Board’s
decision denied the appellant’s request to either withdraw without academic penalty from
BIO 351Y (48%, grade F), CHM 222Y (39%, grade F) and CHM 240Y (45%, grade F)
(the “Courses”) or to recalculate his Grade Point Average (“GPA”) using a 0.3 grade
point value (“GPV”) for each of the Courses. The student seeks either of these remedies
from your Committee.
For the last several decades, the Grading Practices Policy of the University, among other
features, included the letter “E” grade, awarded to a percentage grade between 35% to
49%, and which had a 0.3 value in the GPA calculation.
In June of 1997, the Commission on Grading of the University of Toronto tendered a
report recommending revisions to the Grading Practices Policy. After almost a year of
debate and consultation within the University, the Academic Board of Governing Council
approved the Revised Grading Practices Policy on April 9th, 1998, to be effective in the
fall of 1998. The revisions included a provision that no GPA value would be attributed to
grades lower than 50%, effectively abolishing the “E” grade.
The Calendar for the 1998-1999 academic year had gone to print prior to the Revised
Grading Practices Policy being passed. In an effort to communicate the changes to
students at the University, and in particular students enrolled in the Faculty of Arts and
Science, two documents were prepared and distributed in the summer of 1998. The first
document was a bulletin from the University Registrar mailed individually to all students

in the summer of 1998. The front page of the Notice displayed the heading, “Revised
Grading Practices Policy.” Under the heading “What has Changed,” the bulletin
explained that the new Grading Practices Policy provides a refined letter grade scale, and
noted the new corresponding grade point values, including “F=0.” The bulletin stated
that the University is committed to ensuring that “no student’s progress toward program
completion is adversely affected by the adoption of the revised Grading Practices
Policy.”
In August 1998, the Registrar of the Faculty of Arts and Science sent a letter to each
student enclosing the student’s personal course schedule, a college information sheet, as
well as the student’s photo ID registration sticker. The second page of the letter contained
a heading entitled “Upcoming Changes,” which explained the changes to the grading
scale for the Faculty. This section reiterated the elimination of the “E” grade, and that all
marks below 50 would earn an F grade and a GPV of 0.0. The letter stated that these
changes supercede the grading scale in the 1998-1999 Calendar, but do not retroactively
change any grades of E awarded prior to the 1998-1999 session. Finally, the letter noted
that the Faculty would provide more information about the new grading scale in
November.
The appellant first became a student in the Faculty in the fall of 1995. The appeal relates
to the Courses that were taken in the academic year 1998-99, the first year in which the
new changes were in effect. In accordance with the Revised University Grading
Practices Policy in effect as at September 1998, the appellant’s cumulative GPA was
1.40. This calculation included a GPV of 0.0 awarded to the three courses in which the
appellant received a mark below 50 but above 35. Until that year, the appellant had
managed to remain “in good standing” but with his cumulative GPA at 1.40, the appellant
was put on academic probation.
On July 21st, 1999, the appellant petitioned the Committee on Standing at the Faculty for
late withdrawal without academic penalty from the three courses. The appellant claimed
that he “didn’t know of 0.0 GPA due to failure in course.” In the accompanying letter, he
claimed not to have received any letter detailing the changes to the 1998-1999 Calendar,
and that if he had received the letter “and known about the new rules, I would have
definitely dropped the courses which I had a considerable chance of failing and
concentrated on the other courses.” This petition was denied on August 12th, 1999 for the
reason that the student had “not presented compelling reasons for not withdrawing before
the deadline for withdrawal without academic penalty.”
On September 13th, 1999, the appellant “appealed” this decision by way of a second
petition, again requesting late withdrawal from the Courses for the reason that he “did not
know of change in rules.” By decision dated January 13th, 2000, the petition was denied
for the reason that the appellant had completed all the work in each of the courses, and
because students were notified of the changes to the grade point system. The fact that the
appellant processed his course selections offered proof that this appellant had received at
least one of the letters outlining the changes.
The appellant remained on academic probation through the summer of 1999, but by the
end of the winter session 2000, he was placed on a one year academic suspension as his
cumulative GPA remained below 1.50, and his annual GPA was below the required 1.70.
Specifically, the appellant’s cumulative GPA stands at 1.46, and accordingly he is not
eligible to obtain his degree, although he has completed all of his course requirements.
On July 7th, 2000, the appellant filed a third petition requesting late withdrawal from the
Courses, as well as the lifting of an academic suspension. This petition came as a result of
2

the student not being eligible to receive his degree. This petition also specifically
requested the alternate remedy of a re-calculation of the student’s grades in the Courses
in accordance with the “old” Grading Practices Policy, in place until September 1998. In
the accompanying letter dated July 18th, 2000, he stated “Had I known that the policy,
which was clearly and unambiguously stated in the Calendar was incorrect, I would have
dropped the courses I knew I had the possibility of failing.”
This petition should have been made no later than 90 days after the previous decision, but
was made six months later. The petition was ultimately “cancelled” but forwarded to the
Academic Appeals Board of the Faculty, provided the reasons for lateness were upheld.
The Board accepted the reasons for lateness, and a hearing was held on October 23rd,
2000. By decision dated October 24th, 2000, the Board denied the appellant’s request to
withdraw without academic penalty from the Courses, as well as his alternate request to
re-calculate his GPA using the .3 grade point value for each of the three Courses. The
decision stated:
You could not provide any compelling new evidence that would allow the
members to overturn the decisions of the Committee on Standing. Furthermore, it
was clear, that in having received your registration sticker and in having used
your library card in the [1998-1999] academic session, you did receive at least
one of the two mailings (the one from the Faculty of Arts & Science) advising
you of the grading policy change.
Your Committee had the benefit of documentary evidence not previously tendered by the
appellant during his petition process. In particular, the appellant submitted excerpts from
the University’s Academic Board meeting of April 9th, 1998, and excerpts from the
Committee on Academic Policy and Programs meeting of March 11th, 1998.
The appellant has requested two alternate remedies, either one of which, if granted,
would enable him to obtain his degree.
With respect to late withdrawal, your Committee affirms the Board’s decision that the
Appellant should not be permitted late withdrawal from his courses without academic
penalty. However, your Committee believes there are compelling reasons to apply the
“old” Grading Practices Policy to this Appellant’s 1998-1999 academic year. This would
mean that a 0.3 would be attached to each of the 1998-1999 Courses in which a grade
between 35% and 49% was obtained – the former “E” grade.
The University argued that to allow this appeal would handcuff the University’s ability to
make changes necessary to administer its program. Your Committee respectfully
disagrees. A decision in favour of this appellant highlights deficiencies in how this
particular change was communicated to this appellant, in the context of the importance of
the change. When the Faculty of Arts and Science was required to implement the Revised
Grading Practices Policy, one would assume that it would do so in a timely, reasonable,
and individualized manner. Your Committee believes that the University attempted to do
so, and may have thought it had done so, but in your Committee’s opinion it did not go
far enough. A clearer enunciation that the Revised Grading Practices Policy was meant to
amend the Calendar was necessary. Continued reiterations of the changes to the students
once they returned in the fall would have been appropriate. In fact students were told in
the summer mail-out that further information would be forthcoming in November, which
was not.

3

Your Committee notes that in the Report of the meeting of the Committee on Academic
Policy and Programs dated March 11th, 1998, in response to a question about
implementation, Professor Paul Gooch, Vice-Provost, stated:
… the general practice of the University was -- when changes in policy occurred - that no student who entered under the previous policy would be disadvantaged
by the new. For example, students who would have been promoted under the old
scheme would not be prevented from doing so by the new scheme. Secondly,
once the Academic Board approves the recommendation, all incoming students
would be given the new grade scale, and current students would be informed in
writing of the new scheme.
The fact that the University believed from the outset that students should not be
disadvantaged by the implementation of the new system is echoed in the material mailed
out by the University in the first bulletin. However, your Committee heard testimony that
this meant that for example, students awarded the “E” grade, and its corresponding 0.3
GPV, prior to 1998 would retain that grade. However, your Committee believes that it
also means that students should not be disadvantaged retroactively or prospectively. It
was not clear to your Committee whether this reference to the “general practice” of the
University is a formal or informal policy of the University. However, it is integral to the
policy work of the University, and questions of ambiguity should be resolved in favour of
the student.
There is no question that Governing Council and its committees and boards must be able
to make major policy changes to its policies, and in a timely fashion. The way in which
these changes are implemented and communicated is what is at issue. There is no dispute
that the Faculty’s Calendar, as in most divisions, had already gone to print well before
Governing Council approved the Revised Grading Practices Policy. But the Revised
Grading Practices Policy has a distribution clause requiring that all the information must
be published in the Calendar of every division, and that a copy shall be given to every
student at registration.
Your Committee accepts that the University can make changes to grading policies, and it
notes in particular that at pages 2 and 492 of the 1998-1999 Calendar, the Faculty
reserves the right to make “Changes in Courses,” which includes changes to grading
policies of particular courses. However, the language in “Changes in Regulations and
Policies” is quite different and mandates that all applicable University policies are
displayed in the Calendar. A disclaimer similar to the one noted under “Changes in
Courses” should probably be included in this section. This would properly allow the
University to reserve the right to make – and implement – major policies changes once a
Calendar has gone to print for a coming academic year. Without such a disclaimer, it is
conceivable that the scenario presented to your Committee by this appellant occurred. In
other words, the student relied on what is printed in the Calendar to inform the decisions
he made about his program.
Nevertheless, it is also the opinion of your Committee that this student did not fully carry
out his responsibilities, as outlined in the Calendar, for knowing and observing the rules
and regulations of the Faculty. This particular student worked towards achieving the
barest minimum required to obtain his degree at the end of his program. The student
definitely received at least one of the bulletins mailed to him over the summer, as
evidenced by his course enrollment. However, he clearly did not absorb any information
about the grading changes. It is particularly unfortunate that this student did not avail
himself of help during the year to improve his performance in these courses, or to clarify
his position vis-à-vis the grading policy. However, while the student may not have shown
4

appropriate diligence, it does not change the fact that significant policy changes were not
adequately communicated throughout the year. Throughout the petition and appeal
process, the appellant has consistently maintained that he would have dropped the
courses if he had known of the changes. This student has demonstrated to your
Committee that his entire year of study would have proceeded differently but for his
knowledge of the change, and thus the student has been unduly affected by the change.
When academic institutions implement major changes mid-program, students are often
given the option to elect under which policy he or she will proceed. Further, it may have
been valuable to delay implementation of the Revised Grading Practices Policy by one
year in order to revise and update Calendars. Finally, continued promotion and
advertisement of the changes to the program throughout the year, particularly at key
times during the academic year, such as the drop date, would have served to ensure a
student could not claim ignorance of the changes.
The appeal is allowed and the old Grading Practices Policy is applied to the student’s
results for the 1998-1999 academic year.

May 9th, 2001

5

