Case #256

   DATE: May 9, 2001

   PARTIES: Mr. R.R. (the ‚Student‚) v. University of Toronto, Faculty of
   Arts and Science

   HEARING DATE: April 3, 2001

   Committee Members:
   Assistant Dean Bonnie Goldberg, Acting Chair
   Mr. Muhammad Basil Ahmad
   Professor Christopher Barnes
   Professor Vivek Goel
   Professor Kenneth Sevcik

   Ms Susan Girard, Acting Secretary, Academic Appeals Committee

   Appearances:

   For the Student Appellant:
   Mr. R.R. (the ‚Student‚)
   Mr. Barry Stagg, for the Student
   Dr. K.R., father of the Student

   For the University of Toronto Faculty of Arts and Science:
   Ms Sari Springer
   Associate Dean William Michelson
   Ms Karel Swift, University Registrar, University of Toronto
   Ms Susan McDonald, Registrar, University of Toronto, Victoria College

   The Student appealed a decision of the Academic Appeals Board of the
   University‚s Faculty of Arts and Science denying the Student‚s request
   to either withdraw without academic penalty from three of the Student‚s
   courses, or to recalculate the Student‚s Grade Point Average (GPA) for
   each of the courses, using the old policy.

   The University revised its Grading Practices Policy to provide that no
   GPA value would be attributed to grades lower than 50%. The Calendar
   for the relevant academic year had gone to print prior to the revised
   policy being passed. In an effort to communicate the changes, two
   documents were distributed to students with notification of the new
   grading practices policy. In accordance with the revised policy, the
   Student was awarded a grade point value of 0.0 in the three courses the
   subject of the appeal. The Student claimed he had not received any
   notification of the changes, and requested two alternate remedies
   (withdrawal from the courses without academic penalty or recalculation
   of his GPA to the ‚old‚ Grading Practices Policy). Either remedy would,
   if granted, enable the Student to obtain his degree.

   The Academic Appeals Committee (‚AAC‚) affirmed the Faculty‚s decision
   that the Student should not be permitted late withdrawal from his
   courses without academic penalty. However, the AAC decided that there
   were compelling reasons to apply the ‚old‚ Grading Practices Policy to
   the Student‚s academic year. The AAC rejected the University‚s argument
   that to allow the appeal would handcuff the University‚s ability to
   make changes necessary to administer its program. The AAC stated that a
   decision in favour of the Student highlighted deficiencies in how the
   change was communicated to the Student, in the context of the
   importance of the change. In the AAC‚s opinion, the Faculty did not go
   far enough in implementing the new policy in a timely, reasonable and
   individualized manner. A clearer enunciation of the new policy and
   continued reiterations of the changes to the students once they
   returned in the Fall would have been appropriate. The AAC stated that
   students should not be disadvantaged retroactively or prospectively by
   the implementation of the new system and that questions of ambiguity
   should be resolved in favour of the student. The AAC accepted that the
   University can make changes to grading policies; however, the
   University had failed to adequately communicate the significant policy
   changes throughout the year. The AAC noted that when academic
   institutions implement major changes mid-program, students are often
   given the option to elect under which policy he or she will proceed.
   The Committee furthermore stated that it may have been valuable to
   delay implementation of the revised policy by one year in order to
   revise and update Calendars. Finally, continued promotion and
   advertisement of the changes to the program throughout the year,
   particularly at key times during the academic year, such as the drop
   date, would have served to ensure a student could not claim ignorance
   of the changes. While the AAC took the view that the Student had not
   shown appropriate diligence, he consistently maintained that he would
   have dropped the courses if he had known of the changes. The AAC was
   satisfied that the Student had demonstrated that his entire year of
   study would have proceeded differently but for his knowledge of the
   change, and thus he had been unduly affected by the change.

   The AAC allowed the appeal and ordered that the old Grading Practices
   Policy be applied to the Student‚s results for the relevant academic
   year.
   [1]View Report

References

   1. file:///media/12678
