Report 418

DATE:

   February 8, 2022

PARTIES:

   Ms. M.M. (the ‚Student‚) v. School of Graduate Studies

HEARING DATE:

   December 14, 2021, via Zoom

Chair:

   Professor Andrew Green

Appearances:

For the Student Appellant:

   Ms. Julia Wilkes, Adair Goldblatt Bieber LLP
   Ms. Marlie Earle, Adair Goldblatt Bieber LLP
   The Student

For the School of graduate studies:

   Mr. Robert Centa, Paliare Roland Rosenberg Rothstein LLP

   The Student sought a reconsideration of a decision of a prior panel of
   the Academic Appeals Committee (‚AAC‚) which dismissed her appeal. The
   Student argued that materials she received from a Freedom of
   Information and Protection of Privacy Act (‚FIPPA‚) request provided
   evidence that the grades she received in a course were unreliable and
   that certain members of the School of Public Health had deliberately
   withheld documents and/or misled the Graduate Academic Appeals Board
   (‚GAAB‚) and the prior panel of the AAC.

   Issues pertaining to jurisdiction are a question of law that must be
   determined by the Chair alone. The Chair of this Panel of the Academic
   Appeal Committee (‚Panel‚) needed to determine whether the AAC has
   jurisdiction to reconsider its prior decisions and if so, in what
   circumstances, and if the AAC does have jurisdiction in certain
   circumstances, then should the Committee do so in this case. The Chair
   noted that whether the AAC can reconsider its prior decisions rests on
   the application of the legal principle of functus officio. With certain
   exceptions, an administrative tribunal, such as the AAC, that makes a
   final decision is functus officio, meaning that its work is done and it
   cannot change or reconsider its decision. The Chair further noted that
   this principle rests on the need for finality in decision making and
   such finality provides certainty for the parties, allows for reliance
   on the decision, limits the burden on the administrative system, and
   allows a stable basis for judicial review or appeal. The Chair of the
   Committee referenced the Supreme Court of Canada‚s decision in Chandler
   v. Alberta Association of Architects, [1989] 2 SCR 848 (‚Chandler‚) in
   his analysis of the application of functus officio to administrative
   decision-makers. The Chair noted that based on the discussion found in
   Chandler the principle of functus officio applies to administrative
   tribunals such as the AAC based on the need for finality of proceedings
   but must be applied flexibly. There are two clear exceptions to the
   functus officio principle which are outlined in Paper Machinery Ltd. V.
   J. O. Ross Engineering Corp. [1934] SCR 186 and cited by the Supreme
   Court in Chandler; (1) the tribunal has made a ‚slip‚ in its decision
   such as a minor error in wording; and (2) the tribunal made an error in
   expressing its ‚manifest intention.‚¬  The Chair noted that beyond
   these two exceptions, functus officio generally applies unless there is
   an explicit or implicit statutory power of reconsideration. The Chair
   stated that the AAC does not have an explicit or implicit power to
   reconsider its prior decisions because neither the University of
   Toronto‚s Governing Council bylaws nor the AAC‚s Terms of Reference
   provide the AAC with an explicit power of reconsideration. Furthermore,
   the Terms of Reference do not contain any procedures relating to
   reconsideration and emphasize that the AAC is the final decision-maker
   on appeals that have already been through appeal processes in different
   divisions.

   The Student argued that in the context of court proceedings, courts
   have made an exception for fraud on the tribunal and such an exception
   to functus officio is appropriate also in the administrative law
   context. The Chair noted that Berge v. College of Audiologists and
   Speech Language Pathologists of Ontario, 2019 ONSC 3351 and Kennedy v.
   College of Veterinarians of Ontario, 2021 ONSC 578 (Div Ct) do not find
   such a fraud exception in the context of an administrative tribunal,
   and the Federal Court of Appeal, in Canadian Association of Film
   Distributors and Exporters v. Society for Reproduction Rights of
   Authors, Composers and Publishers in Canada (SODRAC) Inc., 2014 FCA
   235, stated that there should be a reluctance to find new exceptions to
   the functus officio rules.

   The Student also pointed to a broader exception to the application of
   functus officio which, she argued, relates to a denial of ‚natural
   justice‚ or perhaps, more generally, unfairness. The Chair noted that
   the Supreme Court in Chandler stated that a tribunal must ‚start
   afresh‚ where ‚the error which renders the decision a nullity is one
   that taints the whole proceeding.‚ In support of this, the Supreme
   Court cited cases which ‚involve a denial of natural justice which
   vitiated the whole proceeding.‚ Furthermore, the Student provided cases
   that outline tribunals obtaining the power of reconsideration where
   there was a breach of procedural fairness. The Chair remarked that the
   case law seems unclear on this point. In two recent decisions of the
   Ontario Court of Appeal (Jacobs Catalytic Ltd. v. I.B.E.W., Local 353,
   2009 ONCA 749 and Stanley v. Office of the Independent Police Review
   Director, 2020 ONCA 252), the Court found that there was no power of
   reconsideration even though the contexts encompassed potential breaches
   of procedural fairness. The Chair noted that the AAC allows for a final
   resolution of appeals that gives parties certainty and provides a limit
   on the resources for any single appeal. Parties can seek judicial
   review of these decisions on both procedural and substantive grounds.
   The Chair found that the AAC has no express statutory power to
   reconsider its prior decisions and has very limited common law power to
   reconsider decisions where there is a minor error that amounts to a
   ‚slip‚ or where the tribunal has made an error in expressing its
   intent.

   In deciding whether the Panel should reconsider the AAC‚s original
   decision in this matter, the Chair noted that the Panel only needs to
   consider whether it has the power to reconsider the decision in this
   case because there was fraud or a breach of natural justice. The Panel
   found that (1) there was no evidence to support the allegations of
   fraud; (2) there was no evidence of any intent to mislead either the
   GAAB or the prior panel of the AAC; and (3) the proposed exceptions for
   the breaches of natural justice did not apply in this case. The Panel
   noted that the purpose of fairness is to ensure ‚administrative
   decisions are made using a fair and open procedure, appropriate to the
   decision being made and its statutory, institutional, and social
   context, with an opportunity for those affected by the decision to put
   forward their views and evidence fully and have them considered by the
   decision-maker‚ (Baker v. Canada (Minister of Citizenship and
   Immigration), [1999] 2 SCR 817, at para. 22). The Panel noted that none
   of the materials provided under the FIPPA request change any of the
   basic facts nor do they demonstrate any insufficiencies in disclosure
   by the time of the original AAC hearing to warrant reconsideration.
   Furthermore, the FIPPA materials only support the conclusion that the
   Student received the necessary materials to make her case. The Panel
   noted that there may be cases where a breach of fairness is so
   egregious that it gives rise to a power of reconsideration, however,
   this is not such a case. Furthermore, fairness can clearly be raised on
   a judicial review application.

   Given that the Panel found that this case does not fit within the very
   limited circumstances permitting reconsideration, it is unnecessary to
   deal with the other two issues (delay and the merits of this appeal).
   Request for reconsideration dismissed.

   The Panel recommended that (1) the Division ensure steps are taken to
   provide students with timely and accurate information about their
   grades when they are appealed; and (2) the governance process be
   engaged to determine whether the Terms of Reference should be clarified
   regarding reconsiderations.
   [1]View Report

References

   1. file:///media/30250
