Report #354

   DATE: April 5, 2011
   PARTIES: M.H.R.Â  (the Student) v. Faculty of Applied Science and
   Engineering
   Hearing Date(s): March 9, 2011
   Committee Members:
   Professor Emeritus Ralph Scane, Q.C., Chair
   Professor Elizabeth Smyth
   Oliver Sorin
   Appearances:
   For the Student Appellant:
   M.H.R. (the Student)
   For the University of Toronto, Faculty of Applied Science and
   Engineering:
   Professor Thomas Coyle
   Barbara McCann, Registrar
   Faculty of Applied Science and Engineering â reinstatement â academic
   relief in two courses â reinstatement to the university â unexpected
   deathÂ  -- standard relief in similar situations â Boocock-Will Formula
   â correct and fair application of Formula â impossibility of
   reinstatement under other remedies â appeal dismissed
   Appeal of a decision of an Academic Appeals Board of the Faculty of
   Applied Science and Engineering decision denying the Student
   reinstatement to the University. While the initial appeal related to
   relief in two courses, the Student, on appeal to the Committee,
   broadened the appeal to reinstatement to the University. The Student
   had previously petitioned two courses, stating that he had received
   news of the death of his grandfather unexpectedly before the two
   examinations. The Committee on Examinations accepted the events as
   justifying the application of the Faculty of Applied Sciences and
   Engineeringâs standard relief in such situations, the application of
   the Boocock-Will Formula. The formula examines a studentâs âclosely
   supervisedâ term work, the results of the evaluation that is being
   petitioned and the class averages for each. If the application of the
   formula gives a mark higher than actually achieved in the course, the
   âassessed gradeâ is substituted for the original mark. If it does not,
   the original mark stands. The Student argued that an error occurred in
   applying the formula. The Committee found that the Studentâs
   calculation was not a proper application of the formula. The Committee
   concluded that the Faculty applied its rules correctly and fairly. The
   Committee further found that if other remedies, such as aegrotat or
   withdrawal without academic penalty applied to the courses, the Student
   would have had an even lower term average and reinstatement to the
   University would still be impossible. Appeal dismissed.
   [1]View Report

References

   1. file:///media/12598
