THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
THE GOVERNING COUNCIL
Report #354 of the Academic Appeals Committee
April 5, 2011

To the Academic Board
The University of Toronto
Your Committee repo11s that it held a hearing on Wednesday, March 9,201 I, at which
the following members were present:
Professor Emeritus Ralph Scane, Q.C. (Chair)
Professor Elizabeth Smyth
Mr. Olivier Sorin
Secretary: Ms Natalie Ramtahal, Coordinator, Appeals, Discipline and
Faculty Grievances
In Attendance:
For tbe Student Appellant:

Mr. M.H.R. ("the Student") (Appearing by videoconference)
For the Faculty of Applied Science and Engineering:

Professor Thomas Coyle
Ms Barbara McCann (Registrar)
I. Tbe Appeal

This is an appeal from the decision, dated September 24, 2009, of the Academic Appeals
Board ("the Board") of the Faculty of Applied Science and Engineering ("the Faculty"),
which dismissed an appeal from a decision of the Committee on Examinations of the
Faculty, dated July 27, 2009. That decision dealt with a petition for consideration in two
courses, APS105Hl and MAT188Hl, both taken in the Winter Term of 2009. As will be
discussed subsequently, relief was afforded in the case of the former course, but withheld
in the case oft he latter course. The Student failed his First Year in the Edward S. Rogers
Sr. Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering even with the relief granted. In
his appeal document filed with your Committee, the Student broadened his appeal to seek
"reinstatement". This was drawn to the attention of the Faculty by your Committee's
staff. The Faculty did not object to proceeding on this wider basis, and filed amended
response documentation to address this broader remedy. Your Committee decided to
consider the appeal on this basis.

II. Background

The Student, whose home is outside North America, entered the B.A,Sc. program of the
Faculty in the Fall Tenn of 2008. His performance in that Term was very weak, even
though he was permitted to defer one course to reduce his load. The Student attributed at
least some of his poor performance to homesickness, and the cultural differences he faced
on coming to this country. The Student was placed on academic probation at the
completion of the Fall Term.
The Student was permitted to enroll in the Faculty's "T-Program", which allows students
to take or retake courses over the Winter and Summer Terms, to bring themselves to a
level which would permit them to proceed into the Second Year of their program. The
Student took five courses in the Winter Term, 2009. He appealed one course, APSI04HI,
in which he received a grade of "D", on the ground that he had been ill with abdominal
pain on the day of writing the examination. The petition was denied on the grounds that
the Student did not consult a doctor until four days after the examination, and that the
medical evidence did not establish grounds for relief. This decision of the Committee on
Examinations was not appealed. Neve1iheless, in view of the wider relief sought before
your Committee, the decision was considered. Your Committee agrees that the medical
evidence did not support relief.
Subsequently, the Student petitioned two other courses taken in the Winter Term,
APS I 05Hl, written on April 27, 2009, and MATl88Hl, written on April 29, 2009. On
April 26, 2009, the Student received news of the death of his grandfather, to whom he
was very close. The death was unexpected, being the result of an accident. The Student
did proceed to write the examinations. The Committee on Examinations accepted the
event as justifying the application of the Faculty's standard relief in such cases, the
application of the Boocock-Will Formula. This formula examines a student's "closely
supervised" term work, the results of the evaluation that is being petitioned and the class
averages for each. If the application of the formula gives a mark higher than that actually
achieved in the course, this "assessed grade" is substituted for the original mark. If it does
not, the original mark is allowed to stand. Application of the formula in the case of
A.PS 105Hl did result in an assessed mark, changing the final course mark from 40% to
50%, or D-. However, in the case of MATl 88HI, the Fo1mula produced a result less than
the original final mark, which therefore stood unchanged. After rec.alculating his term
average following the adjustment in APS105Hl, the Student still had an average of only
56.2%, which was insufficient under the Faculty's rules to permit him to continue in the
"T-Program" or at all. As a result, his status after the completion of the Winter Tenn was
"Failed - May apply for readmission".
The Student appealed the result in MATl88Hl to the Board. He argued that an error had
occurred in applying the Formula in this case, and submitted calculations showing that
his term average prior to the final examination was higher than his final average.
However, this calculation is not an application of the Formula, as it does not factor in the

2

relevant class averages. Unfortunately the Board's "decision", which appears to be no
more than a general "one-size-fits-all" form for dismissing appeals, did not point this out
to the Student.
The Student also again referred to the fact of his grandfather's death, and added the state
of his mother's health as a concern affecting his performance. The Board obviously did
not weigh these factors as sufficient to alter its decision.
The Student argued that his final course mark in MATl 88H l should not have been left
untouched, but raised to compensate for the fact that he had written the final examination
while handicapped by his reaction to his grandfather's death, and that it should be
assumed that, absent this event, he would have written a better final paper. Yotu'
Committee rejects this argument. It would be pure conjecture to pull an arbitrary number
of marks out of the air and assign them to this examination, as an alleged measure of the
debility under which the Student was labouring. In some cases, students may write
examinations under severe strain, and yet sunnount the problem and perform well. In
some divisions, a student in a similar position might be petmitted to write a deferred or
supplementary examination, where the mark might or might not be improved. That is not
the route offered in the Faculty.
III. Decision

Your Committee considers that the Faculty has applied its rules c01Tectly and fairly in
this case, and that this Student has been judged as any other Student in a comparable
position would have been. The Faculty has pointed out that if other remedies, such as
aegrotat standing or permitting withdrawal without academic penalty had been applied to
MAT188Hl, even though these remedies did not here fall within the usual Faculty
guidelines for their application, the Student would have had an even lower term average.
MAT188Hl was his second best mark in the term, and applying either of these remedies
would withdraw the mark from averaging. The Student did not fail his year because of
two examinations written after his grandfather's death. He failed it because of generally
poor work over two terms.
The appeal is dismissed.

3

