Case 668

DATE:

   April 27, 2012

PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v. P.H.

Hearing Date(s):

   March 27, 2012

Panel Members:

   Mr. Paul Schabas, Chair
   Prof. Nick Cheng, Faculty Member
   Ms. Amy Gullage, Student Member

Appearances:

   Mr. Robert Centa, Assistant Discipline Counsel for the University
   Ms. Julia Wilkes, Articling Student, Paliare Roland Barristers
   Ms. Sierra Robart, DLS
   Ms. Camille Labchuk, DLS
   Dr. Matthew MacKay, Course Instructor
   Mr. Sinisa Colic, Course TA
   Mr. P.H., the Student
   Mr. Ali Afshar, Student at the University of Toronto
   Mr. Armin Ayattolahi, Student at the University of Toronto

In Attendance:

   Prof. John Carter, Dean's Designate
   Mr. Chris Lang, Director, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances

   Student charged under s. B.i.1(b) of the Code . The charges related to
   allegations that the Student copied answers from another student during
   a midterm test. The Student sat next to the other student whom he
   allegedly copied his answers from. The invigilator testified that he
   saw the Studentâs mouth moving during the exam and told both students
   not to speak. He, as well as the course instructor, also testified that
   the two students were sitting closer to each other than other students
   in the room. When he was marking the exam, he noted similarities
   between the two tests and also noted that the Studentâs answers were
   lacking intermediate steps. The Student testified that he arrived with
   the other student and chose the first two available seats and that he
   did not speak to the other student during the test. He stated that he
   thought he listed all appropriate intermediate steps. The other student
   testified that he did not notice anything unusual during the test and
   that he had not started working on the test question under question
   when the invigilator warned both of them not to speak. Two of the
   Studentâs classmates who took the test in the same room also testified
   that they did not notice anything unusual during the test. The Panel
   stated that although the University need only prove its case on a
   balance of probabilities, it had failed to do so in this case. The
   Panel found that there was no direct evidence that the Student cheated
   on the test â evidence was only circumstantial as no one saw the
   Student copying answers. The Panel also found the test instruction
   ambiguous as it said to list âappropriateâ intermediate steps. Also,
   the Panel criticized the University for bringing the charges late, two
   months after the test. Had the charges been brought promptly, the
   Student would have been easily able to rebut the charges with the scrap
   papers he used during the test. Taking all factors into account, the
   Panel dismissed the charges.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12786
