Case #1082

   DATE:Â August 23, 2019
   PARTIES: University of Toronto v. J.W.

   Hearing date : May 22, 2019

   Panel Members:
   Ms. Omo Akintan, Chair
   Professor Blake Poland, Faculty Panel Member
   Mr. Bradley Au, Student Panel Member

   Appearances:
   Mr. Robert Centa, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland
   Rosenberg Rothstein LLP
   Ms. Sonia Patel, Summer Student, Paliare Roland Rosenberg Rothstein LLP

   In Attendance:
   Ms. Krista Osbourne, Administrative Clerk & Hearing Secretary, Appeals,
   Discipline and Faculty Grievances

   Not in Attendance:
   The Student

   Trial Division â s. B.i.3(a) of Code â plagiarism â Student knowingly
   represented as his own idea or expression of an idea the work of
   another â Student purchased work from on-line source - Student did not
   attend hearing â proper service effected on Student â finding of guilt
   â barring mitigating circumstances, expulsion is likely sanction for
   purchase of work submitted for academic credit due to insidiousness of
   this form of plagiarism â goal of deterrence paramount in these cases -
   prior offences typically considered aggravating factor that tips scale
   in favour of expulsion â concurrent offences - commission of two
   academic misconduct offences in quick succession is aggravating factor
   that speaks to Studentâs character - in absence of participation by
   Student, Panel unable to assess individual rehabilitation - grade of
   zero; five year suspension from date of order; recommendation of
   expulsion; and publication by Provost of notice of decision and
   sanctions with Studentâs name withheld.

   The Student was charged with two counts of academic misconduct under
   the Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters, 1995 (the â Code â) on the
   basis that he knowingly committed plagiarism by representing as his own
   idea or expression of an idea the work of another that he did not cite
   appropriately. The charges related to a film review of the movie Aliens
   submitted by the Student in the Studentâs Cinema Studies course.
   Specifically, the Student was charged with plagiarism under s. B.i.3(a)
   of the Code , and in the alternative, academic dishonesty under s.
   B.i.3(b) of the Code .

   Neither the Student nor a representative of the Student attended the
   hearing before the Panel. The Panel noted that notice of the hearing
   had been served on the Student by email to the Studentâs email address
   on ROSI and by courier to the address provided by the Student to the
   University on ROSI. Furthermore, prior to service of the notice, the
   Universityâs Assistant Discipline Counsel emailed the Student at the
   Studentâs ROSI email account advising him of the charges filed against
   him. The Student responded, from his ROSI account, indicating that he
   was forwarding the email to his lawyer. The Universityâs Assistant
   Discipline Counsel subsequently received an email from a lawyer
   indicating that they had been retained by the Student. Upon the
   Universityâs Assistant Discipline Counsel following up with the lawyer
   at a later date, however, the lawyer indicated that the firm no longer
   represented the Student. The Panel also noted that the Universityâs
   Assistant Discipline Counsel confirmed with the Universityâs Associate
   Director of Information Security that the Studentâs ROSI account was
   last accessed over a month following service of the notice of hearing.
   The Student did not respond to the notice of hearing or contact the
   Universityâs Assistant Discipline Counsel. The Panel was satisfied that
   valid and proper service had been effected on the Student in accordance
   with the Rules of Practice and Procedure and that the hearing could
   proceed in the Studentâs absence.

   The Panel noted that the Student had been registered in the Cinema
   Studies course in Fall 2016. The Student submitted a film review worth
   20% of the final grade in the course through the website Turnitin.com.
   The work submitted by the Student was nearly identical (69% similar) to
   that submitted by another student in the course, P.H.Q. The University
   tendered evidence by way of affidavit of the Deanâs Designate for
   academic integrity that upon being asked about the film review, the
   Student denied misconduct, denied knowing P.H.Q. and suggested that the
   latter may have obtained a copy of the Studentâs work when the Student
   printed it at the library. When informed that P.H.Q. had admitted
   purchasing the film review, the Student admitted that he also had
   purchased the review from an on-line source and that he was guilty of
   committing an academic offence. The Student signed an Academic
   Integrity Student Form to this effect.

   Based on the evidence submitted by the University, the Panel made a
   finding of guilt. It noted that in determining penalty, it was required
   to consider the factors set out in the Mr. C case (Case No. 1976/77-3)
   and to determine the weight to be given to each factor based on the
   facts of the case. The Panel stated that a review of relevant Tribunal
   cases clearly demonstrates a consensus that purchasing and submitting
   purchased work for academic credit is among the most egregious offences
   a Student can commit. The Panel in this case agreed with the conclusion
   of the Tribunal in the case of CH&K (Case No. 596; 597; 598 November
   23, 2011) that once detected, these offences must be dealt with at the
   serious end of the sanction spectrum. Given the seriousness of the
   misconduct in the instant case, the Panel started its penalty analysis
   from the presumption that, barring mitigating factors, expulsion should
   be the likely result. The Panel noted that prior offences are typically
   considered an aggravating factor that tips the scale in favour of
   expulsion. In this case, the Student had been questioned about and had
   acknowledged a separate academic offence, at the same meeting with the
   Deanâs Designate concerning the offence in the instant case. The Panel
   therefore took the view that the separate offence could more accurately
   be characterised as a concurrent offence, rather than a prior offence.
   It noted that a Student involved in a concurrent offence has not had
   the benefit of the counselling that would cause one to seriously
   question the studentâs rehabilitation following a subsequent offence.
   At the same time, the Panel took the commission of two academic
   misconduct offences in quick succession as nonetheless an aggravating
   factor that speaks to the Studentâs character. A further significant
   aggravating factor in this case was the denial of the allegations by
   the Student and the fact that he only admitted to purchasing the paper
   when told that the other student had so admitted. The Student did not
   participate in the process and as such the Panel stated that it was
   unable to properly assess individual rehabilitation. The Panel
   ultimately found that the goal of deterrence was paramount in this
   case.

   The Panel imposed the following sanctions: a final grade of zero; a
   suspension from the University for five years from the date of the
   order; and a recommendation to the President of the University that the
   Student be expelled from the University. The Panel also ordered that
   the case be reported to the Provost for publication of a notice of the
   decision and the sanctions imposed, with the name of the Student
   withheld.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/28551
