Case 1048

   DATE:

   February 22, 2022

   PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v. L.L. ("the Student")

   HEARING DATE:

   December 7, 2021, via Zoom

   Panel Members:

   Mr. Simon Clements, Chair
   Dr. Chris Koenig-Woodyard, Faculty Panel Member
   Ms. Julie Farmer, Student Panel Member

   Appearances:

   Ms. Tina Lie, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg
   Rothstein LLP
   Mr. William Webb, Co-Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg Rothstein LLP

   Not in Attendance:

   The Student

   Hearing Secretary:

   Ms. Nadia Bruno, Special Projects Officer, Office of Appeals,
   Discipline and Faculty Grievances

   The‚ØStudent‚Øwas charged under s. B.i.1(c)‚Øof the‚ØCode of Behaviour
   on Academic Matters, 1995‚Ø(the ‚Code‚) on the basis that she knowingly
   personated an individual at a final exam. The Student was also charged
   under s. B.i.1(a) of the Code on the basis that she knowingly forged or
   in any other way altered or falsified a document required by the
   University, or that she knowingly uttered, circulated or made use of
   that forged, altered or falsified document, namely a final exam. In the
   alternative, the‚ØStudent‚Øwas charged under s.‚ØB.i.3(b) of
   the‚ØCode‚Øon the basis that the‚ØStudent‚Øknowingly engaged in a form
   of cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud, or
   misrepresentation‚Øin order to‚Øobtain academic credit or other
   academic advantage‚Øin connection with a final exam.

   Neither the Student nor a legal representative of
   the‚ØStudent‚Øappeared at the hearing. Assistant Discipline Counsel
   (‚Counsel‚) advised the Panel that the Student, nor a legal
   representative for the Student, had responded to the Notice of
   Electronic Hearing. Counsel requested that the Panel proceed with the
   hearing in the absence of the Student. The Panel noted that s. 6 of the
   Statutory Powers and Procedures Act (‚SPPA‚) outlines that parties to a
   proceeding shall be given reasonable notice of hearing by the tribunal.
   Furthermore, s. 7(3) of the SPPA outlines that where reasonable notice
   of a hearing has been given to a party to a proceeding in accordance
   with the SPPA and the party does not participate in accordance with
   notice, the tribunal may proceed without the party‚s participation. The
   Panel noted that rule 17 of the University Tribunal‚s Rules of Practice
   and Procedure (‚Rules‚) mirrors that which is outlined in s. 7(3) of
   the SPPA. The Panel also outlined that rule 9 of the Rules provides
   that the charges, a notice of hearing, and disclosure may be served on
   a student by email or courier to the student‚s email or postal address
   in University of Toronto Repository of Student Information (‚ROSI‚).
   The University‚s‚ØPolicy on Official Correspondence with
   Students‚Øprovides that students are responsible for maintaining a
   current and valid postal address and email account in ROSI. Students
   are expected to monitor and retrieve all mail, including emails, on a
   frequent and consistent basis. The Panel noted that the onus of proof
   is on the University to demonstrate that it provided a student with
   reasonable notice of the hearing. The University provided evidence that
   the‚ØStudent‚Øhad been served via email and courier at her ROSI-listed
   email and postal addresses with the‚Øcharges‚Øand Notice of Electronic
   Hearing. The University also provided evidence that Counsel‚s assistant
   attempted to call the Student at the telephone number in ROSI but was
   unable to reach the Student or leave a message as the voicemail box had
   not been initialized. The University also provided evidence that the
   last time someone accessed the Student‚s email account was after the
   Notice of Electronic Hearing and the charges were served on the Student
   by email. Therefore, the Panel noted that the Student would have been
   able to read the Notice of Electronic Hearing. The Panel found that
   reasonable notice of the hearing had been provided and that it could
   hear the case on its merits in the absence of the Student. The hearing
   proceeded on the basis that the Student denied the charges made against
   her.

   Regarding the charges under ss. B.i.1(c) and B.i.1(a) of the Code, the
   Panel received affidavit evidence of the Professor who was the course
   coordinator of course for which the exam in question was submitted. The
   Professor‚s affidavit outlined that she found one exam booklet with
   identifying information that did not match any of the students enrolled
   in the course. The Panel noted that the Professor‚s affidavit also
   outlined that an Associate Professor who assisted her in reviewing the
   exam requested that the Computer Science Undergraduate Office search
   the student name and number that appeared on the exam booklet. No
   student with the student number or student name identified on the exam
   booklet turned up in their search. On review of the exam sign-in sheets
   and the class list, it was discovered that the Student signed in as
   present for the exam but did not submit a completed exam booklet. The
   University requested that the Student attend a meeting to discuss the
   exam. The Panel received affidavit evidence of the administrator who
   was present at the meeting with the Student. The administrator‚s
   affidavit outlined that the Student denied that the exam booklet in
   question was her exam.

   The Panel heard testimonial evidence of a Forensic Document Examiner,
   Diane Kruger, who was accepted as an expert in forensic document
   examination. Ms. Kruger testified that a name, student ID, and student
   number which had originally been written on the cover of the exam
   booklet had been erased and replaced. Ms. Kruger further testified that
   she attempted to recover the erased writing by visual inspection under
   various light sources and microscopic inspection, however, because the
   erasures were so thorough, she was not able to recover the erased
   writing. The Panel noted that Ms. Kruger outlined that it appeared as
   though lower-case letters ‚ssa‚ had been erased from the first name
   field on the exam. Furthermore, it appeared as though an upper case ‚L‚
   and lower-case ‚y‚ had been erased from the family name field. The
   Panel found that the only reasonable explanation for the Student being
   present at the exam but no exam booklet with her name on it was
   received is that when the Student realized she was going to fail the
   exam she erased her name and student number and replaced it with a
   fictitious name and student number. The Student was found guilty

   of forging or in any other way altering or falsifying an academic
   record, and/or uttering, circulating or making use of such forged,
   altered or falsified record. The University withdrew the first and
   third charge.

   In determining sanction,‚Øthe‚ØPanel received various authorities
   dealing with similar offences involving the falsification of documents.
   The Panel noted that the most relevant of these authorities imposed a
   sanction of a zero in the course, a two-year suspension, and a
   three-year notation. The Panel also considered the factors outlined in
   the University of Toronto v. Mr. C (Case No. 1976/77-3, November 5,
   1976). The Panel noted that there was no evidence of extenuating
   circumstances and no evidence of insight into her conduct. The
   University submitted that the forgery or falsification of an academic
   record is an offence of the utmost seriousness because such
   falsification both undermines the credibility of the University and of
   other students who have legitimately earned their degrees. The Panel
   agreed with this submission. The Panel imposed the following sanctions:
   final grade of zero in the courses; two-year suspension; three-year
   notation on transcript; and a report to the Provost for publication.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/30267
