Case #661

   DATE: February 29, 2012
   PARTIES: University of Toronto v. N.A.
   Hearing Date(s): January 18, 2012
   Panel Members:
   John Keefe, Chair
   Prof. Markus Bussmann, Faculty Member
   Dr. Gillian Reiss, Student Member
   Appearances:
   Ms. Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel for the University
   In Attendance:
   Ms. Betty-Ann Campbell, Law Clerk, Paliare Roland Barristers
   Dr. Eleanor Irwin, Dean's Designate
   Ms. Natalie Ramtahal, Coordinator, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty
   Grievances
   Trial Division â s. B.i.1(d) of Code â plagiarism â significant
   portions of essay copied from internet sources â hearing not attended â
   reasonable notice of hearing provided â course professor's testimony
   and evidence consisting of the contents on the websites - finding of
   guilt â three similar prior plagiarism offencesÂ  â offence not less
   serious than prior offences as the Student attempted to conceal her
   plagiarism â Student appreciated seriousness of offence, had no
   remorse, did not cooperate with the university, attempted to evade
   service, and did not intend to pursue academic career â grade
   assignment of zero for course; five-year suspension; seven-year
   notation on transcript; report to Provost
   Student charged under s. B.i.1(d), and alternatively, under s. B.i.3(b)
   of the Code. The charges related to allegations that the Student copied
   significant portions of her essay from various internet sources. The
   Student did not attend the hearing. The University made various
   attempts to contact the Student by calling and sending emails. The
   Student was also personally served with a notice of hearing at her
   residence. The Panel concluded that the Student was provided with
   reasonable notice. The Panel considered the course professor's
   testimony and evidence that allowed comparison of the Student's essay
   with the words found on the websites. The Panel concluded that portions
   of the Student's essay were lifted directly from the websites and found
   the Student guilty under s. B.i.1(d). The Student had committed three
   similar prior plagiarism offences. The Panel stated that the offence in
   question, although she did not lift the entire essay from the internet,
   is not less serious than the prior offences as the obvious changes in
   wording the Student made were evidence that she tried to conceal her
   plagiarism. The Panel found that the Student appreciated the
   seriousness of the offence as she had been disciplined on three
   different occasions. The Panel also found that the Student did not seem
   to have any remorse, did not cooperate with the University, attempted
   to evade service, and did not seem to intend to pursue her academic
   career. The Panel found the University's submission on penalty to be
   appropriate and reasonable in the circumstance. The Panel imposed a
   grade of zero in the course; a five-year suspension; a seven-year
   notation on the Student's academic record and transcript; and that a
   report be issued to the Provost.

   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/13019
