THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
TRIAL DMSION
IN THE MATTER OF charges of academic dishonesty filed on May 9, 2011 ,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic
Matters, 1995,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Act, 1971, S.O. 1971, c. 56 as amended
s.o. 1978, c. 88

BETWEEN:
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
-AND-

REASONS FOR DECISION

Hearing Date: Janua.-y 18, 2012
Members of the Panel:
Mr. John A. Keefe, Barrister and Solicitor, Chair
Professor Markus Bussmann, Faculty of Applied Science and Engineering, Faculty Panel

Member
Ms. Gillian Reiss, Student Panel Member
Appearances:
Ms. Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Barristers

In Attendance:
Ms. Betty-Ann Campbell, Law Clerk, Paliare Roland Barristers
Dr. Eleanor Irwin, Dean's Designate, University of Toronto Scarborough
Ms. Natalie Ramtahal, Coordinator, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances
Not in Attendance:
Ms. ~ Al, the Student

REASONS l?OR DECISION

I.

The Trial Division of the University Tribunal was co11vened on Wednesday, January 18,

2012, to consider charges under the Universily <f Toronlo Code cf Behaviour on Academic

Mallers, 1995 (the "Code") laid against NIii Al (the "Student").
SERVICE OF Tl IE NOTICE OF HEARING

2.

The Student was informed by letter dated May 9, 2011 from Professor Edith Hillan, Vice-

Provost, Faculty & Academic life, that she had been charged with academic offences and was
provided with particulars of those charges.
3.

Betty-Ann Campbell, a Law Clerk with Paliare Roland attended the hearing and provided

the Tribunal with an affidavit sworn on January 18, 2012. Various attempts were made by the
University and its Counsel to schedule a hearing. An attempt was made to deliver the disclosure
materials to the Student on May 26, 20 11. Ms. Campbell called the number on Ms.

Al'sROSI

contact information. A female who identified herself as Ms. Al's sister stated that Ms.

Al was

out of the country until September 2011.
4.

Various at1empts were made to contact the Student by e-mail. The Student responded by

e-mail advising that she ,vas in Pakistan on a placement program and would not be returning to
Toronto until the end of March 2012.
Ms. Campbell conducted various searches and concluded that the e-mail had been sent

5.

from an IP address in Scarborough, not Pakistan. Ms. Campbell then e-mailed the Student
explaining what she had found and provided her with options for a hearing date. The Student did
not respond.
6.

On December 14, 2011, the Office of the Governing Council sent Ms. ;'I the Notice of

Hearing, dated December 14, 2011 , returnable January 18, 2012 at 5:30 p.m., by e-mail and
couner.
7.

Ms.

Al was personally served with the Notice of Hearing at the residence in Scarborough

on January 2, 2012. A copy of the process server's Affidavit of Service was attached to the
affidavit of Betty-Ann Campbell.

-38.

The Tribunal concluded that the Student was provided with reasonable notice of the

hearing and concluded that it would proceed with the hearing in her absence.
THE CHARGE

9.

I 0.

The charges against the Student arc as follows:

I.

On or about July 21, 20 I 0, you knowingly represented as your own
an idea or expression of an idea, and/or work of another in
connection with a form of academic work, namely, an assay entitled
"Dracula; a male dominated novel however, Mina and Lucy are a
threat to his reality" ("Essay") that you submitted to fulfill the
course requirements of ENGC22H3, contrary to Section
B.l. l(d) of the Code <~f Behaviour on Academic Maffers,
I 0056 ("Code").

2.

In the alternative, on or about July 21, 20 I 0, you knowingly
engaged in a form of cheating, academic dishonesty or
misconduct, fraud or misrepresentation in order to obtain
academic credit or other academic advantage of any kind in an
Essay sub1nitted to folfill course requirements in ENGC22H3,
contrary to Section B.I.3(b) of the Code.

The particulars of the Charges arc as follows:
3.

At all material times you were a student in ENGC221-13 taught
by professor Sonja Nikkila during the summer of 2010.

4.

You did not write portions of the Essay submitted in your
name on or about July 21, 2010 in ENGC22H3, but rather
copied significant portions of the Essay from various
websites.

5.

For the purposes of obtaining academic credit and/or other
academic advantage, you knowingly committed plagiarism in
the Essay.

THE BACKGROUND FACTS

11.

Professor Sonja Nikkila testified at the hearing. She advised the Tribunal that the Student

was enrolled in course ENGC22H3 "Victorian Novel after 1860" in Summer of 2010.
12.

As part of the course requirements, the Student was required to submit an essay dealing

with one of the course texts. The Student submitted an Essay on July 21, 20 IO dealing with the

-4-

book "Dracula" written by Bram Stoker lilied: "Dracula; a male dominated novel, however Mina
and Lucy are a threat lo his reality."
13.

Professor Nikkila testified that at the beginning of the course the students were provided

a course outline that included the structure and expectations. The course outline stated:

About Plagiarism: Plagiarism is presenting the word and ideas
of someone else as your own, and il is an offence very
strongly disciplined by the university. The work you submit
in your assignment musl be original, and any quotations,
paraphrases, or ideas that you use from other sources besides
your own brain must be properly cited in MLA format. See
the University's Code qf Behaviour on Academic Mailers( ... )
for more on this.
14.

Professor Nikkila also posted on the course website a handout titled Essay Tips, Tricks,

and Expectations. This handout set out in great detail Professor Nikkila's expectations with
respect to content and format of essays for this course. There was a separate portion of this
handout titled "Quotation and Citation". This portion of the handout went into some detail
concerning the proper use of quotations and citations.

It contained the following specific

comment:

Don't use websites. Sure, as with any hard-and-fast rule,
there are definite exceptions. But let's keep things simple;
just don't. It's a shoddy way of doing research, to type "Alice
identity quest" into Google and see what comes up - also,
you're begging for a plagiarism hearing.

15.

Upon reading the Student's essay, Prolessor Nikkila suspected that the words in the essay

were lifted from the Internet. She did her own investigation and discovered that much of the
essay had been lifted from various ,vebsites including Sparknotes.com, Blurtit.com and
Multilingualarchive.com. The Tribunal examined some of the words and phrases in the essay
and compared these to the words contained in the websites. The Tribunal easily concluded that
many of the words and phrases in the essay were lifted directly from the websites.
16.

After considering all the evidence, the Tribunal concluded that the Charges had been

made out and it made a finding of guilt on Count I.
University.

Count 2 was then withdrawn by the

-5THE PENALTY

17.

The University submitted that the appropriate penalty, in the circumstances, was a grade

of zero in the course, a five year suspension and a notation on the Student's transcript for the
period of seven years with publication of a notice of the decision of the Tribunal and the sanction
imposed with the name of the Student withheld.
18.

As part of the penalty portion of the hearing, the Tribunal was provided with further

evidence from Professor Irwin, the Dean's Designate.
19.

Professor Irwin outlined for the Tribunal the history of previous academic penalties

imposed on the Student for plagiarism. The otlencc in question before the Tribunal was the
Student's fourth offence for plagiarism involving materials somced from the Internet.
20.

In May 2008, the Student admitted that she had plagiarised an essay in 2007 Fall session

in course ENGBOS. This course was taught by Professor Carson of the University of Toronto
Scat·borough.

He wrote a letter to the University advising that the paper submitted by the

Student incorporated an on-line essay more or less verbatim beginning in the middle of the first
paragraph through to the bottom of third page. After meeting with the Student, the Professor
advised the University that he was told by the Student that she had a fight with her father and,
instead of applying for a petition, she panicked and made a grievous error of judgment in using
an on-line essay as the basis of her essay. Professor Carson advised the University that he found
her account wholly convincing and her remorse genuine and considerable.
21.

On May 21, 2008, Professor Irwin met with the Student to deal with this charge. The

Student admitted that she had plagiarised the essay.

Based on the Student's admission, in

relation to ENGB0S, Professor Irwin applied a penalty of zero for the assignment which was
worth 35% and the further reduction equal to the value of the assignment. This resulted in the
overall reduction in the value of the course by 70%. A notation on the Student's transcript was
made for the period of one year from January 1, 2008.
22.

Professor Irwin noted in her letter to the Student elated May 27, 2008 that the Student had

admitted to a second offence at the time the May 21, 2008 session was held.

Second Offence

-6-

23.

On May 1, 2008, the University was notified that the Student had submitted an essay in

ENGBS I HS that consisted almost entirely of materials that matched sources found on the
Internet. Specifically, large parts of the essay were taken frorn SparkNotes and I 23helpme.com.
In fact, parts of the essay were copied and pasted directly into the essay. The essay was worth
30%. in the course
24.

On May 27, 2008, Professor Irwin wrote a separate letter to the Student indicating that

she had met with her on Wednesday, May 21, 2008. Professor Irwin stated that the Student
wished to have the second offence in ENGBS l investigated and dealt with at the same time. The
Student admitted that she had plagiarized the essay and said that she understood that this was an
academic offence.
25.

On the basis of the Student's admission of the second offence, Professor Irwin applied a

penalty of zero to the course and suspended the Student from the University for a period of four
months from May 1, 2008. She also made a notation on the Student's academic record and
transcript for period of two years from May 1, 2008.

Third Offence
26.

On May 29, 2008, that is, after the meeting on May 21, 2008 which dealt with the first

two offences, the University was notified that in ENGB 17 in the Spring 2008 term, the Student
had submitted an essay in which almost half of the essay had been directly lifted from an Internet
source.
27.

On September 10, 2008, Professor Irwin met with the Student to deal with the third

otlence in ENGB 17. The Student concocted an explanation that she handed in the wrong version
of the essay. Atter further inquiry this story fell apart and the Student ultimately admitted that
she plagiarized this essay.
28.

The last two offences were in relation to essays in ENGBS l submitted on April 3, 2008

and ENGB17 submitted on March 26, 2008. Both of these two essays were plagiarized while the
hearing with respect of the first offence was pending. In these circumstances, Professor Irwin
decided that, rather than submit the matter to the Vice Provost, she would deal with it at her
level. She applied a penalty of zero in the course, and she suspended the Student from the

-7-

University for the period of twelve months. This meant that the Student could not register until
the Fall of 2009.
29.

The offence in question occurred in the summer of 2010, that is, in the year following the

period of the Studenf s suspension.
30.

Clearly, the Student did not learn her lesson.

GUIDELINES ON PENALTY

31.

32.

The Factors to be considered when determining penalty are well established:
(a)

the character of the person charged;

(b)

the likelihood of a repetition of the offence;

(c)

the natme of the offence committed;

(d)

any extenuating circumstances surrounding commission of the offence;

(e)

the detriment to the University occasioned by the offence;

(f)

the need to deter others from committing a similar offence.

The Tribunal, in determining the appropriate penalty, should consider various factors in

order to find a fit sentence for this offender, for this offence in this community. In doing so,
fairness, balance and proportion must be balanced.
33.

There should be some measure of uniformity or proportionality so that there should be

similar sentences imposed for offences committed in similar circumstances. The sentencing
should preserve and ensure fairness by avoiding disproportionate sentences among similar
sentencing processes so that there are not wide swings or inconsistencies between like offences
and like offenders, recognizing that there is never a like offence or like offender.
34.

There should be a range of sentences for offences such as plagiarism with sentences

within that range moving up or down within that range depending on aggravating or mitigating
circumstances.

-835.

Applying these general principles to this case, the Tribunal considered the following

factors. The Student was not in attendance at the hearing. The Tribunal concluded that the
Student had attempted lo evade service. The Student did not cooperate with the University with
respect lo these charges. Neither the Student nor other witnesses were called on behalf of the
Student to provide any evidence of mitigating circumstances or character evidence. There was
no evidence before the Tribunal conceming the Student's personal or family background, or the
Student's activities or her academic intentions.
36.

AHer examining the prior offences of the Student, the Tribunal concluded that the

Student was well aware of the seriousness of the offence of plagiarism. She had been disciplined
on three prior occasions and had received two prior suspensions including a suspension of one
year.
37.

The circumstances of this particular offence appeared at first to the Tribunal lo be of a

less serious nature than some of the prior offences in that she had not lifted the entire essay from
the Internet. However, in this case, the Student made obvious changes to the words taken from
the Internet, which the Tribunal concluded was circumstantial evidence that she did so in order to
conceal her plagiarism.
38.

The academic offence of plagiarism is a serious breach of the University's standards of

ethical behaviour.

It undermines the relationship of trust between the University and the

students. This is particularly serious given the access to the Internet and the wide source of
information available on the Internet. Plagiarism associated with the Internet has became a
serious problem in the University environment. As stated in the decision of the University <~l

Toronto and SB. of November 14, 2007 (Case 488), the principles of general deterrence must be
considered:

It hardly needs to be said that the credibility and academic
mission of the University, and the degrees which it awards to
its students, can be greatly harmed by the commission of
offences such as plagiarism and concoction.
39.

Every offence and every offender is unique. In this case, it is clear to the Tribunal that

the Student appreciated the seriousness of the offence and yet went ahead and committed the
offence. She does not seem to have any remorse. She did not cooperate with the University in

-9this process and she atlemplcd lo evade service. There is no indication that she intends to pmsue
her academic career.
40.

ln the circumstances, the Tribunal concluded that the five year suspension proposed by

the University was appropriate. ln doing so, the Tribunal does not wish to indicate that in every
case of multiple counts of plagiarism, a five years suspension is appropriate. The individual
circumstances of the offence and the offender must be considered in every case.
41.

Overall, the Tribunal concluded that the penalty suggested by the University was

reasonable and appropriate in the circumstances.
ORDER

42.

Accordingly, the Tribunal has determined that the penalty m the circumstances is as

fo ll ows:
(a)

impose a final grade of zero in the course ENGC22H3;

(b)

suspend the Student from the University commencing January 19, 2012, for a
period of five years, ending in January 1, 2017;

(c)

impose a notation on her academic record and transcript from the date of the
Order unti I January I, 2019; and

(cl)

Report this case to the Provost f'or publication of n notice of the decision or the
Tribunal and the sanctions imposed, ,,vith the name of !he student withheld.

Dated F<.:-brnaryl /, 2012

