UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
IN THE MATTER OF charges of academic dishonesty made on January 21, 2016
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic

Matters, 1995,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Act, 1971, S.O. 1971, c. 56 as amended
S.O. 1978, C. 88
BETWEEN:
UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO (the "University")
-AND-

NI DIIIIIIII (the "Student")
REASONS FOR DECISION
Hearing Date: April 6, 2016
Panel Members:
Ms. Roslyn M. Tsao, Lawyer, Chair
Professor Pascal Van Lieshout, Department of Speech-Language Pathology, Faculty Panel
Member
Mr. David Kleinman, Student Panel Member
Appearances:
Ms. Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel for University, Paliare Roland Barristers
Ms. Lucy Gaspini, Manager, Academic Integrity and Affairs, University of Toronto-Mississauga
Dr. Bernice Iarocci, Instructor for FahlOl: Introduction to Art History
In Attendance:
Ms. Krista Osbourne, Administrative Assistant, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances
Not in Attendance:
Ms. NI~' Student

2

1.

The Trial Division of the Tribunal heard this matter on April 6, 2016. The Student was
charged on January 21, 2015 with the following:
(a)

On or about November 27, 2014, she knowingly represented as her own an idea or
expression of an idea, and/or the work of another in an essay titled "Modernity
and the spaces of Femininity" (the "Essay") that she submitted for academic
credit in FAHl 01H5F: Introduction to Art History (the "Course"), contrary to
section B.I.l(d) of the Code.

(b)

On or about November 27, 2014, she knowingly obtained unauthorized assistance
in connection with the essay, which she submitted for academic credit in the
Course, contrary to section B.I.l(b) of the Code (the "Essay").

(c)

In the alternative, on or about November 27, 2014, she knowingly engaged in a
form of cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or misrepresentation
not otherwise described in the Code in order to obtain academic credit or other
academic advantage of any kind in connection with the Essay, which she
submitted for academic credit in the Course, contrary to section B.I.3(b) of the

Code.
Hearing to Proceed in Absence of Student
2.

The Student did not attend at the Hearing. The Tribunal waited for a half hour after the
scheduled commencement of the Hearing to allow for the Student to appear.

3.

The University presented evidence to the Tribunal" confirming the Student's ROSI
Record, which set out her email address ("ROSI Email") and mailing address for service
purposes. The Student has, throughout her attendance at the University actively updated
her contact information on the ROSI system.

4.

On January 21, 2016, the University served the Student with the formal Charges dated
January 21, 2016 by e-mail to her ROSI Email.

5.

Counsel for the University also emailed the Student on February 26, 2016 with a letter
setting out a summary of anticipated evidence of its witnesses to her ROSI Email.

3

6.

On March 7, 2016, the University served the Student by email to her ROSI Email with
the Notice of Hearing dated March 7, 2016 advising of the April 6, 2016 hearing date.

7.

There were no "bounce backs" of any of these three emails.

8.

As service of the Charges and Notice of Hearing was effected in accordance with
Paragraph 9(c) of the Rules of Practice and Procedure, the Panel proceeded with the
Hearing in the absence of the Student.

9.

The Student was contacted by the Office of the Dean at UTM (Academic Integrity) on or
about March 31, April 9, 17 and 20, 2015 by email to her ROSI Email to schedule a
Dean's meeting in regards to alleged academic dishonesty with regard to a paper
submitted in the Course. There was evidence provided that the Student had logged into
her ROSI account on April 14th, April 1?1h and April 2?1h, 2015.

10.

As such, even though the Student was subject to an academic suspension after the Winter,
2015 term (ie., after April, 2015), she was aware by that time that there were efforts by
the Dean's Designate to meet with her regarding allegations of academic dishonesty
before that suspension. The Student failed to respond to the invitations of the Office of
Academic Integrity to meet and was aware from the emails that the matter would be
referred to the Tribunal.

Facts
Evidence of Dr. Bernice Iarocci, Instructor of FAHJ 01

11.

Dr. Iarocci was the instructor of the Course, Introduction to Art History, in the Fall of
2014. Dr. Iarocci was granted her doctorate degree from the University of Toronto in Art
History in April, 2015 and has taught Art History for 20 years at the University.

12.

In the Fall, 2014 session of the Course, there were approximately 150 students. There
were 2 hours of weekly lectures and a 1 hour weekly tutorial. Evaluation was comprised
of 2 writing assignments, a mid-term test and a final examination in addition to tutorial
participation.

4

13.

The Course also comprised a mandatory Writing Module taught by Dr. Michael Kaler
which would account for 15% of a student's final grade in the Course. There was a 1
hour weekly tutorial for the Writing Module. The evaluation for the Writing Module
comprised 2 quizzes, 3 exercises and 2 assignments along with a Final Test.

14.

Dr. Iarocci had 4 Teaching Assistants ("TAs") who were involved in the Course tutorials
as well as the Writing Module tutorials and who attended to marking assignments,
quizzes and exercises and other duties in the normal course.

15.

Dr. Iarocci confirmed that she discussed the nature of academic dishonesty, as outlined in
the syllabus, in the first lecture and that the T As are told to address academic dishonesty
in the tutorial dedicated to each of the two assignments in the Course.

Dr. Iarocci

believed that Dr. Kaler also discussed academic integrity in the Writing Module.
16.

The allegation of academic dishonesty, which is being characterized as plagiarism and/or
use of unauthorized assistance, came to the attention of Dr. Iarocci from the Student's
TA.

17.

The second written assignment in the Course was submitted by the Student on November
28, 2014 through Turnitin.com, an essay entitled "Modernity and the spaces of
Femininity" ("Essay").

18.

The TA, Mr. Murray, reviewed the Essay and became susp1c10us because of the
following:
(a)

the Student's first written assignment (submitted October 3, 2014) was markedly
inferior with respect to grammar, punctuation, syntax, argument, structure and
sophistication, having a grade of 63%;

(b)

the Student's mark in the Writing Module to that point was 3.5/15; and

(c)

the quality of the Essay was an "A" paper with proper grammar, punctuation,
syntax, coherence and structure, and advanced level of analysis (which Dr. Iarocci
compared to that of a very proficient undergraduate student).

5

19.

Dr. Iarocci reviewed the Student's first assignment and the Essay and agreed with the
TA's suspicion that the improvement in the Student's performance from the 1st
Assignment to the 2nd Essay was not likely due to mere improvement in writing skills and
analytical insight over a period of under 2 months.

20.

As a consequence, Dr. Iarocci emailed the Student on December 17, 2014 and asked to
meet with her to discuss her Essay the following day.

The Student responded on

December 18 th advising that she had a final exam and offered to meet after finishing her
exam the next day.
21.

It appears from further emails tendered that Dr. Iarocci and the Student did not meet
rd

before the winter holidays. Dr. Iarocci emailed the Student on January 3 , 2015 and
asked to meet with her on January 5th when the new term began. The Student emailed in
response on January 6th advising that she was out of the country and was returning on
January 10th . On January 9t\ Dr. Iarocci emailed about meeting on January 12th to which
the Student responded asking for another time that day. Dr. Iarocci accommodated her
request. It appears that the Student and Dr. Iarocci did not meet on January 12th and Dr.
Iarocci submitted a report to the Chair of the department about the matter. Dr. Iarocci,
nevertheless, invited the Student to meet with her on January 19th which the Student
accepted by email.
22.

Dr. Iarocci and the Student did meet but Dr. Iarocci had no recollection of the exact date.
Anything discussed at the meeting would have been privileged in any event from the
Tribunal.

23.

With respect to the Essay, Dr. Iarocci commented as follows:
(a)

one rarely sees the proper use of semi-colons, colon and dashes for students at this
level;

(b)

there was much more coherence in argumentation within paragraphs and overall
in the Essay compared to the first assignment;

6

(c)

the content demonstrated a "high level of thinking", more akin to a 3rd or 4th year
level student;

(d)

the sentences in the Essay were longer and more complex in syntax than those
used in the Student's 1st assignment;

(e)

the citation of the source in the footnote was completely correct, which is notable
for a first year student's paper;

(f)

there was a sophistication in the Essay that was absent from the Student's 1st
assignment with ideas/concepts that "built" through the paragraphs; and

(g)

The Student's performance in the Course was not commensurate with the quality
of the Essay, noting that the Student obtained grades of 15% in her mid-term and
a final examination mark of 45%. The Student did receive 8/10 for Tutorial
participation.

24.

Dr. Iarocci believed that there might have been 1 or 2 other students in her course who
would have been capable of writing an essay such as the Essay. However, given the
Student's performance in the Writing Module assignments and the sample of her work in
the 1st assignment, it was her view that the Essay was not the Student's work.

25.

Dr. Iarocci did not speak to Dr. Kaler about the Student nor did she review any of the
assignments submitted in the Writing Module. However, the TA, Mr. Murray, was the
Student's TA and marked her assignments for the Course, including the Writing Module
and he was in a position to query the difference in quality between the Student's 1st and
2nd writing assignments in the Course.

Evidence of Ms. Lucy Gaspini

26.

Ms. Gaspini appeared on behalf of the Office of Academic Integrity at UTM. Emails
from the Office to the Student were sent on March 31, April 9, April 17 and April 20,
2015 requesting a meeting with the Dean's office. There was no response to any of these
communications by the Student even though the Student had logged into her ROSI
account during that period.

7

27.

Accordingly, the matter was referred to the Tribunal for resolution.

Decision of the Tribunal
28.

The onus is on the University to demonstrate that there is clear and compelling evidence
that the Student plagiarized part or all of her Essay and/or that the Student used
unauthorized assistance to write her exam.

29.

As counsel for the University argued, the level of change from the Student's pnor
performance to the Essay in late November was "so remarkable" as to be highly
suspicious.

30.

Upon review of the two written assignments, the Panel agrees that the degree of
improvement in this case is not only suspicious but compelling enough to find that the
Essay submitted by the Student contained ideas or expressions of another person without
citation and/or the use of unauthorized and unattributed assistance.

31.

It is more likely than not that another person, other than the Student, wrote the Essay

given the Student's performance on the 1st Assignment and on the balance of the Course
and Writing Module. It is not merely an improvement to the grammar and punctuation
that can be observed, it is a wholesale development of advanced conceptual analysis and
expression skills demonstrated in the Essay.
32.

The Panel notes, and the University is not suggesting, that improvement of such caliber is
not impossible. However, in this case, there is evidence which makes it very unlikely
that Student improved to near the degree required to render the Essay independently: the
quality of her first writing assignment, failing grades in her midterm and final
examination, her substandard performance in the Writing Module and the consistency of
one TA throughout the Course who had the ability to observe the presence or absence of
any gradual improvement in the Student's performance over the term (in this case,
absence of improvement which raised his suspicions).

33.

Accordingly, the Panel finds the Student guilty of Charges 1 and 2.

34.

The University withdrew the third charge.

8
Penalty

35.

The University sought the following penalty:
(a)

azeroinFAHIOl;and

(b)

a suspension from the University for 2 years commencing the date when the
Student's 3 year academic suspension ends on April 30, 2018; and

(c)

a notation of the sanction be recorded on the Student's academic record from the
date of this Order to a date which is two years after the date on which she reenrols in the University following the completion of her suspensions.

36.

The Student has no prior record of academic misconduct. The University tendered no
other evidence on penalty.

37.

The Student is currently suspended from the University on an academic suspension which
commenced on May 1, 2015 for 3 years due to her poor GPA. Although the Course is a
first year course, the Student was in her 2nd calendar year of studies having first enrolled
in Fall 2012 with a partial course load.

38.

The Panel agrees that a sanction of a zero in the course and a 2 year suspension is not
inappropriate for a first offence of plagiarism/unauthorized assistance, however, the
question of the commencement date for such suspension requires further consideration.

39.

The University sought the commencement of the 2 year suspension to be consecutive to
the academic suspension which would result in the Student's aggregate suspension period
to be 5 years in total.

40.

In terms of aggravating circumstances, the University noted that the Student ignored the
communications from the Office of Academic Integrity to even address the allegations
and has chosen not to participate in the process, leading to the necessity of a full hearing.
The University stressed that specific deterrence would be forfeited if, for example, the
suspension was concurrent to the academic (longer) suspension. We agree with that
observation in part.

9

41.

The Panel was not comfortable with the practical effect of a consecutive 5 year
suspension in the circumstances as it is tantamount to the effects of expulsion. There may
be a possibility, albeit small, that this Student could seek to re-enrol and overcome many
challenges to graduate from the University and a first offence of this nature would not
otherwise prohibit such attempt in another case.

42.

The Panel, therefore, imposes the requested 2 year suspension starting on May 1, 2017,
one year before the end of the academic suspension. This has the practical result of the
Student being required to be absent from the University for a total of 4 years.

43.

It is noted that this situation is somewhat anomalous in that there is a 3 year academic

suspension contemporaneous to the Tribunal sanctioning.
44.

We do not wish to be viewed as concluding that a consecutive suspension in other like
situations is categorically not appropriate. It is a matter of discretion for the Tribunal
hearing the matter and counsel kindly provided two cases illustrating same, one where the
Tribunal suspension was consecutive to a lengthy academic suspension and one where
the University did not seek a consecutive suspension where an academic suspension had
not been completed at the time of sanction.

45.

The Panel, therefore, imposes the following sanctions:
(a)

THAT the Student receive a final grade of zero in FAH101H5 in Fall 2014;

(b)

THAT the Student be suspended from the University for a period of two

years, commencing on May 1, 2017 after the completion of two years of her
existing three year academic suspension, and ending on April 30, 2019; and
(c)

THAT the sanction be recorded on the Student's academic record and transcript

to the effect that she was sanctioned for academic misconduct, from the date of
this Order to a date which is two years after the date on which she re-enrols in the
University following the completion of her suspension.

10
46.

The Tribunal is to report this decision to the Provost for publication of a notice of the
decision of the Tribunal and the sanctions imposed in the University's newspapers, with
the name of the Student withheld.

Dated at Toronto, this

day of April, 2016

