Case 842

DATE:

   April 21, 2016

PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v N.D.

Hearing Date(s):

   April 6, 2016

Panel Members:

   Roslyn M. Tsao, Chair
   Pascal Van Lieshout, Faculty Member
   David Kleinman, Student Member

Appearances:

   Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel
   Lucy Gaspini, Manager, Academic Integrity and Affairs, University of
   Toronto Mississauga
   Bernice Iarocci, Instructor of the Course

In Attendance:

   Krista Osbourne, Administrative Assistant, Appeals, Discipline and
   Faculty Grievances

   Student charged under s. B.i.1(d) , s. B.i.1(b) and, in the
   alternative, s. B.i.3(b) of the Code . The charges related to
   allegations that the Student knowingly represented as her own ideas the
   work of another in the Essay, and that she knowingly obtained
   unauthorized assistance in connection with the Essay. The Student was
   not present at the hearing. The Panel took into account evidence that
   the Student had logged into her ROSI account and therefore concluded
   that even though the Student was subject to an academic suspension by
   the time notice of the allegations were sent to her, she was aware of
   the allegations and reasonable notice of the hearing was provided
   pursuant to Paragraph 9(c) of the Rules of Practice and Procedure .

   Student found guilty of plagiarism and unauthorized aid. The University
   then withdrew the alternative charge of academic dishonesty. The Panel
   took into account the level of change from the Studentâs prior
   performance to the Essay, noting that it was not merely an improvement
   to the grammar and punctuation that could be observed; it was a
   wholesale development of advanced conceptual analysis and expression
   skills. The Panel concluded that the change was so remarkable as to
   find that it was more likely than not that another person, other than
   the Student, wrote the Essay. The Panel considered the Studentâs choice
   to ignore communications from the Office of Academic Integrity and to
   not participate in the discipline process to be an aggravating factor.
   The Panel did not fully accept the Universityâs submission on penalty,
   noting that the practical effect of commencing a 2-year suspension
   consecutive to the Studentâs unrelated 3-year academic suspension (for
   a total of 5 consecutive years) would be tantamount to expulsion. The
   Panel clarified that a consecutive suspension in other like situations
   may be appropriate; it is a matter of discretion for the Tribunal
   hearing the matter. The Panel imposed a grade assignment of zero in the
   Course; a 2-year suspension, beginning after the completion of two
   years of the Studentâs three year academic suspension; a notation on
   the Studentâs academic record and transcript from the date of the Order
   to a date which is two years after the date on which the Student
   re-enrols in the University following her suspension; and that the case
   be reported to the Provost for publication.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12900
