Report 283

DATE:

   October 16, 2003

PARTIES:

   Mr. M.N. (the Student) v. UTSC

Hearing Date(s):

   September 16, 2003

Committee Members:

   Professor Emeritus R. Scane (Chair)
   Mr. M. Ahmad
   Professor R. Elliott
   Mrs. S. Scace
   Professor J. Thiessen

Secretary:

   Mr. P. Holmes, Judicial Affairs Officer

Appearances:

For The Student:

   Mr. M.N. (the Student)
   Mrs. N.

For UTSC:

   Associate Dean I. McDonald

   Request for late withdrawal without academic penalty from one course.
   Alternatively, the Student requested that aegrotat standing be
   considered. The Student failed the course after receiving less than 40%
   of the marks available on the final examination. The Student had passed
   the examinations in three other courses during the examination period.
   The Student successfully repeated the course in a subsequent term and
   requested the remedy in order to improve his GPA and remove the failure
   from the transcript. The Student claimed that he was suffering from a
   sore throat and shortness of breath which affected his performance on
   the examination. The Committee found that while the Studentâs medical
   evidence was deficient, his viva voce submissions did establish that he
   was ill at the time he was writing his examination, and that the
   illness had an impact on his abilities during the examination period.
   The Committee considered whether the deficiencies in the medical
   evidence should prevent the Committee from acting on its own finding of
   fact. The Committee found that it would not debar itself from acting on
   its own finding of fact, because a student may not be successful in
   persuading the doctor to prepare the evaluation that University
   regulations contemplate, or may feel reluctant to challenge the
   sufficiency of what is proffered. The Committee found the Divisional
   Appeals Committeeâs negative conclusions regarding âthe problem of
   selectivityâ to be unfair. The Committee stated that it does not
   believe that a student who was adversely affected by illness during an
   examination period is unreasonable in accepting a favourable
   examination result, nor does it believe that such a student is being
   inconsistent or unreasonable in appealing other examination results
   which were unfavourable. The Committee found that the requirement for
   granting aegrotat standing was met. The Student was unable to complete
   course requirements within a reasonable time because the illness
   affected the final examination, he could not complete that examination
   requirement until he was successful on a petition and, once successful,
   events had made completion of the course unnecessary. Appeal allowed.
   The Committee ordered that the grade of âFâ be vacated and replaced
   with a grade of AEG.Â  The Committee recommended that the University
   take a more proactive role in reviewing the submission of medical
   documentation when accepting petitions.
   [1]View Report

References

   1. file:///media/12653
