Case #782

   DATE: April 15, 2015
   PARTIES: University of Toronto v G.E.
   Hearing Date(s): February 18, 2015
   Panel Members:
   Roslyn Tsao, Chair
   Pascal Van Lieshout, Faculty Member
   Brian Lynch, Student Member
   Appearances:
   Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel
   David Perley, Course Instructor
   Wayne Dowler, Deanâs Designate, UTS
   In Attendance:
   Jesse Elders, Articling Student
   Natalie Ramtahal, Coordinator, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty
   Grievances
   Trial Division â s. B.i.1(d) and B.i.3(b) of the Code â student does
   not appear â plagiarism â no past misconduct â grade of zero in course;
   two-year suspension; three-year notation on transcript; report to
   Provost for publication
   The Student was charged with plagiarism contrary to s. B.i.1(d) and, in
   the alternative, one charge s. B.i.3(b) of the Code . The Student did
   not attend the hearing and it was noted that the Student had
   communicated to the University that he did not plan to attend or
   participate. The Panel was satisfied that the Student had reasonable
   notice of the hearing and had been emailed and phoned in accordance
   with the Rules of Practice and Procedure of the University Tribunal and
   the hearing proceeded.
   The University called the course instructor as a witness. He testified
   that he reviewed the issue of academic misconduct and that Turnitin.com
   would be used to detect plagiarism. The Student submitted an assignment
   which was flagged by Turnitin.com and the instructor noticed there were
   no references or citations. The Panel had no trouble identifying
   plagiarism and attempts to hide it. The Deanâs Designate testified that
   the Student did not respond to his attempts to reach him. The Student
   had not returned to the University since being placed on academic
   probation.
   The Panel found the Student guilty of plagiarism and the University
   withdrew the alternative charge.
   The University sought a penalty of a grade of zero in the course, a
   two-year suspension, and a notation in the Studentâs academic record
   for three years. The Student had no prior record of academic misconduct
   and had not registered at the University since the Winter 2014 term.
   The Panel assigned a grade of zero in the course, imposed a two-year
   suspension, ordered a notation on the Studentâs transcript for three
   years, and ordered that the case be reported to the Provost for
   publication.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12873
