Case #673

   DATE: March 7, 2013
   PARTIES: University of Toronto v. Z.A.
   Hearing Date(s): February 6, 2013
   Panel Members:
   John Keefe, Chair
   Ann Tourangeau, Faculty Member
   Afshin Ameri, Student Member
   Appearances:
   Robert Centa, Assistant Discipline Counsel for the University
   Jeff Marshman, Student Representative, DLS
   In Attendance:
   The Student
   Lucy Gaspini, manager, Academic Integrity & Affairs, UTM
   Christopher Lang, Director, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances
   Trial Division â s. B.i.1(d) and s. B.i.1(f) the Code â plagiarism and
   concocted sources â submitted essay containing plagiarized passages and
   references to concocted sources â Agreed Statement of Facts â guilty
   plea accepted â Joint Submission on Penalty â two prior plagiarism
   offences â substantial mitigating factors â Studentâs husband had left
   her the day before the assignment was due â Student was sole provider
   for young daughter â Studentâs family had severed contact with Student
   â assignment worth only 7% of final grade â joint Submission on Penalty
   accepted â grade assignment of zero for the course; 31-month
   suspension; five-year notation on transcript or until graduation
   whichever is earlier; report to Provost for publication.
   Student charged with one offence under s. B.i.1(d) , one offence under
   s. B.i.1(f) , and in the alternative, one offence under s. B.i.3(b) of
   the Code . The charges related to an allegation that the Student
   submitted an essay that included verbatim or nearly verbatim passages
   from a secondary source that were not properly cited. The Student
   pleaded guilty to the charge under s. B.i.1(d) and the matter proceeded
   on the basis of an Agreed Statement of Facts. The remaining charges
   were withdrawn. The Panel was provided with a Joint Submission on
   Penalty which set out the relevant factual circumstances. The Student
   had been found guilty of two prior plagiarism offences. On the second
   plagiarism offence, the Deanâs Designate had imposed a final grade of
   zero in the course, an eight-month suspension, and a one-year
   transcript notation. The Student was five-months pregnant at the time
   of this offence before the Tribunal. The Studentâs husband informed her
   a day before the assignment was due that he was leaving her. The
   Student had been married to her husband for three years after an
   arranged marriage in Afghanistan. The Studentâs husband suggested she
   procure an abortion as he would not help her with the child. The
   Studentâs family told the Student that these problems were all of her
   own doing. The Studentâs family had not approved of her choice to get
   pregnant prior to finishing school. The Studentâs family offered no
   support when her husband left and thereafter severed all contact with
   the Student. At the time of the hearing, the Student remained for sole
   provider for her newborn daughter and stated her concerns about
   delaying the labour-market advantages a completed degree would provide
   for her. The Student had completed all of the courses necessary for her
   to graduate. The only impediment to her graduation was the outcome of
   the Tribunal hearing. The Panel noted the substantial personal
   mitigating factors and accepted the Joint Submission on Penalty. The
   Panel imposed a final grade of zero in the course, a 31-month sentence,
   a notation on the Studentâs transcript lasting five years or until
   graduation, and that the case be reported to the Provost for
   publication in the University newspapers.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12798
