Case 709

DATE:

   July 10, 2017

PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v. C.S. (the "Studentâ)

Hearing Date(s):

   June 20, 2017

Panel Members:

   Mr. Bernard Fishbein, Chair
   Professor Ann Tourangeau, Faculty Panel Member
   Ms. Susan Mazzatto, Student Panel Member

Appearances:

   Mr. Robert Centa, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland
   Barristers
   Ms. Tina Lie, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Barristers
   Ms. Maryan Shahid, Summer Student, Paliare Roland Barristers
   Ms. Carol Shirtliff-Hinds, Shirtliff-Hinds Law Office, Counsel for the
   Student (for adjournment request only)
   Mr. Vincent Rocheleau, Articling Student, Shirtliff-Hinds Law Office
   (for adjournment request only)
   Professor Luc De Nil, Vice-Dean, Students, School of Graduate Studies

In Attendance:

   Mr. Christopher Lang, Director, Office of Appeals, Discipline and
   Faculty Grievances ("ADFG")
   Ms. Krista Osbourne, Administrative Clerk & Hearing Secretary, ADFG
   Mr. Sean Lourim, Office of the Governing Council, IT Specialist
   Ms. Nora Gillespie, Senior Legal Counsel, Office of the Vice-President
   and Provost, University of Toronto

Not in Attendance

   The Student

   The Student was charged with one charge of plagiarism contrary to s.
   B.i.1(d) of the Code , or in the alternative one charge of academic
   dishonesty under s. B.i.3(b) of the Code . The charges related to
   events that occurred in 1996, when the Student's Ed.D. dissertation was
   submitted with at least 67 passages of text, including some passages
   that were several pages long, that had been copied from unattributed
   sources. The issue came to light in 2013, over ten years after the
   Student had been granted his degree. At a meeting with the Deanâs
   Designate, the Student admitted to copying the passages in his
   dissertation from unattributed sources.

   Since 2013 when the charges were first laid, there had been a number of
   interlocutory decisions and adjournments that delayed this hearing.Â
   Dr S. did not attend the hearing, but had a representative request for
   a further adjournment on his behalf because he was experiencing mental
   health issues, specifically, he had an anxiety attack the previous day.
   The Panel declined to adjourn the hearing because: (1) unsubstantiated
   mental health issues did not meet the standard to grant an adjournment
   of âactual disability or incapacity to participateâ in the proceedings;
   (2) the Student had failed to make mention of any health-related issues
   in the Divisional Court proceedings that had occurred days earlier,
   which raised the inference that the Student did not intend to travel
   from Chicago to Toronto for the hearing; and (3) the Panel was not
   advised that the Student was hospitalized or under immediate medical
   supervision due to an acute crisis.Â  Given the protracted history of
   the proceedings, the Panel inferred that the Student was aware of the
   need for medical evidence to corroborate his application for
   adjournment. In the absence of any medical evidence, the Panel declined
   Studentâs application for an adjournment. The hearing proceeded without
   the Student's or his representative present.

   The Panel found that in the Studentâs dissertation there was clear
   evidence of plagiarism in the sheer number and extent of non-attributed
   sources had been used repeatedly and had been altered and changed in an
   attempt to hide their real sources. Upon the Panel finding the Student
   to be guilty of plagiarism, the University withdrew the alternative
   charge of academic dishonesty.

   The Panel found that the Student had committed a serious form of
   plagiarism, both in terms of sheer volume and in terms of tailoring
   unattributed sources to fit the Studentâs thesis while concealing the
   original sources. Though the Student had admitted to plagiarism at the
   Deanâs Designate meeting, the Universityâs view was that the Student
   had deliberately delayed the disciplinary process in the subsequent
   years.Â  While the Panel acknowledged that the Student had the right to
   make the University establish its case, the Studentâs conduct
   throughout the disciplinary process led the Panel to infer a lack of
   remorse, a lack of appreciation of the gravity of the offence
   committed, or any other mitigating circumstances.

   The Panel imposed a final grade of zero in the affected course, that
   the Studentâs Ed.D. degree be cancelled and recalled, that the
   cancellation be permanently noted on the Studentâs academic transcript,
   that the University remove the Student's thesis from any library, and
   that the decision be published with the the Student's name withheld.
   Due to the severity of the Student's academic misconduct, the majority
   of the Tribunal (Co-Chair dissenting) also recommended that the Student
   be expelled in order to make it clear that any future academic
   engagement of the Student at the University was prohibited.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/13045
