APPENDIX A

-8 -

What next?
[17]

The University urged me therefore to now just dismiss (or treat as

abandoned) the disqualification motion both because Dr. S

had failed to

appear and because he had repeatedly refused to make the production required
to deal with the disqualification motion. Both the Code and the Tribunal's
jurisprudence provide ample authority to proceed in the absence of one of the
parties having notice of these proceedings and there is no question of notice to
Dr. S
S

. I was not prepared to do that just yet - solely on the basis of Dr.
's non-attendance. Rather, I indicated to the University that on the facts

not in dispute (or as advanced by Dr. S

) I also wished to hear the

University's submissions as to why Dr. S

's disqualification motion should

fail. I indicated to the extent necessary, I was prepared to draw adverse
inferences concerning any documents that were referred to that Dr. S

had

failed to produce in accordance with the previous direction of the Tribunal. In the
end, that was largely unnecessary, as the University essentially relied on Dr.
S

's own motion brief, his own affidavit and the exhibits attached to his

affidavit. After a brief adjournment, the University made its submissions.
Accordingly, even if I were not already disposed to dismiss the disqualification
motion as abandoned solely on the basis of Dr. S

's failure to attend or

failure to make out a case why he could not attend, I would do so on the merits
for the reasons that follow.
[18]

As the University pointed out to me, the law with respect to disqualifying

conflicts of interest distinguishes between the duties owed to former clients and
the duties owed to current clients. SeeR. v. Neil [2002] 3 S.C.R. 631 (a case that
was included in the authorities from Dr. S

's motion record on the

disqualification motion). The duty to former clients is largely concerned with
confidential information and the duty to current clients deals with the duty of
loyalty in respect of whether or not there is a risk of disclosure of confidential
information. In any event, the conflict may be waived by informed consent,
expressed or implied.

-9-

[19]

For current clients, there is what has been described as a "bright line

test":
"The bright line is provided by the general rule that a lawyer
may not represent one client's interest and directly adverse to
the immediate concerns of another current client- even if the
two mandates are unrelated - unless both clients consent
after receiving full disclosure (and preferably independent
legal advice) and the lawyer reasonably believes that he or
she is able to represent each client without affecting the other"
See Neil, supra at paragraph 29.

[20]

With respect to former clients, conflict of interest is specifically

addressed in Rule 2.04 of the Rules of Professional Conduct of the Law Society
of Upper Canada. In particular, Rule 2.04(4) prohibits "a lawyer acting for a client
in a matter from subsequently acting against that client ... save as provided by
sub-Rule 2.04(5)" (and even then "if the lawyer has obtained from the other
retainer relevant confidential information"). Those prescribed conditions in Rule
2.04(5) include the former client consenting to the "lawyer's partner or associate
acting" or the law firm establishes the "adequacy and timing of the measures
taken to ensure no disclosure of the former client's confidential information"
occurred to the new lawyer acting.
[21]

In the circumstances here, the University says clearly that with respect

to Paliare Roland, at its highest, Dr. S

stands in the position of a former

client. Again this can be gleaned just from the materials that Dr. S

filed in·

the motion record in support of his disqualification motion. I might also point out
that not only is this information that Dr. S

in his own motion placed before

the Tribunal, but any further information from Mr. Roland (which the Tribunal had
earlier ordered been disclosed) is not only material that Dr. S

refused to

disclose allegedly claiming that it was privileged, but then also refused to outline
the basis or nature of such privilege, even though directed to do so by the
Tribunal.

THE UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
IN THE MATTER OF charges of academic dishonesty made on March 12, 2013 ,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters, 1995,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Act, 1971 , S.O. 1971 , c. 56 as amended S.O. 1978,
c. 88

BETWEEN:
UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO

-and-

C

S

CASE MANAGEMENT INTERIM DECISION

Case Conference: February 28, 2017
Members of the Panel:
Mr. Bernard Fishbein , Chair

Appearances:
Mr. Robert Centa , Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Barristers
(former Student)
Ms. Carol Shirtliff-Hinds , Shirtliff-Hinds Law Office , Counsel for Dr. S

In Attendance:
Mr. Christopher Lang , Director, Office of Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances
Ms. Krista Osbourne, Administrative Clerk and Hearing Secretary, Office of Appeals,
Discipline and Faculty Grievances
Ms. Emily Home, Articling Student, Paliare Roland Barristers

Not in Attendance:
Dr. C
S

, former Student

2
[1]

In the last decision , it was agreed that a case conference by means of telephone

would be conducted on February 28, 2017 to deal with whatever issues could be dealt with
prior to the hearing now scheduled for April 18, 2017.

This is the decision and the

directions resulting from the case conference.

1.

The University will provide its responses to the questions posed by
counsel for Dr. S

in her earlier email of February 21 , 2017 by

March 3, 2017.
2.

Counsel for Dr. S

advises that at present, she plans to bring at least

three applications prior to the Tribunal commencing its hearing into the
merits of the charges against Dr. S

.

It was agreed that these

applications would be filed in writing together with a supporting factum no
later than March 17, 2017. Equally, counsel for Dr. S

will advise

the University and the Tribunal no later than March 17, 2017 of any
witnesses or additional evidence she proposes to call for the hearing.
[2]

In view of these applications that counsel for Dr. S

advises she will bring , and

in the hope of completing the hearing of these charges on the scheduled day of April 18,
2017 , the hearing will now commence at 2:30p.m.

[3)

In the event that any other interlocutory disputes arise prior to the hearing , either

party may request the Tribunal to convene another case conference to deal with those
disputes.

Dated at Toronto, this istf day of March , 2017

Bernard Fishbein , Chair

APPENDIX B

APPENDIX C

