Case 1137

DATE:

   May 18, 2021

PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v. B.C.

HEARING DATE:

   February 17, 2021, via Zoom

Panel Members:

   Mr. Nader Hassan, Chair
   Dr. Maria Rozakis-Adcock, Faculty Panel Member
   Ms. Yerin Lee, Student Panel Member

Appearances:

   Mr. Robert Centa, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland
   Rosenberg Rothstein LLP

In Attendance:

   Mr. Christopher Lang, Director, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty
   Grievances

Not in Attendance:

   The Student

   The Student was charged underÂ s. B.i.1(b) of theâ¯Code of Behaviour on
   Academic Matters, 1995â¯(the âCodeâ) on the basis that heÂ knowingly
   obtained unauthorized assistance inÂ connection with a finalÂ exam. In
   the alternative, the Student was charged underÂ s.Â B.i.3(b)Â of
   theÂ CodeÂ on the basis that the StudentÂ knowinglyÂ did or omitted to
   do something toÂ engage in a form of cheating, academic dishonesty or
   misconduct, fraud or misrepresentation in order to obtain academic
   credit or other academic advantageÂ inÂ a course.

   Neither the Student nor a legal representative of
   theâ¯Studentâ¯appeared at the hearing.â¯The hearing took place based on
   an Agreed Statement of Facts (âASFâ) signed by the Student and
   Assistance Discipline Counsel. The ASF noted that the Student did not
   wish to participate in the proceedings and requested that the Tribunal
   proceed in his absence. The Student acknowledged that he understood
   that the Tribunal may find that he committed an act, or acts, of
   misconduct and may impose sanctions in accordance with the Code and
   that the University Tribunal is not bound by the terms of the joint
   submission on penalty.

   Along with theÂ ASF, the parties submittedÂ a Joint Book of
   DocumentsÂ (âJBDâ).Â The ASF outlined that the Student admitted that he
   knewÂ that he was not permitted to have anyone assist him in the final
   assessment; he askedÂ a third-party to provide him
   withÂ unauthorizedÂ assistance in the final assessment;Â he offered to
   pay the third-party for their assistance;Â he attempted to convince the
   third-party to provideÂ unauthorizedÂ assistance after they had
   decline; and that he was guilty of attempting knowingly to obtain
   unauthorized assistance for the final assessment.Â AfterÂ hearing the
   submission of counsel forÂ the UniversityÂ as well as reviewing the
   ASFÂ and JBD, the PanelÂ concluded that the chargeÂ of unauthorized
   assistanceÂ had been proven with clear and convincing evidence on a
   balance ofÂ probabilities andÂ acceptedÂ theÂ guilty pleaÂ of the
   Student.Â As a result of this finding, the UniversityÂ withdrew
   theÂ alternativeÂ charge under s. B.i.3(b) of theÂ Code.

   The parties submitted aÂ Joint Submission on PenaltyÂ (âJSPâ)Â prior to
   the hearing. The PanelÂ received submissions from the University that
   indicatedÂ that a JSPÂ should only be rejectedÂ ifÂ theÂ joint
   submission onÂ penalty is contrary to the public interest or would
   bring the administration of justice into disrepute, in accordance with
   the Discipline Appeals BoardÂ (âDABâ)Â decision inÂ University of
   Toronto and M. A.Â (Case No. 837, December 22, 2016).Â The Panel took
   into consideration the seriousness of the offence and that the Student
   offered another student money in exchange to obtain unauthorized
   assistance in an exam.Â The offer of money in exchange for
   participating in an act of academic dishonesty is an aggravating
   factor.Â The Panel noted theÂ Provostâs submissionÂ that the sanction
   sought took into account someÂ mitigating factors. First, the
   offenceÂ was an attempt, rather than a complete offenceÂ and second,
   the Studentâs cooperationÂ and entering into the ASF and JSPÂ shows
   insight and remorse.Â The Panel, having regard for the DAB decision,
   the aggravating factor, and theÂ Universityâs submission that the JSP
   takes into account the mitigating factors, determined that there is no
   evidence to suggest that the JSP would be unreasonable and
   unconscionable.Â Â Therefore, the PanelÂ accepted the penalty proposed
   by the JSP.Â The PanelÂ imposedÂ the following sanctions:Â a final
   grade of zero in the course;Â aÂ four-year
   suspension;Â aÂ five-yearÂ notationÂ on the transcript; andÂ aÂ report
   to the Provost for aÂ publication.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/29872
