UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
TRIAL DIVISION
IN THE MATTER OF charges of academic dishonesty filed on May 18, 2010;
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on
Academic Matters, 1995;
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Act, 1971, S.O. 1971 , c. 56
as amended S.O. 1978, c. 88

BETWEEN:
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
-AND-

REASONS FOR DECISION
Hearing Date: July 15, 2010
Members of the Panel:
Ms. Julie Hannaford, Barrister and Solicitor, Chair
Professor Maydianne Andrade, Associate Professor of Evolutionary Biology at
the University of Toronto Scarborough
Mr. Robert Chu, Student Panel Member
Appearances:
Ms. Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Barristers
Mr. Phil Downes, Phil Downes, Barrister
In Attendance:
Professor Grant Allen, Vice-Dean, Undergraduate, for the Faculty of Applied
Science and Engineering and Professor in the Department of Chemical
Engineering and Applied Chemistry
Ms. Natalie Ramtahal, Coordinator, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances,
Office of the Governing Council

1.

Mr. ~ first registered as a student at the University of Toronto in

the Faculty of Applied Science and Engineering in Fall 2005.
2.

In Winter 2010 M r . ~ enrolled in FCS395H1S: Sensuality and the

French. This course was taught by Professor David Clandfield ("Course").
3.

One of the Course assignments was to complete a final essay, worth 30%

of the final grade in the Course. The instructions given to the students about the
essay included a clear warning that "All sources must be clearly referenced and
you must not represent as your own ideas those you have acquired from another
source or individual".
4.

The Essay Instructions further stated that direct quotes must be inside

quotation marks, with longer quotes indented, and the source clearly indicated.
Students were also referred to additional web resources for style and citation
information.
5.

Mr. , , . _ admits that he received a copy of the Essay Instructions.

6.

Before the essay was due to be handed in, Professor Clandfield provided

further notice about proper referencing and citation. In a lecture on March 24,
2010, he showed a slide entitled "Important Notice about the Essays" ("Reminder
Notice").

This Notice contained further reminders to his students that all

resources must be referenced clearly and unambiguously, that any direct citation
of a text must be within quotation marks or longer quotes indented, and that
"Failure to observe these rules is an academic offence and must be reported by
the instructor to the Chair of the Department".
7.

Mr.,,._ admits that he was present in class on March 24, 2010, and

that he received this Reminder Notice.

2

8.

M r . , _ submitted his essay for academic credit on April 6, 2010, in

partial completion of the Course requirements ("Essay").
9.

The essay contained instances of verbatim, nearly verbatim and very

closely paraphrased excerpts from a source that were not properly cited at all.
10.

Mr. , _ admits that he knew or ought to have known that he had

included in the Essay verbatim, nearly verbatim, and/or too closely paraphrased
excerpts from Chapter 4 of In the Garden of the Sun King. Studies in the Park of

Versailles under Louis XIV by Robert W. Berger, 1985 (the "Source").
11.

Mr. , _ admits that he knew that he did not use quotation marks or

any other appropriate method to indicate that he had included lengthy verbatim
or nearly verbatim passages from the Source in his Essay. He also admits that
he ought to have done so.
12.

In addition, M r . , _ concocted references - on page 3 of his essay,

he references to the work of M. Martin, and to M. Mosser and G. Teyssot. These
references were concocted.
13.

Mr. , _ admits that, in the Essay, he knowingly represented the

work and expressions of others as his own.
14.

Mr. , _ admits that he knowingly concocted certain references that

he included in the Essay to conceal his acts of plagiarism. For example, on page
3 of the Essay, M r . , _ admits that the references he provided to the work
of M. Martin, and to M. Mosser and G. Teyssot were concocted. M r . , _
actually plagiarized the passages from the Source.

3

Finding of the Panel in respect of the charges

15.

The Panel considered the evidence provided in the Joint Book of

Documents together with the facts that were presented jointly by the University
and Mr. ~ -

The facts , including the Exhibits, led the panel to

unhesitatingly accept Mr. ~ • s admissions and his plea of guilty. The
panel found that Mr. ~ was guilty of Charges 1 and 2.
16.

Charge number 3, which was filed in the alternative, was withdrawn by the

Provost.
Penalty

17.

M r . ~ committed two previous academic offences. In Fall 2005, he

plagiarized an assignment worth 15% of the course grade in APS 111 by copying
the work of another student. He met with the dean's designate on February 2,
2006 to discuss this offence, at which time he apologized, asked for another
chance, and promised never to do anything like this again. He received a mark
of zero for the assignment, with the remaining portion of his term work to count
as his mark in APS111. No official notation of the decision was made on his
academic record.
18.

In Fall 2009, M r . ~ plagiarized an assignment in AER 525H1, by

using solutions from a solution manual from a previous year to complete a course
assignment. Mr. ~ had been previously warned by the course instructor
that all his submissions must be his own work. This warning occurred after he
had copied solutions in an earlier assignment in the course. He met with the
Dean's Designate on January 7, 2010. He received a mark of 45 in the course,
with a copy of the sanction letter placed in his student file until graduation and his
name added to the student offence database.

No official recording of the

decision was placed on his academic record.

4

19.

In addition to submitting a plea to the offences with which he was charged ,

Mr. ~ engaged in discussions with the University around the issue of
mitigating the problems that caused him to plagiarize.
20.

As a result of these discussions, Mr. ~ proposed and the

University agreed, that he provide an Undertaking related to work on how to write
properly referenced essays and theses. The Undertaking is set out as follows in
its entirety.
Uuive1·sity ofTol'Onto a n d ~ ~ -

Unde1·taking
l.
Mr. ~ undertakes to complete the wo1·l,shops described below
th1·ough the University of Toronto St. George Campus College Writing Centres
Academic Skills Workshops ("Undertaking").

M1•, ~ will fulfill the Unde1·taking by taking the following 6
workshops, which amount to 6 hours of instruction:

2.

(A)
(B)
(C)
(D)
(E)
(F)

3.

Unclcrstnnding the Assignment
Library Research
Thesis Statements
Organizing an Essay
Using Sources
Revising the Essay

Mr. ~ agrees to complete the workshops in the term in which he is

next registe1·ed for a course at the University.
4.

In tJ1e event that these workshops are not available at the time Mr,

~ attempts to complete them, the University will, Rcting reasonably, propose

au alternate and equivalent program that Mr, ~ shall complete to fulfill the

Unde1·taking.
5.

M r . ~ acknowledges that the Provost of the University of Toronto

intends to seek a sanction which includes a 3 year suspension and a 4 yea•· notation
before the University Tribunal.

Mr. ~ further acknowledges that the

5

Pl'Ovost takes this position, in part, in 1·eJiance on Mr. ~ ' s Undc1·taking, and,
without it, the Provost would not seek a sanction before the University Tribunal that
included a suspension of only 3 years and a notation of only 4 years.
6.

Mr. ~ agrees and accepts that he will not be eligible to grnduatc

from the University until he fulfills tbc Undertaking and the University mny t·ely on

this Undertaking to deny him the ability to graduate until it is fulfilled.
7.

M1·. ~ acknowledges that the Provost of the University of To,·outo

has advised him to obtain independent legal advice bcfo,-e sig11ing this document
and that he has done so.

21.

This undertaking was signed by the University and by Mr. , __ It

formed the basis for the University's submission that the appropriate penalty
should be a three year suspension - running from July 15, 2010 to July 15, 2013,
together with a notation on Mr. , _.s transcript and record for a period of
four years - from July 15, 2010 to July 15, 2014, or graduation from the
university (whichever is earlier}.
22.

There was no dispute but that the three year suspension, in these

circumstances, is certainly on the very light end of the penalty spectrum,
especially where there exists three offences, all for a similar kind of plagiarizing.
23.

Where the University and Mr. , _ joined issue was only on the

question of when the period of suspension should terminate.

Mr. , _

submitted that the suspension should end on or about April 21, 2013, rather than
July 15, 2013. If the suspension ends in April, as submitted by Mr. , _ , he
would be eligible to graduate a full six months earlier than if the suspension
terminated in July. For Mr. ~

. this ability to graduate six months earlier

would have significant economic value, as it would permit him to enter the
workforce earlier, with a degree. Moreover, such a disposition would be more in
line with the principle that multiple offences should attract a series of penalties
that "step" rather than "jump".
6

24.

Mr. ~ submitted several testaments to his work ethic (from

employers), and he submitted evidence that his most recent offence stemmed
from severe stress. It was submitted that these mitigating factors should also be
considered when determining the actual length of the suspension.
25.

M r . ~ has certainly co-operated with the University in addressing

this most recent offence.

In agreeing to the statement of fact put before the

tribunal, he has allowed this matter to be addressed and his offence to be
redressed much more speedily than if he had put the University to the proof of
the offence. At the heart of the submissions of Mr. ~ is that his guilty
plea and his ready acceptance of the undertaking should permit the Tribunal to
impose a suspension that terminates in time for him to graduate six months
earlier than if the suspensions ran its full course.
26.

The University submits that a three year suspension is one that is already

on the low end of the continuum. This is Mr. ~ · s third offence - one that
occurred literally months after he had been sanctioned for plagiarizing an
assignment in AER 525H 1, and this third offence occurred in the same term that
Mr. ~ had a meeting with the Dean to address his second offence (in
AER 525H1). Submitting another plagiarized essay, hard on the heels of being
sanctioned for plagiarism in the term before, is most egregious.

Most

importantly, it raises serious questions about Mr. ~ • s commitment to
reforming his approach to citation and recognition of the work of others. Finally,
the University submits that this three year suspension for a third offence,
especially where the third offence is so close in time to the second offence, is in
and of itself the basis for hewing to the full term, rather than a shortened term as
requested by the student.
27.

The panel considered the very compelling submissions of Mr. ~ s

counsel about the importance of M r . ~ being able to graduate six months
earlier if his suspension terminated on April 21, 2013. The panel considered how
M r . ~ had co operated extensively with the University in addressing this
7

third offence, and certainly received the letters about Mr. ~ · s stress and
its effect on his commission of his third offence. After due consideration of these
factors, though, the panel was left with the concomitant obligation to reflect on
how all these factors were taken into consideration when the University acceded
to accepting an undertaking from Mr. ~ and therefore seeking only a
three year suspension (amongst other penalties).
28.

First, the concept of a student providing an undertaking as part of a

reduced penalty scheme still remains a new concept. It is an enlightened form of
sanction, and yet, at the same time, it is still largely experimental - there can be
no way of knowing if these undertakings (which have been given in other cases)
actually have the rehabilitative effect they are hoped to have.

It is clear,

however, that this form of sanction is more actively supportive of rehabilitation
than other forms of punishment. Even though such undertakings involve a "leap
of faith" on behalf of the University, it is still important to recognize that the
penalty that includes an undertaking recognizes that the University and the
student are joined in an effort to prevent further commissions of similar offences.
29.

The three year suspension is, however, a baseline suspension.

Other

cases on penalty clearly seem to indicate that a two year suspension is a
threshold penalty for plagiarism. In this case, there have been no less than three
similar offences, and it must be recognized that the imposition of a three year
suspension is in and of itself an extremely light penalty, rationalized as it is by the
provision of the undertaking.
30.

It was the view of the panel that the integrity of the "undertaking" process

- one that involves a real , active commitment to rehabilitation by the student and
the University conjoined with a much lighter penalty - should not be vulnerable to
the type of 1'fine tuning" that is being requested by Mr. ~ in these
circumstances.

The integrity of this novel form of sanction is very important,

given that it is a novel sanction. It should not be the subject matter of further
dilution, where it is based entirely on the advancement of a graduation date. The

8

panel recognized that Mr. ~

•s counsel advanced a very compelling and

able argument about how a penalty should "step" rather than "jump". But, this is
a unique penalty situation - o ne where the University has worked with the
student to actually reduce the penalty to its lowest threshold in exchange for work
by Mr. ~

to rehabilitate his writing and citation methods. The panel also

recognized Mr. Downes' able argument about the cachet of a university degree
and its importance to Mr. ~

- But, that cachet is based on the University

conferring degrees backed by honesty and integrity and academic excellence.
The panel is confident that the pena lty fashioned by the University together with
Mr. ~

. will ensure that Mr. ~ adheres to the principles that are at

the heart of the degrees conferred by the University of Toronto, but the panel
remained firmly of the view that the suspension should run its full course, and not
be diluted by considerations that are entirely unrelated to the reformative nature
of the penalty itself.

In this disposition, the panel hopes that the efforts of the

University in fashioning penalties that promote rehabilitation and deterrence will
continue apace.

Dated at Toronto, this 13th day of May, 2011.

Julie H11!ord~

9

