Case 719 - Appeal

DATE:

   February 20, 2018

PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v. W.K. (âthe Studentâ)

Hearing Date(s):

   December 12, 2017

Panel Members:

   Ms. Lisa Brownstone, Barrister and Solicitor, Chair
   Dr. Ramona Alaggia, Faculty Panel Member
   Professor Elizabeth Peter, Faculty Panel Member
   Mr. Sean McGowan, Student Panel Member

Appearances:

   Ms. Lisa Freeman, Courtyard Chambers, Counsel for the Student
   Mr. Robert A. Centa, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland
   Barristers

In Attendance:

   The Student
   Dr. Kristi Gourlay, Manager & Academic Integrity Officer, Office of
   Student Academic Integrity, Faculty of Arts & Science
   Ms. Tracey Gameiro, Associate Director, Appeals, Discipline & Faculty
   Grievances
   Ms. Krista Osbourne, Administrative Clerk & Hearing Secretary, Appeals,
   Discipline & Faculty Grievances
   Mr. Sean Lourim, IT Support, Office of the Governing Council
   Appeal by the Student from the sanction of expulsion that was ordered
   by the Tribunal after the Student pled guilty to committing eight
   counts of academic misconduct contrary to s. B.i.1(a) of the Code and
   s. B.i.1(d) of the Code . The Student argued that the errors of law
   committed by the Tribunal is that they had applied irrelevant
   considerations in determining the appropriate sanction and
   mis-apprehended the evidence. The Student requested that the sanction
   of expulsion be replaced with a five-year suspension.
   The Board rejected the first ground of appeal, finding that the Panel
   had made limited and appropriate use of the Student's conduct at the
   hearing. The Studentâs conduct at the hearing was relevant to their
   character (a factor clearly relevant to sanction) and also in the
   concern that the Student would not follow rules of the University if
   the relationship between the Student and the University were not
   severed.Â  The Board dismissed the Studentâs second ground of appeal,
   the misapprehension of the evidence, because in the absence of the
   ability to cross examine the authors of the reports their underlying
   information could not be tested. The Board found that the Panel was
   entitled to admit the medical reports submitted by the Student but then
   place little weight on their contents because the Student did not call
   the authors of the report to testify so cross-examination on their
   contents did not take place. Though the Board found that there were no
   errors in law committed by the Panel, even if they were wrong in this
   respect, the errors in law alleged by the Student would have been too
   minor to warrant granting a new hearing.
   The Board refused the Studentâs alternative argument that his unique
   circumstances (diagnoses of learning disability, anxiety and
   depression) warranted an expansive reading of the Boardâs powers to
   substitute a different penalty on compassionate grounds.Â  The Boardâs
   three reasons for dismissing this argument were: (1) at the time of the
   offences, the only contemporaneous medical evidence showed that the
   Student was seeing physicians for other, non-mental health related
   illnesses; (2) the only mental health expert who did treat the Student
   testified that there was no nexus between the Studentâs learning
   disabilities that would cause him to commit the offences; and (3) the
   earlier cases to which the Student referred as precedents for a lesser
   penalty did not involve the number and severity of offences as those
   that the Student admitted to committing in this case. The Panelâs
   sanction of a grade of zero in each of the affected courses; an order
   that the Student be immediately suspended from the University for up to
   5 years pending an order of expulsion; and an order that the case be
   reported to the Provost for publication with the Student's name
   withheld were upheld.
   Appeal dismissed.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/13078
