FILE: 2000/01-02
UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
TRIAL DIVISION
Members of the Panel:
C. Anthony Keith, Q.C., Senior Chair
Roland J. Le Huenen, Faculty member
Paul Macerollo, Student member
IN THE MATTER of the University of Toronto Act, 1971, S.O. 1971, c. 56, as
amended;
AND IN THE MATTER of the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic
Matters, 1995;
AND IN THE MATTER of disciplinary charges against K.U.;
AND IN THE MATTER of disciplinary charges against R.D.
Maurice Vaturi, Campione & Vaturi, for K.U.
Yvonne D. Fiamengo, Barrister & Solicitor, for R.D.
Linda R. Rothstein, Discipline Counsel and Lily I. Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel,
for the University of Toronto
Appearances:
Siobhan Brady, Invigilator
James B. Campell, Faculty
R. D., accused
Mazda Jenab, Invigilator
Betty I. Roots, Emeritus faculty
Rebecca Spagnolo, Chief Presiding Officer, BIO 351Y examination
Lilian U. Thompson, Faculty
K.U., accused
Tanya Wood, Chief Presiding Officer, NFS 386H examination

BACKGROUND
[1]

A hearing of the Trial Division of the University Tribunal was convened on the

evenings of February 28, 2001, March 7, March 14, April 17, April 25, 2001 and

In the matter of disciplinary charges against K.U.
And in the matter of disciplinary charges against R.D.
concluded on June 5, 2001 to consider charges under the Code of Behaviour on Academic
Matters, 1995 [the “Code”] laid against K.U. and R.D. by letters dated September 20,
2000, from the Vice-President and Provost as he then was, Professor Adel Sedra.
[2]

The charges laid against the two students were identical. Specifically, the charges

were as follows:
1.

On or about April 24, 2000, you did obtain unauthorized assistance and/or
attempted to obtain unauthorized assistance and/or aided or assisted
another person to obtain or attempt to obtain unauthorized assistance
namely, during the writing of the final exam in BIO 351Y, contrary to
Section B.I.1.(b) and B.II.1(a) and B.II2 of the Code of Behaviour on
Academic Matters, 1995. Pursuant to Section B of the Code you are
deemed to have acted knowingly if you ought reasonably to have known
that you obtained or attempted to obtain or aided or assisted another to
obtain or attempt to obtain unauthorized assistance.

2.

In the alternative, on or about April 24, 200, you knowingly engaged in a
form of cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or
misrepresentation in order to obtain academic credit or other academic
advantage of any kind in the final exam submitted to fulfill course
requirements in BIO 351Y contrary to Section B.I3.(b) of the Code of
Behaviour on Academic Matters, 1995. Pursuant to Section B of the Code
you are deemed to have committed the offence knowingly if you ought
reasonably to have known that you engaged in any form of cheating,
academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or misrepresentation in order to
obtain academic credit or other academic advantage of any kind.

3.

On or about December 21, 1999, you did obtain unauthorized assistance
and/or attempted to obtain unauthorized assistance and/or aided or assisted
another person to obtain or attempt to obtain unauthorized assistance
namely, during the writing of the final exam in NFS 386H, contrary to
Section B.I.1.(b) and B.II.1(a) and B.II2 of the Code of Behaviour on
Academic Matters, 1995. Pursuant to Section B of the Code you are
deemed to have acted knowingly if you ought reasonably to have known
that you obtained or attempted to obtain or aided or assisted another to
obtain or attempt to obtain unauthorized assistance.

4.

In the alternative, on or about December 21, 1999, you knowingly
engaged in a form of cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud
or misrepresentation in order to obtain academic credit or other academic
advantage of any kind in the final exam submitted to fulfill course

Page 2 of 11

In the matter of disciplinary charges against K.U.
And in the matter of disciplinary charges against R.D.
requirements in NFS 386H contrary to Section B.I3.(b) of the Code of
Behaviour on Academic Matters, 1995. Pursuant to Section B of the Code
you are deemed to have committed the offence knowingly if you ought
reasonably to have known that you engaged in any form of cheating,
academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or misrepresentation in order to
obtain academic credit or other academic advantage of any kind.
[3]

The particulars of the charges were similarly identical:
1.

At all material times you were a student in NFS 386H taught by Professor
L.V. [sic] Thompson during the 1999/2000 academic year.

2.

At all material times you were a student in BIO 351Y taught by Professor
Campbell during the 1999/2000 academic year.

3.

During the final exam on NFS 386H you engaged in appropriate
communications with [K.U., R.D.] in an attempt to cheat or obtain
unauthorized assistance.

5.[sic] During the final exam of BIO 351Y you engaged in inappropriate
communication with [K.U., R.D.] in an attempt to cheat or obtain
unauthorized assistance.
[4]

At the commencement of the proceedings counsel for Mr. U., with the support of

counsel for Mr. D., raised an objection to hearing the charges against the two accused
students in a joint hearing. In the submission of counsel for Mr. U., this was a
proceeding to which the provisions of the Statutory Powers Procedure Act [S.P.P.A.]
applies and that under sub-section 9.1(1) the Tribunal may proceed to combine the
proceedings or any part of them only with the consent of the parties. Counsel for Mr. U.
advised that his client did not consent to a joint hearing. He has argued that to combine
the proceedings or hear them at the same time was prejudicial. His submissions were
echoed and supported by counsel for Mr. D. Counsel for the University opposed this
request and referred the Chair to other sections of the S.P.P.A. as well to sections of the
Code.
[5]

Paragraph C.II.(a).22 of the Code provides that at trial hearings the Chair shall

determine all questions of law in addition to voting on verdict and the sanction. It is

Page 3 of 11

In the matter of disciplinary charges against K.U.
And in the matter of disciplinary charges against R.D.
therefore the Chair’s function and responsibility to rule individually on the issue that was
raised by counsel for Mr. U. with the support of counsel for Mr. D.
[6]

The application of the S.P.P.A. to a proceeding of this nature must be founded on

section C.II.(a).7. of the Code, which reads that “the procedures of the Tribunal shall
conform to the requirements of the Statutory Powers Procedure Act, as amended from
time to time.” That section requires conformity but does not say that the procedures
followed by the Tribunal are bound by the provisions of the S.P.P.A. which it might very
well have said if the intention was that the proceedings of the Tribunal be governed
explicitly by that statute. It was pointed out by counsel for the University that the power
of the Tribunal to hear and dispose of charges includes the power to determine its
practice and procedure subject to the provisions of the Code.
[7]

The definition in the S.P.P.A. of a proceeding is simply “a proceeding to which

this Act applies”. There is a question as to whether or not this was two proceedings or, in
effect, one proceeding involving charges against different people. The S.P.P.A. also
indicates that the consent requirements upon which counsel for the accused based their
submissions do not apply if another act or regulation that applies to the proceedings
allows the Tribunal to combine them or hear them at the same time without consent.
While this matter is not free from doubt, and while an appellate tribunal or another Chair
might come to a different conclusion, it is this Chair’s view that this is a proceeding
involving two accused against whom identical charges have been laid. In the
submissions of counsel for the University, we were advised that the same evidence will
be tendered with respect to the charges against both of the students. Therefore these are
not separate proceedings, but in a sense one proceeding involving the same evidence.
[8]

While this is an administrative tribunal within the University called to deal with

matters in accordance with the Code, the Tribunal must be mindful of the University
community and the exigencies that relate to that community. The attendance of witnesses
and the attendance of the accused is a part of those exigencies. While it is not certain that

Page 4 of 11

In the matter of disciplinary charges against K.U.
And in the matter of disciplinary charges against R.D.
the matter is free from doubt, on the facts this matter should be heard as one proceeding
and the application for separate proceedings was therefore dismissed.

REASONS FOR DECISION
(Delivered orally by Senior Chair Keith)
[9]

In this case the University of Toronto has laid four charges against the accused

R.D. and K.U. with respect to two separate examinations, namely NFS 386H written in
December 1999 and BIO 351Y written in April of 2000. In each case the charges laid
relate to “knowingly obtaining or attempting to obtain unauthorized assistance” or
“knowingly engaging in a from of cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct fraud or
misrepresentation not otherwise described in the code in order to obtain academic credit
or other academic advantage.” The particulars set out in the charges allege inappropriate
communication between them.
[10]

The two accused students were acquainted with each other during their high

school years but became friends after both enrolled at the University of Toronto where
they took many, if not most, of their courses together. They studied together and on the
evidence were mutually supportive. They were good students, perhaps even exceptional
having particular regard to the commendations received by Mr. D. for impressive
academic achievement on at least three occasions.
[11]

At the time of the two examinations referred to, both students were in their third

year. The first examination in NFS 386H in December 1999 was a final examination in
that course. Two separate rooms were designated for students to write the examination
according to the first letter of their surnames. The two students as a result ought to have
written in different rooms but instead both wrote this examination in the same room
seated beside one another. When it was discovered that Mr. D. was in fact in the wrong
room, the invigilator assigned to collect signatures was asked by Mr. D. if he should
move to the correct room. Mr. D. was told it was not necessary. On all the evidence
Page 5 of 11

In the matter of disciplinary charges against K.U.
And in the matter of disciplinary charges against R.D.
indeed we are satisfied that students writing in the wrong room does occur from time to
time and is not considered significant although for record keeping purposes a separate
notation is made.
[12]

The evidence relied upon by the University with respect to the charges arising

from the irregularities observed during the NFS 386H examination consists of
observations by the Chief Presiding Officer, Ms. Tanya Wood, who noticed four students
entering the room together in what she described as a somewhat loud confident manner.
She asked her colleague Mazda Jenab to keep an eye on these students. In due course
Mr. Jenab, who was assigned to collect signatures, reported to Ms. Wood that one of
them was in the wrong room. Ms. Wood then continued her observation of these two
students and testified that although she was quite sure she had, prior to the examination,
placed the examination materials on alternate chairs, noticed at a certain point during the
examination that these two students were sitting what she termed “unusually close
together”. For that reason she decided to observe them more closely. She accordingly
positioned herself directly behind and above them and observed them intently for a
number of minutes. During this time she testified that she noted what she described as
three “head-tilts”; movements of the head by one of the students, perhaps as much as two
to three inches, although the demonstration that she gave at this hearing seemed to
indicate somewhat less significant movements.
[13]

Mr. Jenab at another time during the examination noticed one of the two accused

lift the corner of his paper a distance of two to three inches. He reported this to Ms.
Wood. At that point she decided to separate them and move Mr. U. to a seat as far away
as possible from Mr. D. in the front corner of the room. On retrieving their papers at the
conclusion of the examination she observed what she took to be an unusual pattern of
similarity between their two papers and she thereupon completed an anomaly report. She
and other witnesses testified that an anomaly report is required from an invigilator when
anything unusual occurs during the course of an examination which could involve, for
example, the room being unusually hot or cold.

Page 6 of 11

In the matter of disciplinary charges against K.U.
And in the matter of disciplinary charges against R.D.

[14]

The pattern of similarity being relied upon by the University consists of what is

termed an unusual number of identical right and wrong answers. Indeed, between the
papers submitted by the two accused in the NFS 386H examination, all but three of their
answers were identical either correct or incorrect. Mr. Jenab also testified as to his
observations of the students during the NFS 386H examination. In his observation, there
was amble elbowroom between them and that if he had thought they were too close
together he would have moved them.
[15]

The examination in BIO 351Y was written in April 2000. Again, it was a final

examination. Again both students wrote in the same examination room and sat side by
side. This time Mr. U. was in the wrong room according to the surname designation, but
again, as with Mr. D. previously, he was permitted to remain in the room by the
invigilator charged with identifying those present. One of the invigilators, Siobhan
Brady, observed what she interpreted as unusual behavior and positioned herself behind
the defendants to observe them further. She described her initial observation as “the two
students seated side by side angled across their desks toward each other and engaging is
some form of communication”. As indicated, she moved to a position directly behind
them where she remained for a period of three to four minutes. She testified that during
this time she made noise in an effort to alert them to her presence but it was only after an
extraordinarily long period of time that they returned to what she considered to be a more
normal position. She then reported this observation to the chief presiding officer,
Rebecca Spagnolo, who testified that she had not previously noticed anything unusual
with respect to the two accused. She then looked in their direction, as pointed out by Ms.
Brady, and at that moment observed what appeared to be communication between them.
She then moved to a position alternately behind and between them and remained in that
vicinity for twenty minutes. During this time she noticed no further unusual behaviour
but did note what to her appeared to be a remarkable similarity between the partially
completed scantron sheets of both students that she stated were visible to her.

Page 7 of 11

In the matter of disciplinary charges against K.U.
And in the matter of disciplinary charges against R.D.
[16]

As with the previous NFS 386H examination, the University relies upon what is

seen as a remarkably similar common pattern between the two answer sheets submitted
by the two accused and the observation that once the students realized that they were
under observation that perceived similarity appeared to cease.
[17]

The accused each testified in their own defence. Both related how they had

become close friends and studied together. Both related how Mr. D.’s father had become
seriously ill at some time prior to the NFS 386H examination. Mr. U. testified that he
carried a cell phone and received a message shortly before the NFS 386H exam with
respect to Mr. D. Sr. and his deteriorating health, which message he had passed on to his
friend before the examination began.
[18]

Both accused denied any form of improper communication during the NFS 386H

examination and said that if there had been some form of communication it would have
related to Mr. D. Sr. That gentleman unfortunately died some time after the NFS 386H
exam and before the BIO 351Y exam and as a result of this family circumstance the
accused, R.D., ceased to attend classes at the University. He was persuaded by his friend
Mr. U. to write the BIO 351Y exam relying on his, that is Mr. U.’s, notes. Mr. U. stated
that he consciously chose to accompany Mr. D. to the wrong examination hall, again with
reference to the designated surnames, in order to provide support and comfort for his
friend and out of concern for his well-being. Both denied any improper communication
between them during that examination.
[19]

The evidence upon which the University relies is entirely circumstantial in our

view. The onus is upon the University to show on clear and convincing evidence that the
accused have committed the offences as charged. The elements of each offence include
intention, that is, in order to convict, the Tribunal must be shown on evidence, which it
accepts as clear and convincing, that the accused acted knowingly with the intent to
commit the offence described. There is no question that the invigilators in both exams

Page 8 of 11

In the matter of disciplinary charges against K.U.
And in the matter of disciplinary charges against R.D.
became aware of conduct that they regarded as suspicious. For this, one can only
commend them for their diligence. However, more than mere suspicion is required.
[20]

Having carefully considered all of the evidence, including the oral testimony and

the written exhibits and the submissions of counsel, we are not satisfied that University
has discharged the required onus of proof. We have examined all of these matters on the
basis of looking at the two events separately and individually and also at the evidence as
a whole. We are not satisfied that on the basis of the evidence before us it would be safe
to register a conviction. We therefore accordingly dismiss all charges against both
accused.
[21]

Before leaving this case we would say to both Mr. D. and Mr. U. that this was not

an easy decision for us and you may consider yourselves fortunate. It is reckless to
engage in behaviour during any academic exercise may which may reasonably lead those
charged with enforcing the Code of Conduct on Academic Matters, 1995, to conclude that
an offence may have been committed. We trust that you will have learned from this
experience and that such equivocal behaviour will not be repeated.

DECISION ON COSTS
[Following submissions on costs from counsel, Senior Chair Keith made the following
ruling]
[22]

It is true that the Code grants to the Chair of the hearing the discretion to award

costs. It is my view that that discretion must, of course, be exercised judicially and based
upon proper principles and that because of the principles which have been enunciated in
the past, both in this Tribunal and in the broader court system, there is a reluctance on the
part of this tribunal to make an award for costs lest that operate as a deterrent to the

Page 9 of 11

In the matter of disciplinary charges against K.U.
And in the matter of disciplinary charges against R.D.
University in fulfilling its obligation to ensure that the principles set out in the Code of
Conduct on Academic Matters, 1995, are upheld.
[23]

There have been judgments in the Ontario Superior Court (previously the General

Division) in which an order for costs was made against the Attorney General. I am
thinking particularly of a case some years ago where there was clear evidence that either
the prosecutor acted maliciously with a view to seeking to punish or persecute
individuals, or with a degree of recklessness that amounted almost to malicious conduct.
In those situations I would be prepared to say that it would not be out of the ordinary for
a Tribunal to consider the exercise of the discretion that was granted by sub-paragraph
C.II.(a).17.(b) of the Code.
[24]

My view of the evidence here is that there was conduct which reasonably led a

number of invigilators to conclude that the behaviour they had observed needed to be
investigated. That investigation was carried out and resulted in the laying of charges. I
am not prepared to say that the University acted recklessly or maliciously in laying those
charges, nor am I prepared to say that it acted in an unreasonable manner in bringing
forward the evidence that it did.
[25]

It is always a difficult matter to decide what evidence needs to be put forward. In

this case it would have been inappropriate, in my respectful submission, not to tender the
evidence of the invigilators who were present. The two professors in charge of the
courses and Professor Roots, the Dean’s designate who interviewed the students, gave
additional evidence. It seems to me that it was entirely appropriate to call those persons.
In order that the hearing may be conducted fully, fairly and impartially, it is necessary to
accord whatever time is reasonably necessary to the examination of those witnesses. The
fact that the hearing may be perceived by some to be unduly long, to have caused stress
to those involved, and to have caused expense, is unfortunately something that is very
difficult to avoid if one is prepared to deal with charges under the Code as the serious

Page 10 of 11

In the matter of disciplinary charges against K.U.
And in the matter of disciplinary charges against R.D.
matters that they are. For all of those reasons I would not be prepared to exercise my
discretion in this particular case and grant the motion for costs.

I certify that this is the decision of the Tribunal

April 25, 2001

C. Anthony Keith

Date

C. Anthony Keith, Q.C.

Page 11 of 11

