Case 00-01-02

DATE:

   April 25, 2001

PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v. R.D. and K.U.

Hearing Date(s):

   February 28, March 7, March 14, April 17, April 25 and June 5, 2001

Panel Members:

   C. Anthony Keith, Q.C., Senior Chair
   Roland J. Le Huenen, Faculty member
   Paul Macerollo, Student member

Appearances:

   Maurice Vaturi, Campione & Vaturi, for K.U.
   Yvonne D. Fiamengo, Barrister & Solicitor, for R.D.
   Linda R. Rothstein, Discipline Counsel and Lily I. Harmer, Assistant
   Discipline Counsel, for the University
   Siobhan Brady, Invigilator
   James B. Campell, Faculty
   R. D., accused
   Mazda Jenab, Invigilator
   Betty I. Roots, Emeritus faculty
   Rebecca Spagnolo, Chief Presiding Officer, examination
   Lilian U. Thompson, Faculty
   K.U., accused
   Tanya Wood, Chief Presiding Officer, examination
   Two Studentâs charged with identical offences under s. B.i.1(b), s.
   B.ii.1(a), s. B.ii2, and alternatively, under s. B.i.3(b) of the Code.
   The charges related to allegations that the Students engaged in
   inappropriate
   communications during the final examinations of two courses, in an
   attempt to cheat or obtain unauthorized assistance. Student U., with
   the support of Student D., raised an objection to hearing the charges
   in a joint hearing, on the grounds that he did not consent to a joint
   hearing and that to combine the proceedings or hear them jointly would
   be prejudicial. The Panel considered s. C.ii.(a).22 of the Code and
   found that it was the Chairâs function to rule individually on the
   issue. The Chair considered s. C.ii.(a).7 of the Code, the Statutory
   Powers Procedure Act, and whether the matter was two proceedings or one
   proceeding involving charges against different people. The Chair found
   that the power of the Tribunal to hear and dispose of charges included
   the power to determine its practice and procedure subject to the
   provisions of the Code and that the consent requirements in ss. 9.1(1)
   of the Statutory Powers Procedure Act did not apply if another act or
   regulation that applied to the proceedings allowed the Tribunal to
   combine them or hear them at the same time without consent. The Chair
   found that while not free from doubt, it was his view that the matter
   was a proceeding involving two accused against whom identical charges
   had been laid because the same evidence was to be tendered with respect
   to the charges against both of the Students. The Chair found that while
   the Tribunal was an administrative tribunal, it had to be mindful of
   the exigencies that related to the University community. The Chair
   found that the matter should be heard as one proceeding and dismissed
   the application for separate proceedings. The Panel considered the
   evidence, including the oral testimony and the written exhibits and the
   submissions of counsel, and found that the Universityâs evidence was
   circumstantial and that the onus of proof on the University had not
   been discharged. The Senior Chair did not exercise his discretion under
   ss. C.ii.(a).17(b) of the Code to grant the Studentsâ motion for costs
   because he found that the University did not act recklessly nor
   maliciously in laying the charges and it did not act unreasonably in
   bringing forward the evidence that it did.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12715
