Case #928

   DATE: June 5, 2017
   PARTIES: University of Toronto v. J.Z. ("the Student")

   Hearing Date(s): May 11, 2017

   Panel Members:
   Mr. Paul Michell, Chair
   Professor Richard Day, Faculty Panel Member
   Ms. Natasha Ramkissoon, Student Panel Member

   Appearances:
   Robert A. Centa, Assistant Discipline Counsel for the University,
   Paliare Roland Barristers
   Ms. Emily Home, Articling Student, Paliare Roland (Discipline Counsel
   for the University)
   Ms. Sana Kawar, Manager, University of Toronto Transcript Centre

   In Attendance:
   Ms. Tracey Gameiro, Associate Director, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty
   Grievances
   Dr. Kristi Gourlay, Manager, Office of Student Academic Integrity,
   Faculty of Arts and Science
   Mr. Sean Lourim, Technology Assistant, Office of the Governing Council

   Not in Attendance:
   The Student

   Trial Division - s. B.i.3(a) of Code - forged academic record - student
   submitted forged transcript in application to another university -
   student did not attend hearing - University provided proper notice of
   hearing - finding of guilt - expulsion, five year suspension,
   publication of the decision with the name of the Student withheld

   The Student was charged with forging an academic record under s.
   B.i.3(a) of the Code, and alternatively, academic dishonesty under s.
   B.i.3(b) of the Code. The charges related to an admission application
   to another university that included a forged transcript.

   The Student did not attend the hearing. The University had sent the
   notice of hearing and charges to the Student's university e-mail
   account, and that account had been accessed within a week before the
   hearing and was active. The Tribunal inferred that adequate notice of
   the hearing had been provided and ordered that the hearing proceed in
   the Student's absence.

   The Tribunal found the student guilty of the forgery charge, and the
   Provost withdrew the second charge. In determining the penalty, the
   Tribunal noted that transcript forgery is among the most serious
   offences due to the importance of the integrity of the University's
   official records; that forgery is difficult to detect making deterrence
   more important; that this instance was the product of planning and
   knowing participation; that the cases commonly impose expulsion for
   such forgeries; and that the Student did not participate in the hearing
   to present any explanation or mitigating factors. The Tribunal
   suspended the Student for up to five years, recommended that they be
   expelled, and ordered that the decision be reported to the Provost for
   publication with the name of the Student withheld.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12946
