Report 413

   DATE : May 10, 2021

   PARTIES : S.R.KÂ (the âStudentâ) v. University of Toronto School of
   Theology

   HEARING DATE : March 26, 2021, via Zoom

   Chair:
   Mr. John Monahan

   Appearances:
   For the Student Appellant:
   Ms. S.R.K. (the âStudentâ)

   For the Toronto School of Theology:
   Ms. Catherin Fan, Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg Rothstein LLP
   Mr. Robert Centa, Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg Rothstein LLP

   The StudentÂ appealedÂ theÂ decision of the TSTÂ Academic
   AppealÂ Committee to denyÂ her request to be reinstated in the program
   as they found thatÂ the decision of the TSTâs Graduate Centre for
   Theological Studies (âGCTSâ) to terminate the Student âs registration
   in the Th.D. program had been a reasonable one.Â The Committee noted
   thatÂ they should only interfere with the decision of the GCTS if that
   decision was unreasonable, or it was made through an unfair
   interpretationÂ and/or application of the relevant University policies,
   processes and procedures that were replied upon inÂ said decision.Â The
   StudentÂ raised four grounds of appeal: (1)Â the Studentâs poor state
   of mental health at the time of her comprehensive examinations,
   (2)Â alleged bias against the Student as an international studentÂ of a
   differentÂ gender, race and cultural background, (3) theÂ appointment
   of the second examiner was made unfairly and without the Studentâs
   consent or agreement, and (4)Â denial of the opportunity to orally
   defend the comprehensive essay or write supplementary examinations.

   The StudentÂ arguedÂ that the Committee should take into consideration
   her poor state of mental health throughout her time in the program
   including the periodÂ in which she was taking her comprehensive
   examinations. The Committee found that, although sympatheticÂ toÂ the
   StudentâsÂ poor emotional state,Â there was no evidence of a medical
   diagnosis to indicate that the Student was suffering from mental health
   challenges at the time she was preparing for her comprehensive
   examinations.Â Furthermore,Â there was no evidence before the Committee
   to indicate that the Student requested,Â or madeÂ anyoneÂ in
   TSTÂ awareÂ ofÂ her need forÂ anÂ accommodation on the basis of mental
   health challenges, and in further absence of evidence to suggest that
   the Student has provided any medical evidence to the TST
   regardingÂ this need, the TST did not have an obligation to accommodate
   her. Therefore, the CommitteeÂ denied this ground of appeal.

   The StudentÂ allegedÂ that, during her time as aÂ student at the TST,
   she was underestimated, discounted,Â and treated unfairly because of
   bias against her as an international studentÂ of a different gender,
   race, and cultural background.Â The Committee is only able to assess
   the meritÂ of the allegations with substantiating evidence.Â The
   Student did not submit any information to show that she had been
   treated differently than other students on the basis of race, gender,
   cultural background, disability or any otherÂ prohibitedÂ grounds of
   discrimination outlined by theÂ Human Rights Code.Â Therefore,Â the
   Committee denied this ground of appealÂ given the lack ofÂ detailed or
   documentary evidence regardingÂ the Studentâs experience regarding the
   comprehensive examinationÂ orÂ evidence showing that the TST applied
   different policies, practices and processes to the Student based on one
   or more of the prohibited grounds set out in theÂ Human Rights Code.

   The StudentÂ allegedÂ that aÂ second examinerÂ was appointedÂ for her
   comprehensive examination without her consent or agreement and
   thus,Â the appointmentÂ was made unfairly.Â The CommitteeÂ was
   convincedÂ thatÂ it caused stress and confusion for the Student to
   learn so shortly before her examinations thatÂ the examiners had not
   yet been confirmed. There was no information beforeÂ the Committee as
   to why TST waited so long to advise the StudentÂ they needed to replace
   one of the professors for the examination. This would have not been
   ideal circumstances for the Student, however,Â the Committee found that
   these unexpected challenges were not so daunting that the Student could
   not have more clearly indicated her disagreement with the changeÂ to
   her examiners if she did not consent.Â Moreover,Â the
   StudentÂ indicatedÂ that she decidedÂ to trust theÂ decision-makingÂ of
   the supervising committeeÂ with respect to another examiner. Therefore,
   the Committee found that TST complied with both the letter and spirit
   ofÂ the Handbook by obtaining the Studentâs consent to appoint a
   different professor to the roleÂ and deniedÂ this ground of appeal.

   The StudentÂ arguedÂ that TSTÂ isÂ in breach of
   theÂ 2018Â TSTÂ Handbook as they did notÂ allow her an opportunity to
   provide an oral defence of her comprehensive essay.Â The Committee
   notedÂ that ss. 8.3.2, 8.6.3, 8.6.3.3, 8.6.3.3.3Â and 8.6.3.3.4 of
   theÂ 2018Â TST Handbook all indicateÂ and confirmÂ that the essay and
   its oral defence are inseparably linked.Â The CommitteeÂ further
   notedÂ that these sections make it abundantly clear that the third
   comprehensive exam (essay) includes an oral defence and that the essay
   is to be graded on its written content and in part on an oral defence
   of that content.Â On review of the evidence and submissions of Counsel
   for TST, the Committee found thatÂ TSTâs interpretation of its own
   HandbookÂ was unreasonable, and in turn, it was unreasonable for the
   TST to issue the StudentÂ a summary of her marks with an âincompleteâ
   after depriving her an opportunity to defend her essay orallyÂ as
   required by the Handbook. The Committee agreed with thisÂ ground of
   appeal.

   AppealÂ granted.

   The CommitteeÂ recommendedÂ that the TST register the Student back to
   the program for a minimum of one full semester.Â Further, the Student
   may wish to begin preparing for her oral defence and work with TST
   regarding timing.Â Furthermore, the Committee recommendedÂ that, upon
   the conclusion of the Studentâs oral defence, the TST should assess the
   comprehensive essayÂ and its oral defence together and assign an
   overall grade.Â All provisions of the 2018 TST Handbook continue to
   apply. Lastly, the Committee recommendedÂ thatÂ the Studentâs tuition
   and any student fees be waived up to and including the final
   determination of whether or not she has succeeded in passing her
   comprehensive examinationsÂ because for reasons of fairness, the
   Student should not have to pay a second time.
   [1]View Report

References

   1. file:///media/29860
