UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
GOVERNING COUNCIL
Report #419 of the Academic Appeals Committee
June 15, 2022
To the Academic Board
University of Toronto
Your Committee reports that it held an electronic hearing, conducted by Zoom on March 29, 2022,
at which the following members were present:
Academic Appeals Committee Members:
Dr. Erika J. Murray, Chair
Professor Jan Mahrt-Smith, Faculty Governor
Ms. Susan Froom, Student Governor
Hearing Secretary:
Ms. Nadia Bruno, Special Projects Officer, Office of Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances
For the Student Appellant:
Ms. P.S. (the “Student”)
For the University of Toronto Mississauga:
Professor Michael Lettieri, Vice-Dean, Academic Experience, University of Toronto Mississauga
Ms. Chioma Nwabugwu, Assistant Registrar, Academic Standards, University of Toronto
Mississauga
I.

Appeal

This is an appeal from a decision of the Academic Appeals Subcommittee of the University of
Toronto Mississauga (the “Division”) dated July 5, 2021 which refused to allow the Student late
withdrawal without academic penalty from the following five courses (“the five courses”)
spanning from Fall 2015 to Winter 2018:
PSY100Y5Y, 2015(9);
PSY201H5F, 2017(9);
PSY210H5F, 2017(9);
PSY230H5F, 2017(9); and
PSY210H5S, 2018(1).
II.

The Facts

The Student first registered with the University of Toronto (the “University”) in the Fall 2015
term. After the Winter 2016 term, the Student was placed on academic probation because her
CGPA fell below 1.50. After the Summer 2016 term, her CGPA remained below 1.50, and, as a
result, she was suspended for one year. The Student returned to the University in the Fall 2017

2
term. At the end of the Winter 2018 term, her CGPA remained below 1.50, and as a result, she
was suspended for three years.
Three years later, on March 14, 2021, the Student submitted petitions for late withdrawal without
academic penalty for the five courses, spanning from 2015 to 2018. The Student’s petition
statements for the five courses were identical. She outlined that her mental health from 2016 to
2018 provided challenges that led her to do poorly in school, be placed on academic probation,
and eventually on academic suspension. The Student sought medical treatment from the
Division’s Health and Counselling Centre and from her family doctor, who then referred the
Student to a psychiatrist whom she saw regularly in 2018.
In August 2018, the Student successfully petitioned to have the 3-year suspension lifted. The
Student returned to the University on academic probation, in Fall 2018. The Student continued to
take courses until the end of the Winter 2021 term, when her CGPA again fell below 1.50. At the
end of the Winter 2021 session, the Student’s status was “suspended for three years.”
The Student petitioned to have the five courses removed from her academic record because, as
reflected in her petition statement, “my condition had caused me to do poorly in school. I wish to
appeal for the grades that I have failed during that time as they do not reflect my best work.” In
support of her petitions, the Student submitted:

a. A medical document (psychiatric assessment) dated March 1, 2021 from her psychiatrist
Dr. J.S. Dhaliwal (“Dr Letter 1”);
b. A medical document (psychiatric consultation) dated June 15, 2018 from her psychiatrist
Dr. J.S. Dhaliwal (“Dr Letter 2”);
c. A medical document (partial psychiatric assessment) dated June 22, 2018 from her
psychiatrist Dr. J.S. Dhaliwal (“Dr Letter 3”);
d. University of Toronto Verification of Student Illness or Injury (VOI) Form dated August
12, 2018 completed by Dr. J.S. Dhaliwal. The VOI Form noted that the Student had
multiple visits with Dr. J.S. Dhaliwal, had moderate and serious incapacitation circled on
the form, handwriting indicating starting in “Sept 2017” with no anticipated end date and
with a last seen handwritten date of “June 22, 2018” signed by psychiatrist Dr. J.S.
Dhaliwal. (VOI Form #1); and
e. A copy of prescription receipts for Clonopam (used to treat panic disorders and seizures),
Clonazepam (used to prevent and control seizures), and Rexulti (used to treat certain
mental disorders such as schizophrenia and depression), all dated June 15, 2018. (“the
prescriptions”).

3
The Student’s petition requests were all refused. The petition denial messages for all five courses
(cited above) were identical. The Student was provided with the same copied and pasted message
from five different Instructors for each of her five petitions:

In response, on April 8, 2021, the Student submitted an Appeal to the Committee on Standing
(“COS”) enclosing additional medical documentation in support of her appeal.

On appeal to the COS the Student submitted:
a. An Appeal Notice (“Appeal Notice”);
b. A Letter from a Lead Counsellor, Office of the Registrar dated April 26, 2021 (“Health &
Counselling Centre Letter”);
c. A VOI Form indicating Dr. J.S. Dhaliwal had multiple/on-going visits with the Student
and that she was last seen June 22, 2018. The VOI Form is dated March 29, 2021, severe
and moderate incapacitation are checked off on the form handwritten starting in “yr
2018” with a “not known” anticipated end date signed by a psychiatrist Dr. J.S. Dhaliwal.
(VOI Form #2);
d. A medical document (psychiatric assessment) dated April 5, 2021 from her psychiatrist
Dr. J.S. Dhaliwal (“Dr Letter 4”); and
e. Three Academic Advising Walk-in Appointment Notes from the Office of the Registrar
[General Advising – Per Request] dated May 12, 2016, December 5, 2017 and March 1,
2018.

4
The Student’s appeals were all denied. Each of the COS members provided the Student with the
exact same copied and pasted response for each of her five appeals:

On June 10th, 2021 the Student appealed the refusals to the Academic Appeals Subcommittee
(“AAS”). The Student did not submit any additional supporting documentation to the AAS. The
Student’s appeal was heard virtually on June 21, 2021. There is nothing in the record about what
was asked or said at the AAS hearing nor what evidence before the subcommittee, if any, was
considered. On July 5, 2021, the Student received a letter from the Chair of the AAS advising her
that her appeal was refused. The letter provided the following comments:

On November 1, 2021, the Student appealed the decision of the AAS to the Academic Appeal
Committee (“AAC”).

5

III.

Decision

The function of this AAC is to hear and consider appeals made by students against decisions of
faculty, college or school councils (or committees thereof) in the application of academic
regulations. Since each division of the University is required to have its own appeal processes,
the AAC is in effect a reviewing body and not a forum for fresh decision-making. Put simply, the
AAC decides whether the Division’s decision was reasonable. In considering the reasonableness
of the decision of the Divisional appeal body, the AAC is to consider the facts and whether the
academic regulations and requirements were applied correctly, consistently, and fairly1; and
ultimately whether the decision was an unreasonable one, or if it was made through a
demonstrably unfair interpretation and/or application of the relevant policies, processes and
procedures that were relied upon or invoked in its making2. If the decision was unreasonable or
there was an unfair interpretation and/or application of the relevant policies, processes or
procedures, only then should the AAC interfere with the decision3.
Various levels of academic appeal committees have on a number of occasions dealt with
petitions for late withdrawal from a course without academic penalty and have consistently
stressed that this remedy should not be lightly granted. This Panel of the AAC (this
“Committee”) agrees. Indeed, a Division’s decision not to grant the remedy of late withdrawal
without academic penalty should not be over-ruled by the AAC except where the Division
appears not to have followed its own published processes fairly and reasonably or in other
unusual and unique situations, for example, if there were exceptional or extraordinary
circumstances where a student may be granted exceptions to the policies.
In order to make a finding on whether the Division’s decision was reasonable, this matter
inherently involved this Committee reviewing if and how the Division considered the evidence
(facts) pertaining to the Student’s mental health during Fall 2015, Fall 2017 and Winter 2018,
and applied the appropriate University policies. This included an assessment of whether the
Division took reasonable steps reviewing the evidence before it, and if warranted, in assembling
additional evidence and documentations that are likely available on request. Although the AAC
has broad jurisdiction, appeals before the AAC are not a trial de novo, meaning not to be a fresh
trial of the evidence. However, the AAC does have a duty to consider the evidence that was
before the Division, particularly when the evidence is at issue.
Prior to the Student’s hearing, this Committee carefully reviewed the reasons of the committees
who have denied the Student’s appeals to date, the evidence as submitted by the Student with her
petitions, the additional evidence the Student submitted in support of her petitions on appeal to
the COS, as well as the information provided by the Division. In a virtual hearing on March 29,
2022, this Committee then heard from the Student and the Division. Both parties were selfrepresented.

1

Motion Decision 359-1 dated August 25, 2011, page 6
Report # 413 dated May 10, 2021, page 8
3
Ibid
2

6
The hearing opened with the Student speaking about her mental health dating back to high
school and that she sought help from various doctors, including her family doctor and now longtime psychiatrist, Dr. J.S. Dhaliwal. She stated that she wanted to be given a fair chance when
she goes out to find employment and that she doesn’t want her GPA hanging over her head from
grades she received when she struggled with various mental health issues.
This Committee asked the Student questions about the one 2018 course in which the Student
enrolled and wrote the final exam in April 2018 (PSY210H5S, 2018(1)). The Student expressed
that due to her mental health she did not believe she was able to make decisions at that time. This
Committee then asked her about her mental health during the three courses she enrolled in and
for which she wrote the final exams in December 2017 (PSY201H5F, 2017(9); PSY210H5F,
2017(9); PSY230H5F, 2017(9)). The Student expressed that just because she wrote the exams, it
did not mean she knew what she was doing because she was mentally unwell. This Committee
then asked her about her mental health during 2015 when she was enrolled and wrote the final
exam for PSY100Y5Y, 2015(9). The Student explained that this was her first course at the
University and that she believed that she had symptoms at that time. She explained that although
her symptoms were not as severe, that she also had symptoms since high school. This Committee
asked the Student if she had any evidence to support that she was medically incapacitated in
2015, to which the Student responded that she did not.
The Student described, though briefly, being mentally unwell during many of her academic
years, and seeing her family doctor on many occasions, who referred her to the psychiatrist Dr.
J.S. Dhaliwal. This Committee did not then press the Student to elaborate and disclose specific
details about her mental health, rather it turned to the medical evidence the Student submitted
with her petitions. This Committee began asking the Student questions about the VOI Form #1.
The Student expressed that this was the form she was instructed to use by the Division. Of
significant importance to this Committee is the fact that on the VOI Form #1, dated August 12,
2018, psychiatrist Dr. J.S. Dhaliwal indicated that the Student had a “serious” degree of
incapacitation under academic functioning, that was ongoing since September 2017 with no
anticipated end date. Under the “serious” category of VOI Form # 1, it lists “unable to write a
test/examination” as a classification.
This Committee noted that in their Response the Division argued that the Student failed to
supply any additional supporting documentation that would support granting an exemption
from University regulations4. Specifically, that the AAS had carefully considered all the
supporting documentation submitted by the Student and acknowledged the ongoing medical
issues she experienced5. Furthermore, it was reasoned that “subsequent documents do not
provide specific enough details about how the Student’s academic functioning was impaired.”6
This Committee next opened the forum to the Division for their comments and response. The
Vice Dean, Academic Experience, Professor Michael Lettieri, stated that he believed the
Student’s petitions were handled fairly, uniformly and in line with policies and procedures of the
Division. Using the same verbiage found in the reasonings of previous committees, Professor
The Division’s Response Submission, page 5
Ibid
6
Ibid, page 6
4
5

7
Lettieri argued that since the Student wrote the final exams for all courses in question, it was
demonstrative of her intent to complete the courses. Professor Lettieri stated that the Student had
sought academic advice since 2016, was regularly in contact with regards to her academic
standing, and was “warned” to monitor her progress in terms of academic standing. The Division
further argued that the medical documentation submitted by the Student did not confirm her
incapacity at the time of the withdrawals, and that the Student was appealing for academic
withdrawal without academic penalty because she had poor grades.
Indeed, this Committee agrees, the Student is seeking academic withdrawal without academic
penalty because she received poor grades. According to the Student’s psychiatrist as found on
the VOI Form #1, the Student received poor grades while having a “serious” degree of
incapacitation on academic functioning, being unable to write examinations from September
2017 to at least June 2018. The issue before this Committee is to decide, based on the evidence
that was before the Division and the AAS, whether denying the Student’s appeal was reasonable
and fair, and ultimately within a range of possible acceptable outcomes.
The Division argued that the AAS had “carefully considered” all the supporting documentation
submitted by the Student and supported the AAS’s reasoning that the dates on the documents,
rather than encompassing the 2015-16 and 2017-18 academic years, postdated them. This is a
factual error. The VOI Form #1 dated August 12, 2018, encompasses September 2017 to June
22, 2018. There is in fact handwriting by Dr. J.S. Dhaliwal on the VOI Form #1 indicating a start
date of September 2017 with no anticipated end date. At the hearing, this Committee asked the
Division why the VOI Form #1 was not considered sufficient enough to grant the Student’s
petitions for Fall 2017 and Winter 2018. In response, the Division advised that because the VOI
Form #1 dated August 2018 was not dated contemporaneously with April 2018 or December
2017, the periods when the Student wrote her final exams, it was insufficient. Furthermore, the
Division argued that since Student’s petitions were filed in March 2021 and the VOI Form #1
was dated August 12, 2018, being not more contemporaneous with Winter 2018 and Fall 2017
terms, that the Division did not give much weight, if any, to the VOI Form #1.
This Committee then asked the Student why the VOI Form #1 was dated August 12, 2018 and
not more contemporaneous with the April 2018 exam or the Fall 2017 periods. The Student
explained that she was very ill, that she did not know what to do, that she had been going back
and forth to her family doctor for years, that she knew she was mentally unwell, however that
she did not know what was wrong with her mind and that it took several months from the date of
referral from her family doctor to be seen by the psychiatrist Dr. J.S. Dhaliwal. The Student then
went on to express that it can often take much longer to see a psychiatrist, that she was seen by
Dr. J.S. Dhaliwal within months quite quickly and that she continues to see Dr. J.S. Dhaliwal.
Furthermore, it was reasoned at the petition level that, “according to University policy, late
withdrawal without academic penalty, cannot be granted when a student writes a final
examination, hence demonstrating intent to complete a course.” If this reasoning is correct, the
University’s VOI Form shall never be completed after a final exam has taken place to medically
attest that a student was ill during a final exam. This Committee questioned the Division if there
was another University form to be used in such circumstances and the Division confirmed that
there was not. The Division further advised that in certain circumstances a VOI Form can be

8
dated after a final exam has taken place, however more evidence is required. This Committee
then sought some examples from the Division of such circumstances. The Division provided the
example of a car accident. The Division advised that if a student was in a car accident, a VOI
Form completed months later would likely be accepted, however there would be more evidence
in addition to the VOI Form completed by a medical professional, such as from Service Ontario
or the police attesting to the accident. This Committee then asked both the Student and the
Division whether or not the Student was notified of any deficiencies with the VOI Form # 1 or
asked to provide further medical documentation. It was confirmed that the Student was never
asked to provide additional medical documentation nor was she notified of any deficiencies with
the VOI Form #1. The Division also confirmed that it did not reach out to the Student’s
psychiatrist Dr. J.S. Dhaliwal to request additional information. This Committee then brought to
the Division’s attention the fact that in one of the pieces of evidence submitted by the Student in
support of her petitions, Dr. J.S. Dhaliwal explicitly wrote “So, there is no confusion about such
situation, if further questions needed, I could be asked by third party. I can explain more if I get
response from the other party.” (Dr Letter 4; April 5, 2021)
This Committee finds that there is nothing on the standard VOI Form template to indicate that
where a VOI Form is dated after a relevant date, there is an onus on students to provide
additional supporting documentation. Furthermore, this Committee is not aware of any
University policy indicating there is a finite limited period of time by which a Student must file a
petition in order to rely on an earlier dated VOI Form to seek late withdrawal without academic
penalty. This Committee asked the Divisional representative, hypothetically, in the Student’s
case, what additional evidence would have been sufficient to meet the standard of evidence the
Division would require to grant the petition. The Division advised that it would require more
than the medical evidence on the University’s VOI Form. In response, the Divisional
representative indicated that if the VOI Form was completed closer to the final exam dates in
question, then the VOI Form would be sufficient. This Committee recognizes that the VOI form
was not completed on the same dates of the Student’s final exams, and in fact was completed by
her psychiatrist months later, however this is when she got her referral appointment. This is the
form the Student was instructed to use. This Committee does not agree that it is reasonable that
where a mentally unwell student having a serious degree of incapacitation attends a final exam
and puts pen to paper so to speak, is therefore necessarily of the mental capacity to write the
exams, or indeed even necessarily of the mental capacity to make an informed decision about
whether writing the exam is a good decision in light of university academic regulations and the
possible consequences.
Each level of previous committees found that the Student “did not confirm her incapacitation”,
the COS going further finding that the Student did not present “sufficient extenuating
circumstances” and the AAS reasoned that the Student had “failed to supply any additional
supporting documentation.” It is unclear to this Committee how the medical evidence provided
by the Student would be considered not supporting, did not confirm her incapacitation,
insufficient, or that extenuating circumstances did not occur nor were required to be presented. It
is this Committee’s finding that not one of the lower-level committees reasonably and adequately
considered the medical evidence before it. In none of the lower-level committees written reasons
was the medical evidence, including specifically the VOI Form #1 even referenced. Nor was the
supporting letter from Dr. J.S. Dhaliwal dated March 1, 2021 referenced, outlining psychiatric

9
consultations with the Student on June 15, 2018, and June 22, 2018. Specifically, the psychiatrist
letter stated in support of the Student’s petitions that, “She has paranoia and unfound
hallucination which caused psychotic symptoms in April 2018, lasting for a month…Her
diagnoses included depression with bipolar type 1, type 2 with psychosis and depression and
psychosis.” Furthermore, the June 15, 2018 psychiatric consultation letter from Dr. J.S. Dhaliwal
to the Student’s family doctor (Dr Letter #2) states: “She was hallucinating which means she was
hearing noises and voices as if you hear a crowd talking, but do not know what they are saying.
She is very clear about that and also she thought people were against her in April 2018. That
lasted about a month and then it stopped and she did not get any delusions of reference and she
did not have any visual hallucinations or any other hallucinations, so there are unformed
hallucinations with paranoia, part of depression.” At the end of the Dr Letter 2 the psychiatrist
Dr. J.S. Dhaliwal made the following ‘Note’: “The patient said to me that right now she is
suspended because her score was low. I am asking her to bring that form which is recognizing
her mental health and then necessary steps should be taken to appeal the decision and also give
her extra protection and some other resources to the patient.” This Committee finds that Dr. J.S.
Dhaliwal went even further than completing the VOI Forms but also took the time to write his
support for the Student’s petitions, which was unreasonably and unfairly overlooked by the
Division and the AAS.
This Committee finds that the evidence relied upon by the Student from her psychiatrist Dr. J.S.
Dhaliwal relevant evidence of significant weight that none of the previous levels of petition or
appeal bodies correctly and fairly considered, and that accordingly the decision of the Division
and the AAS was unreasonable. The Division appears to have been operating under a
misapprehension about the Student’s mental health, the processes and procedures around the
VOI Form, how a student can have a serious degree of incapacitation, still write an exam but in
the professional opinion of a medical doctor be significantly impaired. The question is not
whether the Student intended to complete a course. The question is whether the Student had a
serious degree of incapacitation on academic functioning, which impaired her ability to write her
exams and, potentially, the ability to make conscious decisions about her academic progression
and the potential consequences of relevant academic policies. Despite the Student having written
the exams and the psychiatrist seeing her months later, according to the medical opinion of the
Student’s psychiatrist, she was experiencing a “serious” degree of incapacitation “unable to write
examinations.”
This Committee finds that Division as well as all other appellant committees lacked appreciation
of relevant medical evidence and more particularly had complete disregard of such evidence.
This Committee’s decision relies heavily on the Student’s University of Toronto VOI Form #1
completed by her psychiatrist, Dr. J.S. Dhaliwal on August 12, 2018 and the supporting letter
dated March 1, 2021, from Dr. J.S. Dhaliwal outlining psychiatric consultations with the Student
on June 15, 2018, and June 22, 2018. Of most importance, this Committee relies on and accords
significant deference to the medical evidence of the Student’s psychiatrist submitted on the
University’s VOI Form, per University procedure, in the absence of any other known alterative
University form and/or procedure.
Dr. J.S. Dhaliwal is a medical professional who specializes in psychiatry. This Committee defers
to Dr. J.S. Dhaliwal’s medical opinion and the University’s policy in place around filling out the

10
VOI Forms. The Student completed the VOI Forms per the University’s policy verifying the
Student’s serious illness from September 2017 to at least June, 22, 2018, as indicated on the VOI
Form #1. Furthermore, Dr. J.S. Dhaliwal’s psychiatric consultation letters dated March 1, 2021
and April 5, 2021, make evident his support of the Student’s appeal based on his medical
expertise. “I want to make it very clear that her illness is psychiatric in nature…In my clinical
opinion decline in education has caused by untreated symptoms which she is treating now. I do
not see that the patient can be blamed for having symptoms. Nobody has control over these
symptoms; they occur and cause significant problems in young students. She is a hardworking
student, and deep consideration should be given to her diagnosis of psychiatric in nature as
diagnosed by her attending psychiatric, which I am.” These pieces of evidence are found to be
most relevant to the Student’s petitions, have not been accorded the deference they deserved by
all previous committees to date, and instead have been fatally overlooked.
This Committee unanimously agrees there was indeed sufficient evidence to support the
Student’s petition for late withdrawal without academic penalty from Winter 2018 (PSY210H5S,
2018(1)). However, this Committee unanimously agrees that there is no medical evidence to
support the Student’s petition for late withdrawal without academic penalty from 2015
(PSY100Y5Y, 2015(9)). Although not as extensive, there is also medical evidence sufficient to
grant the Student’s petition for late withdrawal without academic penalty for Fall 2017
PSY201H5F, 2017(9); PSY210H5F, 2017(9); PSY230H5F, 2017(9). This Committee agrees that
a reasonable person who carefully reviews all of the evidence, and properly accords it weight in
terms of reliability and credibility since it’s from a psychiatrist, should reasonably accept that the
totality of the evidence supports the conclusion that the Student was seriously incapacitated and
unable to write exams during the Fall 2017 and Winter 2018 periods, per the VOI Form #1 and
other supporting medical evidence. Finally, this Committee finds that if the Division thought the
evidence was lacking or questionable, it was incumbent on them to request further information
from the psychiatrist Dr. J.S. Dhaliwal to confirm any details on the VOI Forms, as per the
policy. The fact the Division did not make such requests should not be held against the Student,
when she had completed the VOI Form and provided additional medical letters from Dr. J.S.
Dhaliwal.
The University’s VOI Form as stated on the University’s website at the time of this Report “is
the new official University of Toronto form, replacing the Student Medical Certificate, for all
students who are requesting special academic consideration based on illness or injury.” Under
the FAQ section on the University’s website, two relevant questions presumably often posed by
students with the University’s relevant responses are as follows:
1. “Why does the form not include the nature of my health problem. How can the
University decide on my request for special consideration without that
information?”
In response, the University has posted: “The University respects your privacy. The
most important information is whether or how your illness or injury affects your
ability to fulfill your academic obligations and the time involved.”

11

2. “Do I have to see someone while I’m ill or injured? What if I’m too ill or injured?”
In response, the University has posted: “It is important that you see your practitioner
as soon as possible. The form can only be signed if you were seen at the time of your
illness or injury, not after the fact. As well, the University reserves the right to
confirm all details on the form, including dates.”
Accordingly, it is clear to this Committee that the University recognizes that the privacy of
students is important, the VOI Form being completed by a medical professional is to serve as the
means of deciding if a request for special consideration should be granted, that a student is to
have the form completed as soon as possible, which this Committee finds the Student did given
the circumstances. If there were questions around the VOI Forms, the onus was on the University
to seek clarity and confirm any details on the forms, including dates.
Furthermore, at the bottom of the VOI Form, the following is stated:
“In some appeal situations, the University may require additional information from
you or your practitioner to decide whether or not to grant or confirm special
consideration.”
If the Division required further additional information from the Student or her psychiatrist Dr.
J.S. Dhaliwal, there was a clear onus on the Division to request such information, not completely
disregard the medical evidence it had before it. Finally, there is nothing within University policy
that this Committee is aware of or that the Division could point this Committee to:
1. that indicates that a request for late withdrawal without academic penalty shall be filed
contemporaneous, i.e. within the same month or year as the course was completed; nor
2. that there is a separate University form/procedure/evidentiary burden placed on students
to prove their level of mental illness/incapacitation during the period of incapacitation
attested by a medical professional.
To the contrary, as confirmed by the Division during the hearing, and written within University
policy “Registration and Course Enrollment” under “Enrollment Limitations” and specifically
under “Late Withdrawal After the Drop Date (LWD)” one of the methods acknowledged is via a
petition. “Once the academic deadline for dropping a course has passed, the only method of
dropping a course without petition (i.e., with petition is a means) is by using the LWD option
online at http://student.utm.utoronto.ca/LWD.” The Student proceeded via petition by providing
medical evidence. Her petitions ought to have been taken seriously and should not have been
dismissed without regard to the medical evidence, or with no request for additional supporting
information.
This Committee finds that there was insufficient medical evidence to support the Student’s
petition for late withdrawal without academic penalty for PSY100Y5Y, 2015(9), and therefore

12
this Committee dismisses the Student’s appeal with respect to that course. However, this
Committee finds that it was unreasonable and unfair for the lower committees to have
overlooked the Student’s medical evidence for a late withdrawal without academic penalty for
PSY201H5F, 2017(9); PSY210H5F, 2017(9); PSY230H5F, 2017(9); and PSY210H5S, 2018(1),
and if questionable, to not follow the University’s processes by failing to seek any confirmation
on the details of the VOI Forms or psychiatrist letters, while deeming the totality of the medical
evidence insufficient and denying the petitions. Accordingly, this Committee finds that a late
withdrawal without academic penalty for PSY201H5F, 2017(9); PSY210H5F, 2017(9);
PSY230H5F, 2017(9); and PSY210H5S, 2018(1) is an appropriate remedy in this case.
The appeal is allowed, in part.

