Report 419

DATE:

   June 15, 2023

PARTIES:

   P.S. ("the Student"). v. the University of Toronto Mississauga

HEARING DATE(S):

   March 29, 2022 via Zoom

COMMITTEE MEMBERS:

   Dr. Erika J. Murray, Chair

   Professor Jan Mahrt-Smith, Faculty Governor

   Susan Froom, Student Governor

SECRETARY:

   Nadia Bruno, Special Projects Officer, Office of Appeals, Discipline
   and Faculty Grievance

APPEARANCES:

FOR THE STUDENT APPELLANT:

   The Student

FOR THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO MISSISSAUGA:

   Professor Michael Lettieri, Vice-Dean, Academic Experience, University
   of Toronto Mississauga

   Chioma Nwabugwu, Assistant Registrar, Academic Standards, University of
   Toronto Mississauga

   This appeal was from a decision of the Academic Appeals Subcommittee of
   the University of Toronto Mississauga (the ‚Division‚) from July 2021,
   which refused to allow the Student late withdrawal without academic
   penalty from five courses (‚the five courses‚), ranging from Fall 2015
   to Winter 2018.

   PSY100Y5Y, 2015(9); PSY201H5F, 2017(9); PSY210H5F, 2017(9); PSY230H5F,
   2017(9); and PSY210H5S, 2018(1).

   The Student registered with the University of Toronto in Fall 2015.
   Following the Winter 2016 term, the Student was placed on academic
   probation because her CGPA was below 1.50. After a one-year suspension
   in 2016, the Student returned to the University in Fall 2017 and at the
   end of Winter 2018, her CGPA remained below 1.50 and consequently, she
   was suspended for three years.

   Three years later, in March 2021, the Student submitted petitions for
   late withdrawals without academic penalty for the five courses. The
   petition statements for the five courses were identical. The Student
   outlined that her mental health between 2016-2018 provided challenges
   that led her to perform poorly in school, be put on academic probation,
   and later, academic suspension. In support of her petitions, the
   Student submitted three medical documents from her psychiatrist, a
   University of Toronto Verification of Student Illness or Injury (VOI)
   form, and a copy of prescription receipts for three medications, which
   are respectively used to treat panic disorders, prevent and control
   seizures, and treat certain disorders such as schizophrenia and
   depression.

   The petitions were all refused on the basis that the Student had
   completed the courses and late withdrawal without academic penalty
   could not occur after a student showed their intent to finish a course
   by writing the final exam. In response to these refusals, the Student,
   in April 2021, submitted an appeal to the Committee on Standing (COS),
   including additional medical documentation to support her appeal. The
   additional documents included: an appeal notice, a letter from a lead
   counsellor, a VOI, a psychiatric assessment, and three academic
   advising walk-in appointment notes. The Student‚s appeals were all
   denied. On June 10, 2021, the Student appealed the refusals to the
   Academic Appeals Subcommittee (AAS) and did not submit any additional
   supporting documents. The Student received a letter from the Chair of
   the AAS informing her that her appeal was refused, with one of the
   comments stating that members of the Subcommittee noted the Student had
   not presented a compelling case. In November 2021, the Student appealed
   the decision of the AAS to the Academic Appeals Committee (AAC).

   The Committee asked the Student questions about the 2018 course in
   which she enrolled and wrote the final exam in April 2018. The Student
   explained that due to her mental health she did not believe she was
   able to make decisions at that time. The Committee asked about her
   mental health during the three courses she was enrolled in and for
   which she wrote the final exams in December 2017. The Student explained
   that just because she wrote the exams did not mean she knew what she
   was doing because she was mentally unwell. The Committee asked the
   Student about her mental health in 2015 when she was enrolled and wrote
   a final exam for PSY100Y5Y. The Student explained that she had symptoms
   and had symptoms since high school. The Student did not have evidence
   to support that she was medically incapacitated in 2015.

   The Committee opened up the forum to the Division for their response.
   The Vice Dean argued that because the Student wrote the final exams for
   the courses in question, it was indicative of her intent to complete
   the courses. The Division argued further that the medical documents
   submitted by the Student did not confirm her incapacity and the Student
   was appealing for academic withdrawal without academic penalty because
   she had poor grades. While the Committee agreed that the Student was
   appealing for academic penalty because she had poor grades, the issue
   before this Committee was to decide, based on the evidence that was
   before the Division and the AAS, whether denying the Student‚s appeal
   was reasonable and fair, and within the range of possible acceptable
   outcomes.

   The Division argued that the AAS had considered the supporting
   documentation submitted by the Student. The Committee asked the
   Division why the VOI form dated August 2018 was not considered
   sufficient. The Division explained that because the VOI form was not
   dated contemporaneously with April 2018 or December 2017, the periods
   when the Student wrote her final exams, it was insufficient. The
   Committee asked the Student why the form was not more contemporaneous,
   and she explained that she was very ill, did not know what to do, and
   that it took several months to be seen by her psychiatrist.

   The Committee questioned the Division on whether there was a form other
   than the VOI in such circumstances, and the Division confirmed there
   was not. The Division also noted that in certain circumstances the VOI
   can be dated after the final exam but that it would require more
   evidence. The Committee asked both the Division and the Student if the
   Student was notified of any deficiencies with the VOI form or asked to
   provide further documentation. The Division confirmed that it did not
   notify the Student nor reach out to the Student‚s psychiatrist to ask
   for further evidence, even though the psychiatrist did leave a note
   stating they could explain more if needed.

   The Committee found that there was nothing on the standard VOI Form
   template to indicate that where a VOI form is dated after a relevant
   date, there is an onus on students to provide additional supporting
   documentation. Further, the Committee was not aware of any University
   policy indicating a finite limited time period by which a student must
   file a petition to rely on an earlier dated VOI to seek late withdrawal
   without academic penalty.

   The Committee recognized that the VOI form was not completed
   contemporaneously as the Student‚s final exams but noted that the form
   was completed when the Student received her referral appointment. The
   Committee did not agree that it is reasonable that when a mentally
   unwell student, having a serious degree of incapacitation attends a
   final exam, that they have the mental capacity to write the exam or
   even to make an informed decision on whether writing the exam is a good
   decision in light of academic regulations and consequences. The
   Committee found it unclear how the medical evidence the Student
   provided was considered not supporting, insufficient, did not confirm
   her incapacitation, or that there were not extenuating circumstances.
   The Committee found that none of the lower-level committees reasonably
   or adequately considered the medical evidence.

   The Committee found that the evidence the Student submitted from her
   psychiatrist held significant weight that none of the previous petition
   levels or appeal bodies correctly and fairly considered. Accordingly,
   the Committee found that the decision of the Division and AAS was
   unreasonable. The question was not whether the Student intended to
   complete the course, but whether the Student had a degree of
   incapacitation on academic functioning that impaired her ability to
   write her exam and potentially to make informed decisions about her
   academic progression and consequences of relevant policies. The
   Committee found that the Division and other appellant committees lacked
   appreciation of relevant medical evidence and had disregarded such
   evidence.

   The Committee found that there was no medical evidence to support the
   Student‚s petition for the 2015 course and dismissed the Student‚s
   appeal for that course. However, the Committee unanimously agreed there
   was sufficient evidence to support the Student‚s petition for LWD
   without academic penalty from the Winter 2018 course. The Committee
   also agreed there was sufficient, though less extensive, medical
   evidence to grant the Student‚s petition for the three Fall 2017
   courses. The Committee found that a reasonable person who reviews all
   the evidence and properly gives it weight, should reasonably accept
   that the evidence supports the conclusion that the Student was
   seriously incapacitated and unable to write exams during the Fall 2017
   and Winter 2018 periods. The Committee also found that if the Division
   thought the evidence was questionable or lacking, it was on them to
   request further information and that the Division did not make these
   inquiries should not be held against the Student. The Committee found
   that it was unreasonable and unfair of the lower committees to have
   overlooked the Student‚s medical evidence. Thus, the Committee found
   that a late withdrawal without academic penalty for the Fall 2017 and
   Winter 2018 courses was an appropriate remedy.

   The appeal was allowed, in part.
   [1]View Report

References

   1. file:///media/30584
