Case #501

   DATE: March 11, 2010
   PARTIES: University of Toronto v. M.V.
   Hearing Date(s): July 23, 2008
   Panel Members:
   Raj Anand, Chair
   Professor Ikuko Komuro-Lee, Faculty Member
   Sujata Pokhrel, Student Member
   Appearances:
   Rob Centa, Assistant Discipline Counsel for the University
   Sarah Crowder, DLS for the Student
   In Attendance:
   Dr. Krista Gourlay, Office of Student Academic Integrity
   M.V., the Student
   Trial Division - s. B.I.1(a) and s. B.I.1(d) of Code â forged documents
   â forged medical certificate â false doctorâs letter - plagiarism â
   altered date and content from a previous medical certificate â doctorâs
   letter â submitted essay containing passages plagiarized from internet
   â purchased essay over the internet â Agreed Statement of Facts â Joint
   Submission on Penalty â Sopinka principles â no prior offences â three
   offences treated concurrently â early admission of events and acts â
   lengthy period of reflection â Joint Submission on Penalty accepted â
   grade of zero in seven courses; five-year suspension; seven-year
   notation on transcript; and report to Provost
   Student charged with two offences under s. B.I.1(a) and one offence
   under s. B.I.1(d) of the Code. Charges relate to the allegations that
   the Student altered a legitimately obtained medical certificate and
   submitted it under false pretenses, that the Student submitted a
   doctorâs letter knowing that the content of the letter was false, and
   to plagiarism. The Panel considered and accepted the Joint Submission
   on Penalty. The Panel then considered the Sopinka factors from the Mr.
   C case. The Panel considered the significant undertaking involved in
   falsifying the medical certificate, the obtaining and distribution of
   information from a doctor that was known to be false, and plagiarism of
   an essay in analyzing the seriousness of the academic misconduct. The
   Panel then considered the early admission of the acts and events, the
   Studentâs willingness to work with the University in entering a Joint
   Submission. The Panel reviewed the proximity of the three offences and
   found, although there could be some debate as to whether they could be
   characterized as the actions of a repeat offender, they would be seen
   as concurrent offences because none of them came before the Tribunal
   previously. The Panel imposed a grade of zero in seven course; a
   five-year suspension; a seven-year notation on the Studentâs academic
   record and transcript; and that a report be issued to the Provost.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12742
