Case 1388

   [1]Case 1388 - Appeal

FILE:

DATE:

   March 6, 2023

PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v. X.M. (âthe Studentâ)

HEARING DATE(S):

   December 7, 2022, via Zoom

PANEL MEMBERS:

   Alexi Wood, Chair

   Professor Blake Poland, Faculty Panel Member

   Cameron Miranda-Radbord, Student Panel Member

APPEARANCES:

   William Webb, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg
   Rothstein LLP

HEARING SECRETARY:

   Christopher Lang, Director, Office of Appeals, Discipline and Faculty
   Grievances

   The Student was charged for knowingly representing as their own an idea
   or expression of an idea or work of another in an assignment, contrary
   to section B.i.1(d) of the Code. In the alternative, they were also
   charged with knowingly obtaining unauthorized assistance in connection
   with the assignment, contrary to section B.i.1(b) of the Code. In the
   further alternative, the Student was charged with knowingly engaging in
   a form of cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or
   misrepresentation not otherwise described in the Code in order to
   obtain academic credit or other academic advantage of any kind in
   connection with the assignment, contrary to section B.i.3(b) of the
   Code.

   The Student was neither present nor represented at the hearing. The
   University filed evidence regarding service and attempts to contact the
   Student. The Panel noted that the University is not required to provide
   actual notice. Based on the evidence, it found that the Student had
   received reasonable notice of the hearing and the charges pursuant to
   sections 6 and 7 of the Statutory Powers Procedure Act and rules 9 and
   17 of the University Tribunalâs Rules of Practice and Procedure . The
   hearing proceeded in the Studentâs absence.

   The Panel received evidence that the Student had collaborated with at
   least one of three other students, two of whom had admitted to academic
   misconduct concerning the assignment. It considered side-by-side
   comparisons of the Studentâs and the other studentsâ assignments. Based
   on the evidence, the Panel found the Student guilty of one count of
   knowingly obtaining unauthorized assistance, contrary to section
   B.i.1(b) of the Code. The University withdrew the remaining charges.

   In determining sanction, the Panel observed that the outcome may have
   been different had the Student participated and provided an
   explanation. It also held that several factors weighed in favour of a
   severe penalty, including the seriousness of the offence, the detriment
   caused to the University by the offence, and the need to deter others
   from committing similar offences.

   The Panel imposed the following sanctions: a grade of zero in the
   course; a two-year suspension; a three-year notation on the Student's
   transcript; and a report to the Provost for publication.
   [2]View Case

References

   1. https://governingcouncil.utoronto.ca/case-summary/case-1388-appeal
   2. file:///media/30984
