Case 00-01-05 - Appeal

DATE:

   March 8, 2001

PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v. Mr. W.

Hearing Date(s):

   August 29, 2000

Board Members:

   Patricia D.S. Jackson, Chair
   Professor Marvin Gold
   Josh Hunter
   Professor Lorraine Weinrib

Appearances:

   W. Gerald Punnett, Counsel for the Appellant
   Lily I. Harmer, Counsel for the University

   Appeal by the Student from a Tribunal decision in which the Student was
   found guilty of submitting a plagiarized report, contrary to s.
   B.i.1(d) of the Code. The Student submitted that the Tribunal should
   not have tried the Student at the same time as a second student charged
   with the same offence in relation to the same report; that the
   attribution of sources in the report demonstrated that the Student did
   not intend to plagiarize, or alternatively such attribution was
   sufficient that there was no plagiarism; that the Chair of the Trial
   Panel wrongly allowed the University to reopen its case during the
   course of submissions, resulting in fundamental unfairness to the
   Student; that the Tribunal wrongly excluded evidence of plagiarism by
   other students who wrote other chapters of the same report; that the
   University did not comply with the pre-hearing procedures specified in
   the Code; and that the penalties imposed were inappropriate. At the
   Trial Division hearing, the Student was not represented by counsel. The
   Board considered the transcript of the Trial Division hearing. With
   respect to the first ground of appeal, the joint trial, the Panel
   considered the Studentâs submissions and s. 9.l(l)(a) of the Statutory
   Powers Procedures Act, and found that the conditions of s. 9.1 had been
   met because the Trial Panel made it clear to both Students that if
   either of them objected to a joint trial then they would be tried
   separately; that there was no suggestion that they had to justify such
   a separation; and that the similarity of the facts and law underpinning
   the identical charges against the two students was evident, and that it
   was not incumbent upon the Tribunal to identify such evident
   similarities as a basis for exercising its jurisdiction. The Panel
   considered the transcript of the Trial Division hearing and the
   submissions on the Studentâs counsel and found that the parties did
   consent to a joint trial and that the failure of the reporter to fully
   record that consent did not avoid it. The Panel found that there was no
   injustice as a result of the joint trial because there was no
   indication at the trial or on appeal of an area in which the appellant
   sought to cross-examine and was denied, and no indication that the
   defences of the two Students were in conflict. With respect to the
   second ground of appeal, the Panel considered the definition of
   plagiarism in the Code, and found that the Trial Panelâs finding was a
   finding of the necessary mental element to constitute the offence of
   plagiarism. The Panel found that the Trial Panelâs rejection of the
   Studentâs defence was based on findings on fact and that those findings
   were supported by the evidence. With respect to the third ground of
   appeal, the Panel found that an exchange between the Chair and the
   course professor, which did not go to proving any element of the
   offence, did not amount to a âre-openingâ of the Universityâs case, and
   that even if it did amount to a re-opening, there is a discretion to
   permit such re-opening which should not be interfered with unless an
   injustice had resulted and that no injustice had occurred. With regard
   to the fourth ground of appeal, the Panel found that the Trial Panelâs
   decision to exclude evidence of the potential commission by others of
   an offence to not be in error, and that such evidence was irrelevant to
   the question of whether the Student committed the offence. With regard
   to the fifth ground of appeal, the Panel considered the Code and found
   that there was no evidentiary basis for the Studentâs argument that the
   matter may have been resolved without having to proceed with the
   prosecution if the he had the opportunity to meet with the teaching
   assistant who marked the Report. The Panel found that there was no
   requirement in the Code to afford a meeting with the teaching
   assistant, that there was no basis for departing from the conclusion of
   the Trial Panel that the Students was not disadvantaged as a result of
   the defect in procedures,Â  and that there was no substantial wrong,
   detriment or prejudice to the Student. With regard to the sixth ground
   of appeal, the Board considered the Studentâs academic status and the
   Trial Panelâs object in imposing a sanction, and found that it was not
   appropriate to vary the penalty imposed by the Trial Panel. The Board
   found that penalizing the Student only in relation to his mark in the
   report, rather than in the course as a whole, would not reflect the
   reality that plagiarism reflects a want of academic integrity, and a
   sanction limited to the report mark would not adequately signal to the
   Student and other students, the severity of the offence. Appeal
   dismissed.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/28423
