Report #316

   DATE: April 9, 2007
   PARTIES: The Student Appellant v. Faculty of Pharmacy
   Hearing Date(s): March 9, 2007
   Committee Members:
   Assistant Dean Kate Hilton, Chair
   Mr. Kristofer Coward
   Professor William Gough
   Dr. Joel Kirsh
   Professor James Rini
   Judicial Affairs Officer:
   Dr. Anthony Gray
   In Attendance:
   For the Student Appellant:
   the Student Appellant
   Mr. Chris Burr (Counsel)
   Ms. Janye Lee (Counsel)
   For the Leslie Dan Faculty of Pharmacy:
   Associate Dean Lesley Lavack,
   Ms. Brenda Thrush, Registrar
   Faculty of Pharmacy â request for readmission to the Faculty of
   Pharmacy â re-instatement in program â failure to obtain the required
   annual GPA â stress and anxiety did not incapacitate to the point of
   mental illness â no basis for Divisional Appeals Committee conclusions
   â appeal dismissed â recommendation to Division to consider additional
   procedures to ensure students in difficulty are aware of options
   available to assist them â recommendation that Division pay attention
   to information and resources provided to students pursuing an appeal â
   See Policy on Academic Appeals within Divisions
   Request for readmission to the Faculty of Pharmacy for the purpose of
   repeating Year 2 of the program. The Studentâs registration in Pharmacy
   was cancelled after he did not obtain an annual GPA of 1.7 in two
   separate years. The Committee considered whether the Student had
   suffered from an undiagnosed mental illness as a result of his family
   situation during the relevant time period which had prevented him from
   performing to the standard required. There was no medical documentation
   available in relation to the Studentâs alleged mental illness. The
   Committee considered the Studentâs oral evidence about the nature of
   his symptoms and found that the Studentâs stress and anxiety did not
   incapacitate him to the point of mental illness and that his situation
   did not merit extraordinary relief. The Committee arrived at the same
   decision as the Divisional Appeals Committee, but disagreed on the
   reasons. The Committee found that the Divisional Appeals Committee had
   no basis for its negative conclusions regarding the studentâs attitude
   when he returned to his studies. Appeal dismissed. The Committee
   recommended that the Faculty may wish to consider adopting procedures
   to ensure that students are aware of the range of options available to
   assist them. The Committee expressed concern that the Student was
   unprepared for the Divisional Appeals Committee despite meeting with
   the Registrar. The Committee recommended that the Division to review
   its information provided to students pursuing an appeal, with reference
   to the Policy on Academic Appeals within Divisions, and the Provostâs
   Framework for the Divisional Appeals Processes.
   [1]View Report

References

   1. file:///media/12571
