Report 393

DATE:

   December 14, 2017

PARTIES:

   R.S. (âthe Studentâ) v. the University of Toronto, Mississauga (UTM)

Hearing Date(s):

   November 9, 2017

Committee Members:

   Professor Malcolm Thorburn (Chair)
   Professor Paul Kingston, Faculty Governor
   Ms. Amanda Harvey-Sanchez, Student Governor

Secretary:

   Ms. Tracey Gameiro, Associate Director, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty
   Grievances

Appearances:

For the Student Appellant:

   Mr. R.S. (âthe Studentâ)

For the Faculty of Kinesiology and Physical Education:

   Professor Gretchen Kerr, Vice-Dean of Academic Affairs
   Mr. Timothy Linden, Assistant Registrar, Office of the Registrar

   The Student appeals a decision made by the Dean of the Faculty of
   Kinesiology and Physical Education and asked the Committee for the
   following relief: (1) review the grades for a number of small
   assignments for KPE440H; (2) give the Student the opportunity to
   produce another assignment in satisfaction of a video assignment that
   he had handed in late; (3) aegrotat standing in KPE440H; (4) removal of
   KPE440H as a degree requirement for the Bachelor of Education degree;
   or (5) the option to take a course other than KPE440H in order to
   fulfil the specified degree requirement.

   The Committee dismissed the Studentâs request for all of these grounds
   of relief except for the opportunity to take a course other than
   KPE440H in fulfillment of his degree requirements. The Committee gave
   the course instructor considerable deference in the marks that had been
   allocated for the small assignments that formed part of the course, as
   there was no evidence of unfairness. One of the grade appeals related
   to an assignment that was handed in well past its due date, contrary to
   a course policy that set out that assignments were deducted marks for
   lateness and given a grade of zero if more than a week late. The
   Committee held that there were good reasons for policies like this one,
   specifically, that instructors should be able to grade assignments
   together to ensure that they are all subject to the same standard and
   cannot be expected to ascertain whether each assignment was actually
   completed by the deadline if it was not in their possession at that
   point. The Committee further found that students needed to be in the
   habit of actually providing deliverables when they are expected. In
   this case, the instructor had taken additional steps to assist students
   with the assignments and had provided the Student with an additional
   opportunity to submit a replacement assignment. The Student failed to
   provide adequate documentation of alleged mental health problems that
   prevented him from completing this substitute assignment. The Studentâs
   request for remedies 1 â 4 was denied.

   However, the Studentâs request that he be allowed to take an
   alternative course to fulfill his degree requirements was granted based
   on evidence given by a professor who attested that the Student was an
   exemplary member of the Faculty community, and that the Faculty would
   do whatever they could to make sure that the Student would be able to
   graduate from the program. In particular, the professor would
   personally write Victoria College requesting that the Student be
   admitted to their comparable course so that he could substitute it for
   KPE440H.

   The Committee closed by recommending that the Faculty of Kinesiology
   and Physical Education put in place more robust measures to instruct
   and assist students with the academic appeals process, including
   providing more information about expectations around materials and
   appearing before any panels.Â  The Committee also commented that the
   Dean may have provided inadequate reasons for his decision in this
   case. The Committee found it to be a duty incumbent upon all public
   decision-makers to justify their decisions in a way that provides
   meaningful guidance to those who are subject to those decisions. Appeal
   allowed in part.
   [1]View Report

References

   1. file:///media/12693
