UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
GOVERNING COUNCIL
Report # 393 of the Academic Appeals Committee
December 14, 2017
To the Academic Board
University of Toronto.
Your Committee reports that it held a hearing on Thursday, November 9, 2017, at which
the following members were present:
Professor Malcolm Thorburn (Chair)
Professor Paul Kingston, Faculty Governor
Ms. Amanda Harvey-Sanchez, Student Governor
Hearing Secretary:
Ms. Tracey Gameiro, Associate Director, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty
Grievances
Appearances:
For the Student Appellant:
Mr. R.S. (“the Student”)
For the Faculty of Kinesiology and Physical Education:
Professor Gretchen Kerr, Vice-Dean of Academic Affairs
Mr. Timothy Linden, Assistant Registrar, Office of the Registrar
The Appeal
This appeal relates to a decision of the Dean of the Faculty of Kinesiology and Physical
Education dated 8 February, 2017 concerning the Student’s results in KPE 440 in the fall
of 2016. The Dean’s decision rejected two of the student’s claims and provided a remedy
for the third of his claims that the Student now deems to be inadequate.
The Facts
In the fall of 2016, the Student was in his fifth year of a KPE/Education concurrent
education program. He had already completed all of his degree requirements for his
bachelor’s degree in kinesiology. All of his courses in the 2016-2017 academic year were
part of the education component of the concurrent education program. KPE 440, although

1

it is offered by the faculty of Kinesiology and Physical Education, is a prerequisite for
successful completion of the B.Ed. degree.
1. The Video
One of the requirements of KPE 440 was to create a video and to upload it to YouTube.
This assignment was worth 10% of the final grade in the course. The deadline for
uploading the video was 27 September, 2016. The Student and his partner experienced
difficulties uploading the video to YouTube, so they approached their instructor, Ms.
Karlene Headley-Cooper, about their concern in class on the day it was due. They
showed her a laptop on which the video was playing and asked her how they might hand
it in. She indicated that arrangements could be made but because it was the beginning of
class, it was not an appropriate time to do so.
The Student and his partner did not upload the video to YouTube. The Student’s partner
emailed Ms. Headley-Cooper at 4:00pm with a link to a video on “wevideo.”
Unfortunately, this was not a format that could be viewed by the instructor. It was only
two weeks later, on October 12, 2016, that the Student contacted Ms. Headley-Cooper
about the video. He wrote,
I just realised that I never ended up submitting XXX and I’s 3-minute video from
KPE440. I’ve tried to attach it to an e-mail a couple times but it appears that for
some formatting reason, that is not possible. Is there a g-mail address with which I
can give you access to it? (It is on my google drive). It is a video of the original
playing online since we weren’t able to upload it to youtube.
It was not for another two weeks (on October 26, 2016)1 that the Student actually sent a
link to the video to Ms. Headley-Cooper.
2. The Conference
Another requirement of KPE400 was participation in the mounting of an academic
conference on a topic related to the course. This part of the course was worth 30% of the
Student’s final grade. 10% was concerned with participation (5% for an online form; 5%
for a self-assigned reflection); 10% instructor marks (4% pre-conference; 6% day-ofconference); 5% for a pre-conference form; and 5% for a class mark.
The Student did especially poorly in the instructor marks part of this assignment: he
received a pre-conference mark of 1/4 and a day-of-conference mark of 1/6. (By his own
admission, he lost all 10 participation marks by failing to submit the online form or the
self-assigned reflection.) In an email to the Student dated December 1, 2016, Ms.
Headley-Cooper gave the following comments as justification for these marks:
1

In her correspondence of October 28, 2016, however, Ms. Headley-Cooper suggests that
she received the “submission that could be fully viewed” on October 17, 2016. In oral
submissions, the Student indicated that the video was sent by his classmate on that date.
2

Pre-conference instructor mark: 1/4 –low engagement, minimal contributions and
limited observations of participation during in-class work time for conference;
important facilities scheduling conflict was not communicated to fellow
classmates
[…]
Day-of-conference instructor mark: 1/6 – representation of observations made
during the Conference regarding student contribution to Conference
atmosphere/environment, advertising/social media, attendance, scheduling, flow,
professionalism, teamwork, presentation, and attendance to sessions.
The Student insists that both of these instructor-assigned marks are much lower than he
deserved. The Student acknowledges that he did not do very much in preparation for the
conference, but this was true of many others, as well. In his January 27, 2017 email to
Dean Jacobs, he wrote, “the KPE440 conference was put on by 30 students when it
realistically could have been completed by as little as 5; there simply was not enough
work to go around.”
Concerning the day-of-conference mark, the Student argues that Ms. Headley-Cooper
mistakenly believed that he was not at the conference because he was not in a picture
taken at the end of the evening. He argues that he was very engaged in the conference. In
his January 27, 2017 email to Dean Jacobs he wrote: “I assisted many students with their
‘day-of’ duties. […] I networked with conference presenters and attempted to ask critical
questions after keynote presentations.” Further, the Student alleges that Ms. HeadleyCooper “did acknowledge some of [the ways he participated in the conference] when I
spoke to her after class one day, and told me my mark would be adjusted, but it has not
been changed since the meeting.”
3. Professionalism
The Student’s final concern is his professionalism mark in KPE440. As of November 29,
2016, he had received a mark of 9.5/16. At first, the Student’s main concern on this topic
was that he lost marks for being absent from a number of classes that conflicted with a
“teaching in Catholic school” class that is a prerequisite to being able to work in catholic
schools in Ontario. But once Ms. Headley-Cooper was given the relevant documentation,
she adjusted his mark accordingly (on October 13, 2016).
The Student’s remaining concerns are some challenges to the appropriateness of specific
grades he was assigned on specific days and a grade of 0/2 he was assigned for the class
of November 29, 2016.

3

4. Instructor Bias
The Student made clear in his oral presentation to this committee that he thought all of
these concerns should be understood in light of a worry about the instructor’s
unprofessional conduct toward the Student.
In the fall of 2016, the Student had a leadership position in the Kinesiology and Physical
Education Undergraduate Association (KPEUA). In that capacity, it was his task to
allocate use of the Benson Student Lounge (BSL). He was asked to book the BSL for the
KPE440 conference. He agreed to look into it. As it turned out, he booked another event
for the same time, so the conference had to be moved to another location. Ms. HeadleyCooper indicated to the Student that he had not communicated the room conflict to his
classmates “in a timely manner.”
In his email to Dean Jacobs dated January 27, 2016, the Student alleges that Ms.
Headley-Cooper informed “a staff member, Ron Castro, that she had assigned [the
Student] a ‘0’ grade on the 3-minute video assignment, and alleg[ed] that [the Student]
had changed the booking of the BSL as a retaliatory measure.” The Student added: “Not
only did this compromise my academic confidentiality but it also slandered my personal
reputation with KPE staff…”
On January 13, 2017, Ms. Headley-Cooper wrote the Student a letter apologizing for
having breached his student confidentiality.
Decisions Below
After having spoken to Ms. Headley-Cooper about the matters listed above without
success, the Student approached Professor Catherine Amara, Director of Undergraduate
Studies, for a grade appeal. In an email dated December 19, 2016, Professor Amara
indicated that she was responding only to a concern about the grade on the video. She
wrote:
It’s up to the student to take the responsibility of handing in work on-time and/or
communicating issues with the instructor in a timely fashion or to accept the
consequences for failing to do so. It is unfortunate, that this did not happen in
your case. […] Your mark for this particular assignment will stand as zero.
On January 27, 2017, the Student wrote to the Dean of the Faculty of Kinesiology and
Physical Education, Ira Jacobs, to raise all four of the concerns above. In an email dated
February 8, 2017, the Dean delivered his decision on these matters. Concerning the first
three matters, he wrote:
After reviewing the collective documentation and considering my conversations
with those involved, I do not question the validity of the assessment vehicles
employed by the course instructor, nor the grades that were assigned by her. I
think that the timelines associated with the various assessment vehicles were

4

clearly communicated to students as were the consequences of not meeting those
timelines. Therefore, I will not be initiating any further actions about items two
and three in your email [i.e., the grades for the conference and professionalism].”
On the matter of the late video, Dean Jacobs notified the student that there was a remedy
available to him. He wrote:
[T]he course instructor, upon reflection about the background you provided, has
decided to create a replacement course requirement, worth 10% of the course
grade. Ms Headley-Cooper will communicate with you very shortly with details
and deadlines in that regard.
The Student initially accepted this proposal. In an email reply dated 13 February 2017,
the Student wrote “I will complete the make-up assignment diligently and hopefully
achieve some success in the course as a result…” The Student did not complete the
make-up assignment, however. In part, he says (in his statement of appeal), this is
because of “pre-existing and acquired mental health issues… extreme anxiety and
depression.” And in part, this is because the new assignment “was much more daunting
and rigorous than the original assignment (making the two unworthy of equal weighting
for their proportion of the course grade).”
Concerning the matter of bias, Dean Jacobs wrote, “from reading her letter to you about
the disclosure of your grade to a staff member, I know that she was and remains sincerely
regretful and apologetic about that disclosure.” He did not deem any further action
required on this matter.
The Student now appeals the Dean’s decision to the AAC, seeking the following
remedies:
1. The marking of the video and other small assignments from KPE440H;
2. The opportunity to produce another video submission;
3. Aegrotat standing in KPE440H;
4. Removal of KPE440H as a degree requirement for the Bachelor of Education
degree;
5. The option to take a course other than one instructed by Ms. Headley-Cooper to
fulfil the specified degree requirement.
Decision
The central focus on the Student’s appeal is his mark on the video assignment. Indeed,
although he made submissions to Dean Jacobs on other matters, his written submissions
to the AAC and the faculty’s written reply are concerned exclusively with this matter.

5

On this matter, Dean Jacobs’s decision was clearly a reasonable, even generous one.
There was no reason why the Dean had to provide any remedy for the Student who had
clearly run afoul of the course lateness policy. The course policy reads (on p. 3): “Late
assignments will have marks deducted at the rate of 1 mark per day late up to a maximum
of 7 after which (7 days) the assignment will not be marked and you will receive a mark
of 0 for that assignment.”
The Student suggests that assignments should be treated as though they had been
submitted as long as they have been date-stamped in some reliable way. The actual
submitting of the assignment to the professor in the prescribed way, the Student suggests,
is a formality that we should be able to see past. But that is not so. There are many
reasons why students must not only complete but also submit their assignments on time.
Instructors should be able to grade assignments together to ensure that they are all subject
to the same standard. Instructors cannot be expected to ascertain whether each
assignment was actually completed by the deadline if it was not in their possession at that
point. And students need to be in the habit of actually providing deliverables to others at
the time when they are expected. For these reasons and more, universities and other
educational institutions regularly impose clear lateness policies and regularly enforce
them. A fifth-year student has had ample notice of these policies and should be expected
to follow them.
The committee notes that Ms. Headley-Cooper took additional steps to assist students
with the deadline, writing an email to them on the due date (September 27, 2016)
indicating that “if you are having difficulties with this process [of uploading the video to
YouTube], I ask that you please be patient and keep calm – I am happy to help make sure
that your video gets submitted on time.” That is, she made clear that she would provide
whatever assistance was required should students have trouble with the process. Had the
student reached out to Ms. Headley-Cooper on this matter beyond his initial encounter in
class on September 27, 2016, things might have turned out quite differently. But he did
not.
Nevertheless, in light of the Student’s petition to the Dean, Ms. Headley-Cooper was
willing to allow the student another chance to save his grade in the course by submitting a
replacement assignment. It is beyond the scope of this committee to decide whether the
new assignment was an appropriate substitute for the first. But we note that the Student
expressed in the clearest possible terms his willingness to complete it. This committee
will not look past the expressed views of the instructor, the Dean and even the Student
that this was an appropriate remedy. If the Student chose not to complete the replacement
assignment – already an extraordinary measure – then he must bear the consequences.
Finally, on this matter, the Student mentions in his appeal to this committee that one of
the reasons why he did not complete the make-up assignment was that he was suffering
from mental health problems. The only evidence submitted to support the Student’s claim
of mental health problems were three email confirmations for appointments at the
university health service. Since these emails did not indicate what the appointments were

6

for, much less what diagnosis or course of treatment was determined, they do not
substantiate his claim. This was not supported by any evidence either in the Student’s
written materials or in his oral presentation.
The Student’s second concern is his instructor-assigned mark for the conference. Here,
we find that there is simply not enough credible evidence to support the Student’s claims.
First, it is unclear precisely how much his mark should change if he could establish that
he was, indeed, at the conference on the day. Second, he provided nothing more than his
own say-so to support his claim that he was there on the day. Third, the fact that the
Student was neither in the end-of-day picture nor did he submit the forms that were given
out at the end of the conference lend support to the instructor’s claim that he was not
present for at least some parts of the conference. In the absence of significant evidence
otherwise, we have no reason to alter the instructor’s evaluation of the Student’s
performance at the conference.
The Student’s third concern is his mark for professionalism. Once again, this is a matter
on which the instructor is entitled to considerable deference. Ms. Headley-Cooper
provided a rubric for evaluation and broke down marks for the student class by class. She
showed real willingness to adjust marks once the Student provided documentation to
explain his absences from class. We see no reason to disturb those judgments.
The Student’s fourth and final concern is his allegation of bias on the part of the
instructor against him. It is indeed alarming when an instructor breaches student
confidentiality as happened in this case. And it is also alarming when an instructor
alleges that the Student has deliberately sabotaged the class’s conference. But the
instructor here has written a full and sincere apology to the Student already for this
conduct. There is no evidence to suggest that any of the other matters were coloured by
this one incident. Indeed, her willingness to change grades and to provide make-up
assignments to the Student demonstrate quite the opposite.
For the above reasons, the appeal is dismissed. The student’s final grade will remain as it
is. As a result, the Student’s request for remedies 1-4 is denied.
The Student’s fifth remedy, however, is more easily provided. He sought assurance that
he could take a course other than one instructed by Ms. Headley-Cooper to fulfil the
specified degree requirement. On this matter, Professor Kerr made clear in her
presentation before this committee that this student was an exemplary member of the
faculty of kinesiology and physical education community, serving in a number of
capacities and working diligently to improve student life at the faculty in many ways. She
went on to say that the faculty would do whatever they could to make sure that the
Student would be able to graduate from the program. In particular, Professor Kerr
mentioned that she would be happy to write a letter to Victoria College requesting that
the student be admitted to their comparable course on conflict resolution so that he could
use that course as a substitute for KPE440. We expect the faculty to make good on that
promise and also to do its utmost to convince OISE to accept the Victoria College course
as a substitute for KPE440.

7

Additional Remarks
There are two matters that arose in this appeal on which this committee would like to
express its view.
First, it was clear from the Student’s written and oral submissions at the AAC and from
the quality of his submissions to the decision-makers below that he could have benefitted
significantly from more assistance from the Faculty in preparing his appeals. We
recommend that the Faculty of Kinesiology and Physical Education put in place more
robust measures to instruct and assist students with the academic appeals process,
including providing more information about expectations around materials and appearing
before any panels.
Second, although we see no reason to disturb the Dean’s rulings in this matter, this
committee is concerned with the lack of reasons provided by the Dean for his decision.
The Dean’s reasons were as follows:
After reviewing the collective documentation and considering my conversations
with those involved, I do not question the validity of the assessment vehicles
employed by the course instructor, nor the grades that were assigned by her. I
think that the timelines associated with the various assessment vehicles were
clearly communicated to students as were the consequences of not meeting those
timelines. Therefore, I will not be initiating any further actions about items two
and three in your email [i.e., the grades for the conference and professionalism].
As concerns the late submission of the video, these reasons make clear why the Dean has
denied the Student’s appeal. But as concerns the other matters in the appeal – his grade
on the conference and for professionalism – the Dean’s email provides no meaningful
guidance to the Student or to others why his appeal has been dismissed. On these two
matters, his reasons simply state his conclusion rather than provide reasons for it. We
strongly recommend, as have many other AAC panels in the past, that decision-makers at
the faculty level take care to provide meaningful reasons for their decisions. It is a duty
incumbent upon all public decision-makers to justify their decisions in a way that
provides meaningful guidance to those who are subject to those decisions.

8

