Case 1027

   DATE: March 24, 2021
   PARTIES: University of Toronto v. Y.T.

   HEARING DATE: December 3, 2020, via Zoom

   Panel Members:
   Ms. Alexi Wood, Chair
   ProfessorÂ Ken Derry, Faculty Panel Member
   Ms. Emily Hawes, Student Panel Member

   Appearances:
   Ms. Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg
   Rothstein LLP
   Mr. Daniel Walker, Representative for the Student, Bobila Walker Law
   LLP
   The Student

   In Attendance:
   Mr. Christopher Lang, Director, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty
   Grievances

   On two occasions,Â theÂ StudentÂ was charged underâ¯s. B.i.1(d) of
   theâ¯Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters, 1995â¯(the âCodeâ) on the
   basis thatÂ sheâ¯knowingly represented an idea or expression of an idea
   or work of another asâ¯herâ¯own in an assignmentâ¯to obtain an academic
   credit.Â She was charged alternatively under ss. B.i.1(b) and B.i.3(b)
   of theÂ CodeÂ for these offences.

   The parties provided a partial Agreed Statement of Facts (âASFâ), a
   Joint Book of Documents,Â as well as a Joint Submission on Penalty
   (âJSPâ).Â The ASF noted thatÂ theÂ StudentâsÂ assignmentÂ contained
   sentences and text that appeared in two other studentsâÂ assignments as
   wellÂ two paragraphs copied directly from the ProfessorâsÂ assignment
   text. Further,Â the Professor noted thatÂ the test code for the
   oralÂ testÂ wasÂ virtually identical to that of a studentÂ from the
   previous year.Â AfterÂ hearing the submission of counsel for both
   parties as well as reviewing theÂ facts outlined in theÂ ASF, the Panel
   acceptedÂ theÂ guilty pleaÂ forÂ both charges under s. B.i.1(d) of
   theÂ Code.Â The Panel was satisfied that theÂ StudentÂ acknowledged
   that sheÂ had entered the guilty pleaÂ freely and voluntarily, knowing
   of the potential consequences she faced, and having obtained the advice
   of counsel.Â The University withdrew the alternative charges.

   Regarding the submitted JSP, the Panel noted that a JSPÂ should only be
   rejectedÂ ifÂ the penalty is contrary to the public interest or would
   bring the administration of justice into disrepute.Â The Panel
   furtherÂ noted that whenÂ there is a JSP, it is not their role to
   determine if it would impose the same penalty that was proposed by the
   parties.Â The Panel found that the proposed penalty falls within the
   acceptable range of outcomes, it is not contrary to the public interest
   nor would it bring the administration of justice into disrepute.
   Therefore, the PanelÂ accepted the penalty proposed in the JSP.

   The PanelÂ imposedÂ the following sanctions:Â a final grade of zero in
   the course;Â three and a half yearÂ suspension;Â notation on
   transcriptÂ for just underÂ 54
   monthsÂ orÂ untilÂ graduation,Â whichever comes first; andÂ report to
   theÂ ProvostÂ Â forÂ Â publication with theÂ StudentâsÂ name withheld.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/29749
