Ul'.TVERSITY OF TORONTO
The University Tribunal
Trial Division

IN THE MATTER of charges of academic dishonesty made on March 4, 2009;
Al""\11) IN THE MATTER of the University of Toronto Code ofBehaviour on Academic
Matters, 1995;
·

A."l\1D IN THE MATTER of The University of Toronto Act, 1971, S.O. 1971, c. 56 as
amended S.0. 1978, c. 88

BETWEEN:
UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO (the "University")
and N

A

Members of the Panel:

Ms. Laura Trachuk

:Mr. Adil D'Sousa
Professor Graham Trope

Appearances:

Phil Doii\'Iles for N - ~
Linda Rothstein and Lily Harmer for the University of Toronto

N-

DECISION

[1]

A hearing of the Trial Division of the University Tribunal was convened on September
10, 2009 to consider charges brought against
~ under the University of
Toronto's Code of Behaviour on Academic A{atters (the "Code").

Charges
[2]

On March 4, 2009 N - ~ was charged as follows:

CHARGES
Note: \Vherever in the Code ofBehaviour on Academic Matters, 1995 ("Code")
an offence is described as depending on "knowing", the offence shall likewise be
deemed to have been committed if the person ought reasonably to have kno"''Il·
1. On or about November 29, 2007, you knov1.mgly forged or in any other way
altered or falsified any academic record or uttered, circulated or made use of any
such forged, altered or falsified record, whether the record be in print or electronic
form, namely the marks for your mid-term exam in MGTB03H - Management
Accounting, contrary to section B.I.3.(a) of the Code.

2. In the alternative, on or about November 29, 2007, you knowingly engaged in
any form of cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or
misrepresentatio'n not herein othenvise described, in order to obtain academic
credit or other academic advantage of any kind, in connection with your mid-term
exam in MGTB03H-Management Accounting, contrary to section B.I.3.(b) of
the Code.
3. On or about December 10, 2007, you knov.mgly forged or in any other way
altered or falsified any academic record or uttered, circulated or made use of any
such forged, altered or falsified record, whether the record be in print or electronic
form, namely the marks for your final exam in MGTB03H - Management
Accounting, contrary to section B.I.3.(a) of the Code.
4. In the alternative, on or about December 10, 2007, you kno~;vingly engaged in
any form of cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or
misrepresentation not herein otherwise described, in order to obtain academic
credit or other academic advantage of any kind, in connection with your final
exan1 in MGTB03H -Management Accounting, contrary to section B.I.3.(b) of
the Code.

5. On or about April 23, 2008, you knowingly forged or in any other way altered
or falsified any academic record or uttered, circulated or made use of any such
forged, altered or falsified record, whether the record be in print or electronic
form, namely the marks for your final exam in MGTC03H-Principles of
Finance, contrary to section B.I.3.(a) of the Code.
6. In the alternative, on or about April 23, 2008, you knowingly engaged in any
form of cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or misrepresentation
not herein otherwise described, in order to obtain academic credit or other
academic advantage of any kind, in connection with your final exam in
MGTC03H-Principles of Finance, contrary to section B.I.3.(b) of the Code.
[3]

Mr. A.11111 contends that the University may not proceed with the charges listed at
paragraphs 5 and 6 above because the Dean's designate made a prior decision to dismiss

2

those charges and conveyed that decision to him by letter on June 24, 2008. He asse1is
that the University is precluded by the provisions of the Code from chargi.,.-rig hi1n after
that decision was made.

Facts
[4]

The parties introduced the follo'0.ring agreed Statement of Facts which was signed by
:1\1r. Alllland counsel for the university:
1. For the purposes of this hearing under the Code of Behaviour on Academic
Matters ("Code"), the University of Toronto (the "University") and Na.
AIIIII have prepared this Agreed Statement of Facts ("ASF") and a joint book of
documents ("JBD"). The University and N-AIIIIIIIIII agree that:

a.

they consent to the admission into evidence of each document
contained in the JBD for all purposes, including for the truth of its
contents, without further need to prove the document; and

b.

if a document indicates that it was sent or received by someone,
that is prima facie proof that tl-ie document was sent and received
as LT1dicated.

2. On August 10, 2009, the University delivered a Notice of Hearing in this
matter. This Notice of Hearing is included in the JBD at Tab 18.
3. The Notice of Hearing arises out of charges of academic misconduct filed by
the Provost under the Code. A copy of the Charges dated March 4, 2009 is
inqluded at Tab 19 of the JBD.
A.

BACKGROUND

4. In Fall 2006, N - AIIIII registered at the University of Toronto at
Scarborough ("UTSC") in the Specialist (Co-Operative) Program in Management.
At the end of the Winter 2009 term N - Aa111 had accumulated 12.5 credits.
A copy o f N - Aalll's academic record dated August 24, 2009, is found in
the JBD at Tab 2.
5.

A-AIIIIII is N-Allllll's older brother. At all material times N -

Alllll lived together 'i\7ith his brother AIIIII and their parents in t~e family home.
6. Both N - and A - Aalll were emailed at UTSC in the Specialist (CoOperative) Program in Management (the "Program"). This is an emiched
program which combines academic studies with work experience in public and
private enterprises. Co-operative programs are considered desirable because
students have contact with, and heightened exposure to, prospective employers
and career opportunities following graduation. At UTSC, approximately 80 per
cent of students applying to the Management program from high school seek
3

admission into Co-Operative progrnms, of which approximately 50 per cent are
actually accepted. Admission is granted on the basis of an applicant's academic
performance as well as their interest, experience and potential ability. N A.allll was admitted to the programme directly out of high school.
7. A - ~ was enrolled in this Program from 2004 to 2008. A - ~
was also employed by UTSC as a teaching assistant ("TA") in a number of
management courses from the Summer of 2006 to the Winter of 2008. As a TA
A - Alllll's responsibilities included marking student course work and
invigilating exams.

N-

8. N - A111111 enrolled in the Program in the Fall 2006 term and has
completed his third year of study. In Summer 2007,
was placed on the
Honours List. In June 2008, N - joined, and was appointed Director of
Finance of, DECA U. DECA U promotes itself as being "part of an international
organization aimed at preparing university students for a variety of careers ...
maintaining a strong focus on business-related areas ... ". In January 2009,
N - competed against 77 students at a DECA U Provincial Conference
sponsored by TD Bank and was awarded a Top 5 Medal in Financial Services.
9. N - ~ w a s enrolled in the following courses at the same time that his
brother A-Aallllll was employed as a TA in those same courses:
c. MGTB05 in Fall 2006;
d. MGTB03 in Fall 2007; and
e. MGTC03 in Winter 2008.
10. NIIII AIIII knew that his brother was a TA in each of these courses, but
did not advise any of the course instructors in MGTB05, :tv1GTB03 or MGTC03
that his brother A11111 was a TA in the same course in which he was emol1ed.

B. FACTS RELATING TO MGTB03H3

N-

11. MGTB03H3 was an introductory course in Management Accounting. It was a
required course for successful completion of the Program.
~ was
enrolled in this course in Fall 2007. It was taught by Professor Liang Chen.
12. AIII ~ was employed as a TA in MGTB03 in the Fall term of 2007
while his brother was enrolled in the course. N-A.a was aware that his
brother was a TA responsible for marking course work. He did not inform
Professor Chen that he was AIII Aallll' s brother.
~ was never
asked by any faculty member or instructor ifhe V{as related to AIII AIIIIII.

N-

4

13. Grades in the course were assigned as follows: 4 assignments - 10%;
midterm test - 40%; final exam - 50%. There \Vere approximately 205 students
enrolled in this course, divided into three lecture groups of 65 students (Ll), 78
students (130), and 62 students (L31).
A copy of the Course Outline for
MGTB03H3 is found i.i.1 the JBD at Tab 4.

14. As one of three TA's in the course, A - AWIII had electronic access to all
of the course marks for all students enrolled in the course, including his brother
N-A
15. N-Aalll submitted 4 assignments for credit in MGTB03, worth in total
10% of the overall course mark, and received the following marks:

f.

October 1, 2007 - Assignment 1 (worth 3%): 100%

g.

October 16, 2007 - Assignment 2 (worth 3%): 100%

h. November 12, 2007 - Assignment 3 (worth 2%): 96%
1.

November 26, 2007 - Assignment 4 (worth 2%): 100%

Mid-term exam
16. The mid-term in MGTB03 was written on October 23, 2007. It was w01ih
40% of the overall course mark. N - Aall received a mark of 70 out of 100
on the mid-tenn. This mark, and the breakdown of his marks by question (Q 1:
26, Q2: 18, Q3: 26) was recorded on an electronic spreadsheet to which the TA's,
including~ A.11111, were given access by the course instructor. A copy of
the electronic spreadsheet shmving N - ~ ' s mid-term mark as 70 is
found in the JBD at Tab 6.

17. N -

A.al received his marked mid-term back in class in early

November, 2007, clearly indicating that he had received a mark of 70. He was
aware that he had received a mark of 70 for the mid-term at that time.
18. On November 30, 2007, A1111 ~ inflated N. . Allllts mid-term
grade by 20 marks to 90% by altering the mid-term mark on an electronic
spreadsheet which was maintained by the course instructor, and to which he had
access. A copy of the electronic spreadsheet altered by AIII Aall to show a
mid-term mark for NJ111 Allllof90% is found in the JBD at Tab 8.
Final exam
19. The final exam in MGTB03 was held on December 10, 2007. It was worth
· 50% of the overall course mark. N _ Allll,vrote this exam. Aall
served as an invigilator during this exam, and together with the other 2 TAs and

Alla

5

Professor Chen, marked the exam papers immediately after the exam.
20. Aa ~ marked ~ A - ' s final exam paper. In the course of
doing so he inflated the marks given to N - Allll's answers to the final
exam as follows:

J.

he marked 3 multiple choice questions in Question 1 as having been
answered correctly when they were not, and thereby gave an additional 6 ·
marks in Question 1, so that N-Alllll's mark for the multiple choice
questions in Question 1 showed as 44/50 when it should have been 38/50;

k. he m-varded a mark of 15/25 for Question 2, when the answer should only
have received a mark of 11/25;

1. he awarded a mark of 19/25 for Question 3, when the answer should only
have received a mark of 13/25.
21. \\/hen these adjustments are made to N-Aalll's total mark for the final
exam, he should have received a mark of 62%, and not the 78% given to him by
A - ~ . A copy of the Answer Booklet submitted by l\WIII A1111 on
December 10, 2007 for the final exam in MGTB03, with the original marks
recorded in black ink and the corrected marks recorded in red ink, is found in the
JBD at Tab 11.

N-

22. N-Aalll received a final grade of85 in MGTB03. This final mark was
calculated using an improperly inflated mid-term mark of 90, and an improperly
inflated final exam mark of 78. If the marks actually earned by
AIIIIII
had been used to calculate his final grade, his actual final mark in the course
should have been 69.

N-

23. The improperly inflated grade of 85 was posted on ROSI on December 12,
2007.
~ accessed his transcript on ROSI at least six times on
December 12, 2007. He continued to access his transcript on ROSI a further
seven times on December 13, 14, 15, and 16. He was aware at that time that he
had received a final grade in MGTB03 of 85%. A copy of the ROSI access
records for NIIIIII Allllll's account using his access identification number is
found in the JBD at Tab 20.

N-

N-

24. In order to receive a final mark in MGTB03 of 85%,
AIIIII would
have had to score 94 .16% on the final exam, because he only received a grade of
70 on the mid-term.
~ knew that he would have had to have done
very well, and much better than he had done on the mid~tenn, in order to receive
such a high final grade in the course.

N-

25. Only 3 people in the class of 144 students received a mark of 90 or higher on
the final exam. 10 people in the class (other than
~ received a mark
of 85 or higher in the course. Only 3 people improved their mark on the final

6

exam by more than 20 marks, as N - would have had to have done to achieve
a course mark of 85. Each of these 3 students, however, had failed the mid-term
and needed to improve their marks significantly on the fmal exam in order to pass
the course. A further 5 students achieved a mark on the final exam that was
between 16 and 20 marks higher than each had earned on the mid-term; 3 of
these students bad also failed the mid-term, while 2 had received marks in the
60's. A copy of the marks recorded for all of the students in MGTB03 in Fall
2007 is found in the JBD at Tab 21. A table comparing the mid:-term marks ·with
the final exam marks highlighting the 8 students described above, as well as those
who did worse on the final than the mid-term by the same spreads, is found in the
JBD at Tab 22.
26. \Vhen the improperly inflated marks are removed from NIii Aallllll's
record, he earned a mark of 69 in MGTB03, and not the recorded 85.
27. The fact that "NIIIII Allll's marks were inflated by his brother A AIIIII on both the mid-term and the final exams was not detected by the
University until after the University became aware that~ Aalllhad inflated
N - ~ • s marks on the final exam in MGTC03, as described below.

C. FACTS RELATING TO MGTC03
28. N-Aalwas enrolled in MGTC03 in the Winter 2008 term. IvfGTC03
was a required course for successful completion of the Program. MGTC03 was a
course in Principles of Finance, taught by Esther Eiling. Grades in the course
were assigned as follows: assignments-15%; midterm exam - 30%; final exam55%. A copy of the Course Outline for MGTC03 is found in the JBD at Tab 14.

29.1\..a Alllllreceived 100% (15/15) on the assignments and 96% (28.8/30)
on the midterm exam.
30. AIIII.Aal was employed as a TA in MGTC03 in the Winter 2008 term at
the same time his brother was emolled in the course. NIIIIII Ala was aware
that his brother was a TA responsi_ble for marking course work. He did not
inform Professor Elling that he was A • Allll•s brother. NIIII Aal was
never asked by any faculty member or instructor if he was related to A -

AIIIIII

.

31. The final exam in MGTC03 was v.Titten on April 23, 2008. The exam
consisted of 9 questions. AIII ~ was one of the invigilators at the exam. A
copy of the Exam Question Book is found in the JBD at Tab 15.
32. l'lla- AIIIII wrote the final exam in MGTC03 on April 23, 2008. A copy
of his Answer Booklet is found in the JBD at Tab 16. ·

7

N-AJlll's

N-

33. ~AIIII graded his brother
exam paper. In doing so he
gave inflated marks on 6 of the 9 questions, so that
Alia's reported
mark on the final exam was 56.5i68, or 83%, when it should have been 31.5/68,
or 46.3% - a failure. N - A
's mark was therefore iinproperly ii,creased
by a total of 25 marks. This inflated mark on the final exam would have
improved N-Aal• s final mark in the course by 20%. A comparison of the
marks awarded by A - A - - t o the correct grades is found in the JBD at Tab
17.
34. Professor Eiling discovered the inflated marks improperly awarded to NIIII
, were
marking the final exam papers.

Allll's paper at the time she and the course TAs, including A - A·

N-

35.
AIIII acknowledges that the University has advised him to obtain
independent legal advice before signing this ASF and that he has done so.
36. NIIII AIIII acknowledges that the University has made no promises or
representations to him regarding the penalty the University will seek in this
matter.
[5]

I\1r. Allll's brother, Aalll A.11111, was the only person to testify in this matter. Mr.
AIII ~ acknowledged that he bad falsified his brother's marks in t'l\10 courses in
which he had been a teaching assistant. He also testified that he arid his brother had
discussed the courses on a few occasions but did not do so regularly. Mr. A-A.al
denied that he ever told his brother that he had altered his marks.

[6]

J\1r. 1 \ ~
transcript was included in the joint book of documents and it
showed that Mr. Alli.was a good student who frequently received "A's" in his
courses.

[7]

11:r. ~ met vvith the Dean's designate, Eleanor Irwin, about the alterations to his

Allll's

marks in MGTC03- Principles of Finance on June 17, 2008. At that time he was advised
that he would not be charged and a letter to that effect followed on June 24, 2008. The
University subsequently learned about the changes to his marks in MGTB03 and then
decided to lay charges against him with respect to the changes to his marks L"'l both
courses. A statement by Professor Invin was submitted on the agreement of the parties.

Submissions With Respect to the Objection to the Charges Relating to MGTC03.
[8]

11r. ~ submits that the University had no authority to impose charges with respect
to the exam in MGTC03 as the Dean's designate bad already made and issued a
decision that no charges would be laid. He relies upon the follov.ring sections of the
Code:

8

C.I.(a) Divisional Procedures
Note: \\'here a student commits an offence, the faculty in which the student is
registered has responsibility over the student in the matter. In the case of
Scarborough and Erindale Colleges, the college is deemed to be the faculty.
3. If after such a discussion, the instructor is satisfied that no academic offence
has been committed, he or she shall so inform the student and no further action
shall be taken in the matter by the instructor, unless fresh evidence comes to the
attention of the instructor, in which case he or she may again proceed in
accordance with subsection 2.
7. If the dean, on the advice of the department chair and the instructor, or if the
depaitment chair, on the advice of the instmctor, subsequently decides that no
academic offence has been committed and that no further action in the matter is
required, the student shall be so informed in ,\'Titing and the student's work shall
be accepted for nonnal evaluation or, if the student was prevented from
"11.thclra'V\ring from the course by the withdrawal date, he or she shall be allowed to
do so. Thereafter, the matter shall not be introduced into evidence at a Tribunal
hearing for another offence.
[9]

JV.fr. Aallargues that the plain meaning of section C.I.(a)(7) of the Code precludes the
Dean's designate from relying on the charges she had dismissed in any other proceeding
and the University therefore cannot rely on the charges related to MGTC03. 1.fr. AIII
argues that the Dean decided that no academic offence had been committed with respect
to MGTC03 and had informed him in writing. He contends that the University is
therefore precluded from introducing those allegations into evidence at the Tribunal
hearing for another offence pursuant to section C. I. (a) (7). He notes that section
C.I.(a)(7) does not include an exception for fresh evidence although such an exception
is found at the instructor level in section C.I.(a)(3). Mr. AIIIII argues that even if such
an exception exists at the decanel level, no fresh evidence came to the attention of the
Dean's designate. Specifically, there was no new evidence about whether N A
knew about his brother changing his marks. Professor mvin said she changed
her mind because she learned about the changes to Jvfr. ~ s marks in MGTB03.
However, Mr. A.all claims that she knew or should have knmvn about those changes
at the time she made the decision not to lay any charges in MGTC03. Mr. A
submits that a student is entitled to finality when a Dean investigates an allegation and
then dismisses it.

[10] The University responds that JV.fr. A
s interpretation of the Code is too narrow. It
asserts that the Code should be read purposively and as a whole. The University claims
that it would not be consistent "11.th the purpose of the Code for a Dean to be prevented
from forwarding charges to the Provost when she or he becomes aware of new
information. In this case, the second meeting was not with the instructor but with the
Dean. The University may, therefore, have ~kipped a procedural step but .Mr. Aal
has not objected to that. The University relies upon section C.I.(a) (11) of the Code

9

which provides that decanal procedures w:ill not normally be reviewed by the Tribunal
unless there has been a substantial 'WTong. The University argues that, in this case, all
that has occurred is that there has been a second Dean's meeting instead of a second
instructor's meeting ..
[11] The University argues that the last sentence of section C.I.(a)(7) of the Code is not
meant to apply to a situation such as this. It claims that the section is intended for
situations in which an allegation has been dismissed and therefore never dealt with. The
University would be prevented from raising such an allegation in a subsequent
proceeding. The University says that these circumstances are different because it has
laid charges ·with respect to the allegation. As a result, :Mr. ~ has a full opportunity
to meet the case against him and there is no prejudice,
[12] The University maintains that the Dean's designate did act on fresh evidence when she
referred the charges because she learned of the changes to 11r. Alllll's marks in
MGTB03 in the fall of2008. It asserts that the standard for the introduction of fresh
evidence upon which l\1r. ·AIIII is relying is the civil standard for introducing
evidence on appeal and is not appropriate in these circumstances. The University
contends that the decanal process is intended to be flexible and that the Dean cannot
investigate every possible source of information before making a decision. According to
the University, the Dean must be able to go back and revisit a decision after it has been
made. In this case, the University says, Mr. Aall vvithheld the information that his
brother had been the teaching assistant in previous courses that he had taken.
[13] :t-.1r. ~ replies that the Code says that an instructor may revisit an allegation when
new evidence comes to light not new information and in this case there was no new
evidence . .Mr. ~maintains that he was never asked if his brother was a teaching
assistant in any other course. He claims that the Dean's designate did not change her
mind because she leained of new evidence. She changed her mind about his credibility
and the University should not be permitted to proceed ·with the charges in those
circumstances.

Submissions 011 the Merits
[14] The University argues that 11r. Aaa knew that his brother A - had changed his
mai·ks and is therefore guilty of the offences with which he is chai·ged. It asserts that it
has proven his knowledge on a balance of probabilities. The University contends that it
is more likely than not that Mr. AIIII knew what his brother had done and that any
other explanation is improbable. It relies upon AIII A
's evidence and claims that
it is highly improbable that he discussed the course Vlrith his brother as infrequently as
he claimed or that he never discussed his marks. It points to the fact that the conduct
continued for a long period of time. It argues that the only explanation for why A A.111111 would change the marks is that he wanted to help his brother. It relies upon the
fact that A - AIIIIII never offered any other explanation for his actions.

10

[15] The University referred to the decision of the Supreme Court in FH v. l11cDougall
[2008) 3 S.C.R. 41.
[ 16] :tv:fr. A.all responds that tb.e University has not proved on the bala.c"'lce of probabilities
that he knew about the changes to his marks. He contends that the University has not
provided clear, cogent and convincing evidence. He maintains that it is not dra,ving an
inference from the evidence but is only speculating as to what rnay have occurred. Mr.
A_ _ notes that there is not.½ing about his previous academic performance which
would lead hiin to the conclusion that his marks must have been changed. He denies
that the fact that A - is his brother and that they live together should lead to the
conclusion that they must have discussed what AIII was doing. He argues that no
information has been provided about his family. He notes that it is completely possible
that he and Aal did not discuss what ~ was doing if AIII was trying to protect

him
[ 17] The University replies that if A-was acting alone to protect his brother he could
have provided that explanation but he did not do so.

Decision
[I 8] The parties agree that the University has the burden of proof with respect to the charges
against Mr. Aalll and must prove that he violated the Code on the balance of
probabilities. The Code states at section C.II.(a)(9) that the prosecutor has the onus of
proof and "must show on clear and convincing evidence that the accused has committed
the alleged offence". The panel has considered all of the evidence and has determined
that the University has not met that onus.
[19] There is no dispute that Mr. A-A.1111 changed his brother's marks. However, there
is no direct evidence and insufficient circumstantial evidence that Mr. ~ knew
what his brother was doing. AIIIIIII and N-are brothers who live in the same house
and .Aall used his position as a teaching assistant to improve Nllll's marks. That is
all relevant circumstantial evidence. However, it is not clear and convincing enough to
prove that
knew A - had changed his marks. We know almost nothing about
the relationship between the brothers. Family dynamics can be very complicated. We
could speculate that
must have known ,vhat his brother was doing. We could
also speculate that if A - was prepared to put his OVi'Il future in jeopardy to help his
brother, he may very well have not told him what he was doing in order to protect him.
However, we cannot convict Mr. Aalllll on the basis of speculation. We also cannot
infer that :tv1r. AIIII necessarily should have k,_'1own his marks had been inflated given
how well he did on the assignments and in prior courses. We do not know whether he
felt confident in the answers he gave. He is a student who usually did well. We note that
the University did not argue that he should have knovvn that the marks he received did
not reflect how he had done on the tests. Ultimately, we do not have sufficient evidence
to conclude Mr. AIIII knew tl~at Aall AIIIIII had changed his marks let alone any
evidence of any more active participation in those actions. The University has therefore
not proved on the balance of probabilities that Mr . .AIIIIIII knew that AIII~ was

N- N-

11

10/09/2009 16:06 FAX

@002

going to change his marks or had changed his marks before the University became
aware ofit.
[20] We therefore find that the University has not proved that Mr. N - Aallllviolated
the Code. The charges against him are therefore hereby dismissed.

(21] As the panel has decided to dismiss the charges after reviewing all of the evidence it
need not decide whether the University was precluded from proceeding with the charges
related to MGTC03H.
Dated at Toronto, October 9, 2009

Laura Tr huk for the panel

Graham Trope
Adil D'Sousa

12

