Case 553

DATE:

   October 9, 2010

PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v. N.A.

Hearing Date(s):

   September 10, 2009

Panel Members:

   Ms. Laura Trachuk, Chair
   Prof. Graeme Trope, Faculty Member
   Mr. Adil D'Sousa, Student Member

Appearances:

   Ms. Linda Rothstien and Ms. Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel
   for the University
   Mr. Phil Downes for the Student

   Student charged under s. B.i.3(a) of the Code. The charges related to
   allegations that the Student knowingly forged his academic records by
   letting his brother, the TA for his courses, change his marks in two
   courses. The TA inflated marks for his brotherâs midterm and final exam
   in a course in 2007 and for a final exam in a course in 2008. Before
   the incidents, the University had never been informed that they were
   brothers. When the incident in 2008 was discovered, the Deanâs
   designate decided not to charge the Student, as the TA testified that
   his brother, the Student, had no knowledge that his marks had been
   changed. However, the University decided to lay charges when it
   subsequently learned about changes to the Studentâs grades in 2007. The
   Student argued, relying on s. C.I.(a)3 and 7, that the University had
   no authority to impose charges with respect to the later course since
   the Deanâs designate had already made and issued a decision that no
   charges would be laid. The Panel held that it was not necessary to
   consider this issue because the University failed to prove on a balance
   of probabilities that the Student knew that his brother changed his
   marks. There was no direct and insufficient circumstantial evidence
   that the Student knew what his brother was doing. The fact that they
   were brothers who lived in the same house and that the brother used his
   position to change the Studentâs marks was all relevant circumstantial
   evidence but it was not clear and convincing enough to prove the
   charges. Given that the Student had been academically successful, the
   Panel could not infer that the Student necessarily should have known
   that his marks had been inflated. The Panel found the Student not
   guilty.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12740
