Report #335

   DATE: June 1, 2009
   PARTIES: Ms. S. A.Â  (the Student) v. UTM
   Hearing Date(s): February 6, 2009
   Committee Members:
   Mr. Tad Brown, Chair
   Professor William Gough
   Ms. Jacqueline Greenblatt
   Professor Joel A. Kirsh
   Professor Elizabeth M. Smyth
   Secretary:
   Ms Nancy Smart
   Appearances:
   Ms. S.A., the Student Appellant
   For the University of Toronto at Mississauga (UTM):
   Professor Gordon Anderson
   UTM â late withdrawal without academic penalty â awareness of rules for
   dropping courses â students not eligible to withdraw from a course
   after the final exam has been written â new evidence â no evidence that
   impact of parentâs ill health became worse after the drop date â heavy
   course load attempted despite Faculty advice to lighted load â forced
   to move during exam period due to robbery â grounds not raised at
   previous level and not supported by evidence â additional evidence
   insufficient â appeal dismissed
   Request for late withdrawal without academic penalty from one course.
   The Student wrote the final exam and failed the course. The Committee
   considered the Studentâs evidence and her experience of withdrawing
   from courses in previous years, and found that she had sufficient
   information about her progress in the course to make an informed
   decision, and was aware of the timelines and rules for dropping the
   course. The Committee found that the Student chose to write the final
   exam because she believed that she could pass. The Committee observed
   that students are not eligible to withdraw from a course after the
   final exam has been written. The Student claimed that she had
   additional household responsibilities as a result of her motherâs ill
   health. The Student introduced new evidence in the form of a doctorâs
   letter indicating that her mother had been severely depressed. The
   Committee found that there was no evidence that the impact of the
   parentâs ill health had become worse after the drop date. The Student
   claimed that her heavy course load was a contributing factor on her
   poor performance in the course. The Committee found that the Student
   was advised by the Faculty to take a lighter load but that she chose to
   take six courses because she desired to complete her studies quickly.
   At the hearing the Student claimed a new contributing factor to her
   poor performance: there had been a robbery at her house which forced
   her family to move out during the exam period. The Committee found that
   the Student did not raise the grounds at any previous level and did not
   present any supporting evidence of the event.Â  The Committee found
   that the additional evidence provided at the hearing was insufficient
   and that there was no evidence of circumstances occurring after the
   drop date which would warrant granting late withdrawal without academic
   penalty. Appeal dismissed.
   [1]View Report

References

   1. file:///media/12585
