Case #915

   DATE: May 29, 2017
   PARTIES: University of Toronto v. J.F. ("the Student")

   Hearing Date(s): March 6, 2017

   Panel Members:
   Ms. Amanda Heale, Chair
   Professor Katherine Larson, Faculty Panel Member
   Ms. Alanis Ortiz Espinoza, Student Panel Member

   Appearances:
   Mr. Robert Centa, Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg
   Rothstein LLP
   Ms. Emily Home, Articling Student, Paliare Roland Rosenberg Rothstein
   LLP

   In Attendance:
   Prof. Jonathan Freedman, Dean's Designate, Faculty of Arts and Science
   Ms. Sana Kawar, Manager, Transcript Centre, University of Toronto
   Ms. Tatiana Dobrovolska, Transcript Centre, University of Toronto
   Ms. Krista Osbourne, Administrative Clerk and Hearing Secretary, Office
   of the Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances
   Mr. Sean Lourim, IT Support, Office of the Governing Council

   Not in Attendance:
   The Student

   Trial Division - s. B.i.3(a) of Code - forged academic record - student
   submitted forged transcript in application to another university -
   student did not attend hearing - University provided proper notice of
   hearing - finding of guilt - expulsion, five year suspension,
   publication of the decision with the name of the Student withheld

   The Student was charged with forging an academic record under s.
   B.i.3(a) of the Code, and alternatively, academic dishonesty under s.
   B.i.3(b) of the Code. The charges related to an admission application
   to another university that included a forged transcript.

   The Student did not attend the hearing. The Tribunal found that it was
   entitled to proceed in light of evidence of service of the notice of
   hearing to the student's official e-mail and home addresses as recorded
   on ROSI. The Tribunal proceeded in the Student's absence.

   The Tribunal found the student guilty of the forgery charge, and did
   not address the academic dishonesty charge. In determining the penalty,
   the Tribunal noted that transcript forgery frequently attracts a
   recommendation of expulsion due to the importance of the integrity of
   the University's official records, and that the Student did not
   participate in the hearing to present any potential mitigating factors
   in this case. The Tribunal suspended the Student for up to five years,
   recommended that they be expelled, and ordered that the decision be
   reported to the Provost for publication with the name of the Student
   withheld.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12942
