Case 1074

   DATE: May 3, 2021
   PARTIES: University of Toronto v. X.C.

   HEARING DATE: February 1, 2021, via Zoom

   Panel Members:
   Ms. Johanna Braden, Chair
   Professor Paul Kingston, Faculty Panel Member
   Mr. Alex Erickson, Student Panel Member

   Appearances:
   Ms. Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg
   Rothstein LLP

   In Attendance:
   Ms. Krista Kennedy, Administrative Clerk & Hearing Secretary, Appeals,
   Discipline and Faculty Grievances

   Not in Attendance: The Student

   The Student was charged under s. B.i.3(a)Â of theâ¯Code of Behaviour on
   Academic Matters, 1995â¯(the âCodeâ) on the basis thatÂ the
   StudentÂ knowinglyÂ forged,Â or in any other way altered,Â or falsified
   a document or evidence required by the University of Toronto, or
   uttered, circulated or made use of such forged, altered or falsified
   document.Â In the alternative, the Student was chargedÂ with two counts
   ofÂ knowingly engagingÂ in a form of cheating, academic dishonesty or
   misconduct, fraud or misrepresentation in order to obtain academic
   credit or other academic advantageÂ contrary toÂ s. B.i.3(b) of
   theÂ Code.

   Neither the Student nor a legal representative of
   theâ¯Studentâ¯appeared at the hearing.â¯TheÂ University requested that
   theÂ Panel proceed with the hearing in the Studentâs absence.Â The
   University submitted evidence regarding service of the charges and
   noticeÂ ofÂ electronicÂ hearing.Â The Panel received evidenceÂ that the
   StudentÂ hadÂ not been enrolled in any classes at the University for
   the last four yearsÂ and that the last time the Student
   accessedÂ herÂ ROSI-listed email address wasÂ three years ago.Â The
   incident that gives rise to the charges occurred in 2019 and since that
   time the University, the Tribunal and Assistant Discipline Counsel have
   attempted to communicate with the Student on various occasions, without
   any reply from the Student.Â The Panel received evidence
   thatÂ Assistant DisciplineÂ Counselâs office attempted to reach the
   Student at the telephone number listed in ROSI, however,
   theÂ individual that answered the call advised them thatÂ they had the
   incorrect phone number.Â The evidence indicates that the Student has
   not received any emails from the University about the incident,Â she
   has not received the charges nor the notice
   ofÂ electronicÂ hearing.Â However,Â the Universityâsâ¯Policy on
   Official Correspondence with StudentsÂ makes it clear thatÂ a student
   is responsible for maintainingÂ a current and valid University-issued
   email account. Students are also expected to monitor and retrieve their
   email on a frequent and consistent basis.Â Taking into
   considerationÂ RulesÂ 9, 16, andÂ 17Â of theâ¯RulesÂ of Practice and
   ProcedureÂ of the University TribunalÂ coupled together with
   sectionsÂ 6Â andÂ 7 of theÂ Statutory Powers and Procedures Act, the
   Panel foundÂ the StudentÂ did not receive actualÂ notice,Â but the
   StudentÂ had been given reasonable notice of the hearingÂ andÂ ordered
   the hearingÂ toÂ proceed to be heard on its merits in the absence of
   the Student.

   Regarding the chargesÂ laid under s.Â B.i.3(a)Â of the Code,
   theÂ PanelÂ receivedÂ evidenceÂ from theÂ formerÂ Executive Director of
   Enrolment Services and University RegistrarÂ (âExecutive
   Directorâ)Â andÂ the Associate Registrar, Records,Â Registration and
   Graduation at University of Toronto MississaugaÂ (âAssociate
   Registrarâ).Â TheÂ ExecutiveÂ DirectorÂ provided evidence thatÂ he
   received an email from an Intelligence Officer at the Canada Border
   Services Agency (âCBSAâ) advising that they wereÂ conducting an
   investigationÂ and provided the Studentâs name and date of birth.Â CBSA
   requested the assistance of the Executive Director to verify whether a
   letter submitted by the Student was issued by the University of
   Toronto.Â TheÂ body of the letter purports to certify that the Student
   completed all the requirementsÂ for an Honours Bachelor of Commerce
   Degree and signed by the Registrar and Director of Enrolment
   Management.Â TheÂ ExecutiveÂ DirectorÂ completed a search of the
   Universityâs records andÂ located only one student that was a match
   with the name and date of birthÂ â the Student.Â Upon review of the
   Studentâs ROSI record, the Executive Directorâs evidence provided that
   the letter was not an authentic document issued by the University
   because the Student had notÂ completed the requirements for an Honours
   Bachelor of Commerce Degree, the Student was suspended at the time the
   letter was purportedly written and the namedÂ Registrar on the letter
   was not the Registrar at the relevant time.Â The Panel received
   evidence from the Associate RegistrarÂ who also searched the
   Universityâs records and compared them to the letter and concluded that
   the letter was not an authentic University document.Â Upon review of
   the evidence,Â theÂ majorityÂ ofÂ theÂ Panel found theÂ Student guilty
   ofÂ uttering,Â circulating,Â andÂ makingÂ useÂ ofÂ aÂ forgedÂ academicÂ
    recordÂ contraryÂ to s. B.i.3(a) of the Code.Â Given the Panelâs
   findings, the University withdrew the alternative chargeÂ under s.
   B.i.3(b) of the Code.

   A Panel member dissented.Â The dissenting Panel member was not
   convinced, on a balance of probabilities, that the Student hadÂ either
   falsified the record herself or uttered, circulated or made use of
   it.Â In the absence ofÂ persuasive evidence explaining how and why the
   CBSA received the letter, and by whom they received it, the dissenting
   Panel member was unable to findÂ that the Student was guilty of any
   form of academic dishonesty.

   In determining sanction,Â theÂ majorityÂ ofÂ theÂ PanelÂ and the
   dissenting Panel member proceeded to hear submissions from the
   University regarding sanction. The dissenting Panel Member understood
   that they were to proceed as if they had found the Student guilty. The
   PanelÂ considered the principles and factors relevant to sanction
   discussed inÂ University of Toronto and Mr. C.Â (âMr. C. factorsâ) and
   determinedÂ that this offence was an act of flagrant andÂ deliberate
   dishonesty; a profoundly serious offenceÂ which requires a severe
   sanction in order toÂ deter other students from committing the same
   offence. The Panel further found thatÂ without the Studentâs
   participation there was no evidence of any extenuating circumstances,
   however, the Panel did not hold the Studentâs absence against
   herÂ sinceÂ she had no actual notice of the hearing.Â The Panel noted
   that although they are not bound by previous cases of this Tribunal, it
   is useful for like cases to be treated alike so thatÂ all parties
   understand what kind of penalty they can expect based on the
   findings.Â Upon review of the relevant case law and the Mr. C. factors,
   the Panel accepted the sanction proposed by the University. The Panel
   imposed the following sanctions: aÂ five-yearÂ suspension;Â a
   recommendationÂ that the Student be expelledÂ as perÂ s.Â C.ii.(b)(i)
   ofÂ Code; andÂ report to the Provost forÂ a publication.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/29855
