UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
GOVERNING COUNCIL
Report #366 of the Academic Appeals Committee
July 8, 2013
To the Academic Board
University of Toronto
Your Committee reports that it held a hearing on Wednesday, June 19, 2013, at which the
following members were present:
Professor Andrew Green (Chair)
Dr. Avrum Gotlieb, Faculty Member of the Academic Board, Governing Council
Ms. Mainawati Rambali, Student Member of the Academic Board, Governing Council
Secretary: Ms. Natalie Ramtahal, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances
Appearances:
For the Student Appellant:
Ms. S.A. (the Student)
For the School of Graduate Studies:
Mr. Robert Centa, Counsel for the School of Graduate Studies
Professor Luc de Nil, Vice-Dean, School of Graduate Studies
Ms. Jane Alderdice, Director, Quality Assurance and Governance, School of
Graduate Studies
The Appeal
This is an appeal from a decision of the Graduate Academic Appeals Board (“GAAB”) dated
August 8, 2012 dismissing an appeal of the Student from a decision of Professor D. McDougall
(the “Chair”), Chair of the Graduate Department of Curriculum, Teaching and Learning (CLT).
The Chair had refused to allow the Student to withdraw her Notice of Withdrawal from the CLT
graduate program.
The Facts
The Student began her studies in the Ph.D. program at CTL at the University of Toronto in 2007.
While in the program she had difficulty obtaining a supervisor for her thesis. She failed her first
comprehensive examination but the CLT provided her with an opportunity to rewrite the
examination. In May 2011 after the submission of a second comprehensive examination, the
Chair informed the Student that CLT would be requesting the termination of her registration.
The Chair also provided her with the option of voluntary withdrawal from the program rather

2

than termination. After discussions, CLT provided her with an extension of candidacy until
August 31, 2011 and the opportunity to retake the second comprehensive examination. The
Student handed in her examination on July 15, 2011. Unfortunately the Student also failed this
examination.
In an email and letter dated August 16, 2011, the Chair informed the Student that CLT would be
requesting SGS terminate her registration. He also reiterated the possibility of voluntary
withdrawal and stated that while termination could be appealed, withdrawal could not be
appealed. The Chair and the Student met on August 22 to discuss these options. The Student
also sought advice on the options from others on campus but stated that because of the timing of
the decision (late August) she could not get adequate advice. On August 31, 2011 the Student
met with the Chair and submitted a request to withdraw from the program. The CLT
subsequently submitted this withdrawal to the SGS. The Student stated that at the time she felt
withdrawal was the best way to provide an opportunity to continue her research.
In the Fall of 2011, the Student spoke with the University Ombudsperson. In November 2011
the Student notified the CLT that she was considering an appeal of her withdrawal. The Student
in her appeal argued that she did not have adequate advice concerning her options at the time of
her withdrawal. The Graduate Department Appeals Committee of CTL in a decision dated
March 9, 2012 found there were no grounds to allow the student’s appeal.
The Student subsequently appealed to the GAAB. Before the GAAB, the SGS argued that the
Board did not have jurisdiction to hear an appeal of a voluntary withdrawal by a student. In a
decision dated August 8, 2012, the GAAB dismissed the Student’s appeal. It considered both the
question of whether it had jurisdiction to hear the matter and, if so, whether it should allow the
appeal. The GAAB found that even if it had jurisdiction to hear the matter, it would not on the
merits allow the appeal. It then found that a voluntary withdrawal “is not a decision which is
generally within the jurisdiction of the Board to decide. Therefore, it would generally quash an
appeal of this nature.” However, because the Chair and the Graduate Department Appeals
Committee heard the appeal, the GAAB held the University should be taken to have abandoned
any jurisdictional objection and that it could rule on the merits. As noted above, it dismissed the
appeal.
The Student subsequently appealed to the Academic Appeals Committee. The Student argued
that she did not have adequate time or advice at the time of withdrawal, particularly if the entire
context of her experience within CLT is taken into account. The University argued that the
Committee did not have jurisdiction and that even if it did, it should not allow the appeal.
Jurisdiction
As noted above, the GAAB found that it did not generally have jurisdiction to hear an appeal
from a voluntary withdrawal by a student. The GAAB’s jurisdiction is conferred by Section 3(a)
of By-Law #3 of the Graduate Education Council of SGS which states that the GAAB “shall hear
and determine appeals of students registered [in SGS] concerning grades in a course or a
component of a grade in a course, or concerning any other decision with respect to the

3

application of academic regulations and requirements of a student.” The Academic Appeals
Committee’s Terms of Reference have similar language under section 2.1 where the Terms of
Reference state that the Committee’s function is “to hear and consider appeals made by students
against decisions of faculty, college or school councils (or committees thereof) in the application
of academic regulations and requirements…”
In its decision, the GAAB stated that “while the phrase ‘decision with respect to the application
of academic regulations and requirements to a student’, has a wide scope, it does not include
every type of dispute between a student and the University. Most simply, in deciding not to
accede to the Student’s request to rescind her withdrawal, the University authorities involved
were not applying an ‘academic regulation or requirement’ in coming to their conclusion,
although the Student’s academic career is obviously greatly affected by the decision under
appeal.” Your Committee agrees with this statement. Just because an action has academic
consequences does not mean it is necessarily a relevant decision with respect to the application
of academic regulations and requirements. A withdrawal is a decision a student can make at any
time during a program. It is not a decision about the application of an academic regulation or
requirement in the same way as a grade or a time period for completing a program.
The GAAB ruled on the merits of the Student’s appeal as the Chair and the Graduate Department
Appeals Committee heard the appeal. However, as noted in Motion Decision #359-1 of the
Academic Appeals Committee by Chair Hamish Stewart dated August 25, 2011 in a different
context, “The jurisdiction of the GAAB and the AAC does not depend on what University
officials or students think it is but on their Terms of Reference, as interpreted by their Chairs.”
In this case, the Committee finds there is no jurisdiction to hear an appeal of the Student’s
withdrawal.
Because the Committee finds it does not have jurisdiction to hear the appeal, it is precluded from
ruling on the merits of the Student’s appeal of her withdrawal. However, the Committee notes
that the Student expressed significant concerns about the stress and impact of the withdrawal
including from her inability to obtain advice on her options. The Committee notes that to the
extent they do not currently exist, the University should consider ensuring that options for
students to obtain advice on such matters are in place and clearly identified to the student at the
time withdrawal is considered.
The appeal is dismissed.

