Report 366

DATE:

   July 8, 2013

PARTIES:

   Ms. S.A. (the Student) v. School of Graduate Studies

Hearing Date(s):

   June 19, 2013

Committee Members:

   Professor Andrew Green, Chair
   Dr. Avrum Gotlieb
   Ms. Mainawati Rambali

Secretary:

   Ms. Natalie Ramtahal, Coordinator, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty
   Grievances

Appearances:

For the Student Appellant:

   Ms. S.A., the Appellant (âthe Studentâ)

For the School of Graduate Studies:

   Mr. Robert Centa, Counsel
   Professor Luc de Nil, Vice-Dean, School of Graduate Studies
   Ms. Jane Alderdice, Director, Quality Assurance and Governance, School
   of Graduate Studies

   Request to withdraw Notice of Withdrawal. The Student failed two
   comprehensive examinations in her Ph.D program, following which the
   Chair of the program requested termination of the Studentâs
   registration. The Chair provided the Student with the option of
   voluntary withdrawal from the program rather than termination, and
   informed her that while termination could be appealed, voluntary
   withdrawal could not be appealed. The Student submitted a request to
   withdraw from her program, and it was accepted by the School of
   Graduate Studies. The Student then notified her program that she was
   considering an appeal of her withdrawal, arguing that she did not have
   adequate advice concerning her options at the time of her withdrawal.
   The Graduate Department Appeals Committee of the program found that
   there were no grounds to allow the Studentâs appeal. The Student
   subsequently appealed to the Graduate Academic Appeals Board. The GAAB
   dismissed the appeal, noting that voluntary withdrawal was not a
   decision within the jurisdiction of the GAAB to decide and that it
   would also not allow the appeal on the merits. The Student then
   appealed to the Academic Appeals Committee. The Committee agreed with
   the GAABâs decision. A withdrawal is a decision a student can make at
   any time during a program; it is not a decision about the application
   of an academic regulation or requirement. An appeal of a withdrawal is
   therefore a decision outside of the Committeeâs jurisdiction, which in
   turn means that the Committee is precluded from ruling on the merits of
   the Studentâs appeal. The Committee recommended that to the extent they
   do not currently exist, the University should consider ensuring that
   options for students to obtain advice on withdrawals are in place and
   clearly identified to the student at the time withdrawal is considered.
   Appeal dismissed.
   [1]View Report

References

   1. file:///media/12607
