Case 783

DATE:

   July 21, 2015

PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v Y.T.

Hearing Date(s):

   April 30, 2015

Panel Members:

   Dena Varah, Chair
   Markus Bussmann, Faculty Member
   Shan Arora, Student Member

Appearances:

   Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel
   Julia Wilkes, Counsel for the Student

In Attendance:

   Ms. Y.T., the Student (via Skype)
   Lucy Gaspini, Manager, Academic Integrity and Affairs, University of
   Toronto Mississauga
   Natalie Ramtahal, Coordinator, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty
   Grievances
   Student charged under s. B.i.1(d) , s. B.i.1(b) and, in the
   alternative, under s. B.i.3(b) of the Code . The charges related to
   allegations that the Student submitted an essay containing four
   paragraphs directly from an essay purchased from a commercial essay
   provider and that the Student copied the ideas and expressions of an
   academic source without attributing the excerpts appropriately.
   Student admitted to having committed the offences. The University then
   withdrew the alternative charge of academic dishonesty not otherwise
   described. The Panel reviewed the Agreed Statement of Facts in
   determining that the Student was guilty of plagiarism and using
   unauthorized aid.
   The University and the Student submitted a Joint Submission on Penalty.
   The Panel noted that though the purchase of essays is among the most
   serious of offences that can be committed in a University setting, and
   that the sanction is generally expulsion, there were a number of
   distinguishing mitigating factors in this case that made a lesser
   sanction appropriate. The mitigating factors were that the Student only
   used part of the Purchased Essay and completed much of the essay on her
   own, and that the Student had a difficult year personally with health
   and familial issues. The Panel also took into account an aggravating
   factor, namely that the Student had a prior academic offence. In
   deciding the appropriate sanction, the Panel noted the high threshold
   for rejecting a Joint Submission on Penalty, and stated that to reject
   it here would be inappropriate. The Panel imposed a grade assignment of
   zero in the Course; a 5-year suspension; a notation on the Studentâs
   academic record and transcript until her graduation from the
   University; and that the case be reported to the Provost for
   publication.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12878
