Case No.: 980
UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
TRIAL DIVISION
IN THE MATTER OF charges of academic dishonesty made on June 25, 2018
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic
Matters, 1995,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Act, 1971, S.O. 1971, c. 56 as amended
S.O. 1978, c. 88
B E T W E E N:
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
- and –
V

T

(“the Student”)

REASONS FOR DECISION
Hearing Date: January 29, 2020
Members of Panel:
Ms. Lisa Talbot, Chair
Professor Margaret MacNeill, Faculty Panel Member
Mr. Jin Zhou, Student Panel Member
Appearances
Mr. Robert A. Centa, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg Rothstein LLP
Hearing Secretary:
Krista Kennedy, Administrative Clerk and Hearing Secretary of the Office of Appeals,
Discipline Faculty Grievances
Not in Attendance:
The Student

-2THE CHARGES
1.

This matter arises out of charges of academic misconduct filed on June 25, 2018, by the

Provost of the University of Toronto (the “Provost”) under the Code of Behaviour on Academic
Matters (“Code”).
2.

The charges arise out of events that took place in the winter term of 2018 in two courses

taught at the University: (i) the “Social Impact of Information Technology” (CSC D03) in which
the Student was enrolled as a student; and (ii) “Principles of Programming Languages” (CSC
C24) in which the Student was a teaching assistant.
3.

The charges are as follows.

A.

Charges relating to CSC D03
1. On or about March 28, 2018, the Student knowingly had Chris Meng personate him
when Mr. Meng submitted an in-class assignment in the Student’s name, contrary
to section B.I.1(c) of the Code.
2. On or about April 2, 2018, the Student knowingly had Chris Meng personate him
when Mr. Meng submitted an in-class writing assignment in the Student’s name,
contrary to section B.I.1(c) of the Code.
3. In the alternative to each of the charges above the Student knowingly engaged in a
form of cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or misrepresentation
not otherwise described in the Code in order to obtain academic credit or other
academic advantage of any kind in connection with an in-class writing assignment
in Social Impact of IT, contrary to section B.I.3(b) of the Code.

B.

Charges relating to CSC C24
4. On or about January 25, 2018, the Student knowingly did or omitted to do
something for the purpose of aiding or assisting a student, Y.W., to obtain

-3unauthorized assistance in connection with Lab 3 in Programming Languages,
contrary to section B.I.1(b) of the Code.
5. On or about February 1, 2018, the Student knowingly did or omitted to do
something for the purpose of aiding or assisting a student, Y.W., to obtain
unauthorized assistance in connection with Lab 4 in Programming Languages,
contrary to section B.I.1(b) of the Code.
6. On or about February 3, 2018, the Student knowingly did or omitted to do
something for the purpose of aiding or assisting a student, Chiu Yuen, to obtain
unauthorized assistance in connection with Assignment 1 in Programming
Languages, contrary to section B.I.1(b) of the Code.
7. On or about February 8, 2018, the Student knowingly did or omitted to do
something for the purpose of aiding or assisting a student, Chiu Yuen, to obtain
unauthorized assistance in connection with Lab 5 in Programming Languages,
contrary to section B.I.1(b) of the Code.
8. On or about February 8, 2018, the Student knowingly did or omitted to do
something for the purpose of aiding or assisting a student, Y.W., to obtain
unauthorized assistance in connection with Lab 5 in Programming Languages,
contrary to section B.I.1(b) of the Code.
9. On or about February 15, 2018, the Student knowingly did or omitted to do
something for the purpose of aiding or assisting a student, Chiu Yuen, to obtain
unauthorized assistance in connection with Lab 6 in Programming Languages,
contrary to section B.I.1(b) of the Code.
10. On or about February 17, 2018, the Student knowingly did or omitted to do
something for the purpose of aiding or assisting a student, Chiu Yuen, to obtain
unauthorized assistance in connection with Assignment 2 in Programming
Languages, contrary to section B.I.1(b) of the Code.

-411. In the alternative to each of charges 4 to 10, the Student knowingly did or omitted
to do something for the purpose of aiding or assisting one or more students to
engage in a form of cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or
misrepresentation in order to obtain academic credit or other academic advantage
in Programming Languages, contrary to section B.I.3(b) of the Code.
THE HEARING
4.

The Tribunal heard this matter on January 29, 2020. The hearing proceeding on an

Agreed Statement of Facts, dated August 22, 2019, in which the Student pleaded guilty to all
charges filed against him.
5.

The Student did not attend the hearing. In the Agreed Statement of Facts, the Student

admitted that he received a copy of the charges filed by the Provost, and that he received
reasonable notice of the hearing. The Panel accepted his consent, dated January 7, 2020 to
proceed in his absence and to waive his right to any further notice of the proceedings.
THE FACTS
6.

In the Agreed Statement of Facts, the Student admits to the following evidence, which the

Panel accepts and finds as facts.
A.

Social Impact of Information Technology (Charges #1 to 3)

7.

In Winter 2018, the Student registered in CSC D03: Social Impact of Informational

Technology (“Social Impact of IT”), which was taught by Professor Graeme Hirst. Social Impact
of IT gives senior undergraduates in computer science programs some perspective on their
studies including insight into the social consequences of the field, and the ethical dilemmas that
computer professionals may face. The course helps students prepare for their transition from
computer science students to computer professionals.

-58.

The final grade in Social Impact of IT comprised written assignments, in-class

presentations, and participation. Professor Hirst expected students to attend all lectures. As the
course outline explained:
Attendance
This is an inherently participatory class. You are expected to attend all lectures.
Repeated absences without a legitimate reason are grounds for a substantial
reduction of the final grade, typically 5 percentage points per class missed (that is,
your class participation mark can be seriously negative). If you miss a class for
unavoidable reasons such as illness, you should contact the instructor as soon as
possible to explain.
Feedback
You are expected to provide feedback on all presentations held in the lectures and
your tutorials. A sample feedback form can be found here. This feedback will count
for part of your participation mark. Thoughtful and helpful comments are expected.
9.

Participation was worth 10% of the final grade in Social Impact of IT:
This mark will be based on a combination of your attendance at lectures (as
indicated by your use of the feedback forms) and your in-class and online
participation (6% and 4% respectively).

10.

Professor Hirst emphasized the importance of ethical behaviour in the course outline and

reminded students that they were expected to follow the Code:
Ethical Behaviour and plagiarism
We will debate many ethical issues in this course, but the University of Toronto
Code of behaviour on academic matters and the Code of student conduct will not
be among them; rather, these will be taken as given, and students will respect them
and follow their precepts.
Therefore:


Undue collaboration in your papers and assignments is not permitted. You may
use ideas and positions that are raised and discussed in class (with proper
attribution, where appropriate). And you may discuss your work with other
students outside class, indeed you should do so, but this is to stimulate your
own thinking, not to substitute for it. What you hand in must be, in essence,
your own work.

-611.

The Student attended lectures and submitted Presentation Feedback Forms on a regular

basis.
12.

On March 28, 2018, the Student did not attend class because he had a doctor’s

appointment. The Student asked Chris Xin Meng, another student in the class, to complete and
submit Presentation Feedback Forms in the Student’s name and on his behalf.
13.

On April 2, 2018, the Student wished to pick up someone at the airport and he did not

attend class. The Student again asked Mr. Meng to complete and submit Presentation Feedback
Forms in the Student’s name and on his behalf.
14.

The Student admits that he knowingly had Mr. Meng personate him in connection with

the five Presentation Feedback Forms submitted in his name on March 28 and April 2, 2018. The
Student admits that he did so in order to obtain academic credit for work that he did not
complete.
B.

Programming Languages (Charges #4 to 11)

15.

In Winter 2018, Professor Albert Lai taught CSC C24, Principles of Programming

Languages (“Programming Languages”). The Student was a teaching assistant in Programming
Languages in Winter 2018. Y.W. and Chiu Yuen were both students registered in Programming
Languages during this term.
16.

The Course Information Sheet was included in evidence. The final grade in the course

consisted of marks for coding exercises called Tutorial-labs (11 assigned, with the best 10 to
count towards a total of 10% of the final grade in Programming Languages), five assignments
(A1 to A5), a mid-term test, and a final exam.
17.

Additional information about Programming Languages was found on the course website,

a copy of which was adduced into evidence.

-718.

Each week, the Student was responsible for running a two-hour tutorial. During most

tutorials, the Student would present information to his class. The students would then do coding
exercises based on “starters” provided by Professor Lai to the students. The Student was
available to assist students as they worked on their exercises during the tutorial period. Students
could complete their coding exercises during the tutorial, or they could submit their solutions by
6:00 p.m. on the Friday of the same week that the tutorial took place.
19.

Professor Lai provided solutions for all of the coding exercises and assignments to the

Teaching Assistants. Professor Lai provided teaching assistants with the instructor’s solutions to
ensure that the teaching assistants understood the professor’s expectations, could accurately
respond to student questions, and evaluate the students’ work. Professor Lai sent an email to the
teaching assistants that attached the solutions in the form of computer code. There were many
different ways to solve correctly the coding exercises and assignments. It is extremely unlikely
that two students would submit identical solutions or that any solution, even an excellent
solution, would be nearly identical to Professor Lai’s solutions.
20.

The Student received the instructor’s solutions for all of the coding exercises and

assignments from Professor Lai. He knew that he was receiving those solutions in his capacity as
a teaching assistant and for his authorized duties only. He knew that he was not permitted to
give, show, or make the instructor’s solutions available to students in Programming Languages.
He knew or ought to have known that doing so would breach the Code and violate his
obligations as a tutorial assistant.
Relationship between Mr. Yuen and the Student
21.

Mr. Yuen enrolled in Programming Languages during this term and was in the Student’s

tutorial group. Mr. Yuen knew the Student personally before the term started and the Student
was willing to help Mr. Yuen with the course when he had difficulties with the material. Mr.

-8Yuen did not take the prerequisite to the course and had significant difficulty with the material
and completing the coding exercises assigned by Professor Lai.
22.

As described below, Mr. Yuen received unauthorized assistance from the Student and

such assistance was unauthorized and a breach of the Code.
23.

Mr. Yuen did not pay the Student for his assistance.
Relationship between Y.W. and the Student

24.

Y.W. was a student in the course but was not a student in the Student’s tutorial group.

25.

Y.W. knew the Student personally before the term started. As described below, Y.W.

received unauthorized assistance from the Student. Such assistance was unauthorized and a
breach of the Code.
26.

Y.W. did not pay the Student for his assistance.
Lab Week 3: Basic Scheme Exercises (Charge #4)

27.

For the coding exercise assigned during Lab Week 3, students were required to write four

functions. Each function was worth one mark for correctness and there was one additional mark
for style and layout.
28.

Professor Lai provided students with starter code for Lab Week 3, which was adduced

into evidence and reviewed by the Panel.
29.

Professor Lai sent the same instructor’s solution for Lab Week 3 to the Student and all

the other teaching assistants. The Panel reviewed the instructor’s solution, which was adduced
into evidence.
30.

The Student sent Y.W. a copy of the Lab Week 3 solution by WeChat. Y.W. made some

minor changes to the file that the Student sent to her and submitted it as her answer for the Lab
Week 3 coding exercise. The Panel reviewed her submission, which was adduced into evidence.
Y.W.’s submission was nearly identical to the instructor’s solution.

-931.

The Student admits that he knowingly provided his copy of the instructor’s solution to

Y.W. to permit her to use the solution to assist her in completing her lab. The Student did not
review or grade Y.W.’s completed lab.
Lab Week 4: Intermediate Scheme exercises (Charge #5)
32.

For the coding exercise assigned during Lab Week 4, students were required to write

three functions.
33.

Professor Lai provided students with starter code for Lab Week 4, which was adduced

into evidence.
34.

Professor Lai sent the same instructor’s solution for Lab Week 4 to the Student and all

the other teaching assistants. This was adduced into evidence.
35.

Mr. Yuen approached the Student for assistance during the tutorial. Despite providing

him extra assistance, Mr. Yuen had difficulty completing the coding exercise and messaged the
Student on WeChat to ask for assistance with the coding exercise. The Student responded by
sending Mr. Yuen a solution by WeChat. Mr. Yuen made some minor changes to the file that the
Student sent to him and submitted it as his answer for the Lab Week 4 coding exercise. The
Panel reviewed Mr. Yuen’s submission. Mr. Yuen’s assignment was nearly identical to the
instructor’s solution.
36.

The Student admits that he knowingly provided his copy of the instructor’s solution to

Mr. Yuen to permit him to use the solution to assist him in completing his lab.
Assignment 1 – February 3, 2018 (Charge #6)
37.

Assignment 1 in Programming Languages was due on February 3, 2018, and was worth

6% of the course grade. A copy of the questions for Assignment 1, was adduced into evidence.
38.
Panel.

Professor Lai sent students starter code for Assignment 1, which was reviewed by the

- 10 39.

Professor Lai sent the same instructor’s solution for Assignment 1 to the Student and all

the other teaching assistants. This was reviewed by the Panel.
40.

Mr. Yuen tried to work on completing Assignment 1, but found that he did not

understand how to answer the questions. Mr. Yuen saw the Student at school and asked the
Student to help him. The Student showed Mr. Yuen a computer file containing the instructor’s
solution. The Student tried to explain the assignment to Mr. Yuen, however he continued to have
difficulty. Mr. Yuen asked the Student to provide him with the instructor’s solution, which he did
by WeChat.
41.

Mr. Yuen submitted his answer to Assignment 1 on or about February 8, 2018. The Panel

reviewed Mr. Yuen’s submission, which was adduced into evidence. It was nearly identical to
the instructor’s solution.
42.

The Student admits that he knowingly provided his copy of the instructor’s solution to

Mr. Yuen to permit him to use the solution to assist him in completing his assignment.
Lab Week 5: Haskell exercises part A (Charges #7 and #8)
43.

For the coding exercise assigned during Lab Week 5, students were required to complete

Haskell exercises.
44.

Professor Lai provided students with starter code for Lab Week 5, which the Panel

reviewed.
45.

Professor Lai sent a unique instructor’s solution for Lab Week 5 to the Student. A copy

of the instructor’s solution that Professor Lai sent to the Student was adduced into evidence and
reviewed by the Panel. Professor Lai sent a different instructor’s solution to all of the other
teaching assistants in the course. Some of the unique features contained in the instructor’s
solution sent to the Student consisted of characters and spacing that were not visible.

- 11 (a)
46.

Yuen

Mr. Yuen messaged the Student on WeChat and asked for his assistance on Lab 5. The

Student sent Mr. Yuen the instructor’s solution by WeChat.
47.

Mr. Yuen submitted an answer for the Lab Week 5 assignment, which was reviewed by

the Panel.
48.

Mr. Yuen’s submission was nearly identical to the unique instructor’s solution provided

to the Student and is different than the solution provided to the other teaching assistants. Mr.
Yuen’s submission included the characters that were not visible, but were present in the unique
instructor’s solution that Professor Lai gave to the Student.
49.

The Student graded Mr. Yuen’s submission and awarded it full marks. The Student’s role

was to give the lab either 0 or 1 (full marks) based on the style of coding (not the correctness or
logic of the program). The Student did not notice that Mr. Yuen had submitted a solution which
was identical or nearly identical to the solution of Professor Lai.
50.

The Student admits that he knowingly provided his copy of the instructor’s solution to

Mr. Yuen to permit him to use the solution to assist him in completing his assignment.
(b) W.
51.

Y.W. contacted the Student and asked for his assistance. The Student sent the instructor’s

solution to Y.W. by WeChat.
52.

Y.W. submitted an answer for the Lab Week 5 assignment. A copy of her submission was

reviewed by the Panel. Y.W.’s submission was nearly identical to the unique instructor’s solution
that Professor Lai provided to the Student and is different than the solution provided to all the
other teaching assistants. Y.W.’s submission included the characters that were not visible, but
were present in the unique instructor’s solution that Professor Lai gave to the Student.

- 12 53.

The Student admits that he knowingly provided his copy of the instructor’s solution to

Y.W. to permit her to use the solution to assist her in completing her lab. The Student did not
review of grade Y.W.’s completed lab.
Lab Week 6: Haskell exercises part B (Charge #9)
54.

For the coding exercise assigned during Lab Week 6, students were required to complete

further Haskell exercises.
55.

Professor Lai provided students with starter code for Lab Week 6.

56.

Professor Lai sent a unique instructor’s solution for Lab Week 6 to the Student. This was

reviewed by the Panel. Professor Lai sent a different instructor’s solution to all of the other
teaching assistants in the course. Some of the unique features contained in the instructor’s
solution sent to the Student consisted of characters and spacing that were not visible.
57.

Mr. Yuen had difficulty completing the coding exercise and messaged the Student on

WeChat to ask for assistance with the coding exercise. The Student responded by sending Mr.
Yuen a solution by WeChat. Mr. Yuen made some minor changes to the file that the Student sent
to him and submitted it as his answer for the Lab Week 6 coding exercise. It was nearly identical
to the instructor’s solution.
58.

The Student admits that he knowingly provided his copy of the instructor’s solution to

Mr. Yuen to permit him to use the solution to assist him in completing his assignment.
Assignment 2 – February 17, 2018 (Charge #10)
59.

Assignment 2 in Programming Languages was due on February 17, 2018 and was worth

6% of the course.
60.

Professor Lai provided students with starter code for Assignment 2.

61.

Professor Lai sent a unique instructor’s solution for Assignment 2 to the Student. This

was reviewed by the Panel. The solution that Professor Lai sent to the Student was different from

- 13 the solution he sent to all other teaching assistants in the course. Some of the unique features
contained in the instructor’s solution sent to the Student consisted of characters and spacing that
were not visible.
62.

Mr. Yuen submitted his answer to Assignment 2 on or about February 17, 2018. A copy

of Mr. Yuen’s submission was adduced into evidence. It was nearly identical to the unique
instructor’s solution provided to the Student and is different from the solution provided to the
other teaching assistants. Mr. Yuen’s submission included the characters that were not visible,
but were present in the unique instructor’s solution that Professor Lai gave to the Student.
63.

The Student admits that he knowingly provided the instructor’s solution for Assignment 2

to Mr. Yuen to permit him to use the solution to assist him in completing the assignment.
The Student learns he is suspected of committing academic offences
64.

In late February or March 2018, the Student learned that Professor Lai suspected that he

may have committed academic offences with Mr. Yuen and Y.W..
65.

Y.W. spoke with the instructor and the Dean’s designate before speaking to the Student.

She reported to the Student that she told the University’s representatives that she had looked at
the Student’s computer screen while he had the answers open. She told the Student that she did
not wish to get him in trouble because she felt sorry for putting him in this position. She told the
Student that she would email the University a new story, in particular, that she surreptitiously
accessed the Student’s email to obtain the instructor’s solutions because she had his UTORid.
Y.W. asked the Student to tell the same story, and he agreed to do so.
66.

The Student admits that he then persuaded Mr. Yuen to lie to various university officials

to align with Y.W.’s story. Mr. Yuen did lie to the university representatives by stating that he
took photographs of the solutions when the Student showed them to him and that he received the
lab answers from Y.W..

- 14 Meeting with Dean’s Designate
67.

On April 24, 2018, the Student met with Professor Wanda Restivo, Dean’s Designate for

Academic Integrity at the University of Toronto, Scarborough. During this meeting, the Student
admitted that he committed the acts of academic misconduct in Social Impact as described
above.
DISPOSITION ON CHARGES
68.

On the basis of the facts set out above, as well as the documents provided in the Joint

Book of Documents, the Tribunal determined that it was appropriate to accept the Student’s
guilty pleas and entered the finding that the Student was guilty of charges 1, 2, 4 to 10.
69.

On the basis the Tribunal’s conviction of the Student on charges 1, 2, 4 -10, the Provost

withdrew charges #3 and 11.
DECISION ON PENALTY
70.

The Student and the University submitted a Joint Submission on Penalty in support of the

following penalty:
(a)

the imposition of a final grade of zero in CSC D03;

(b)

the suspension of the Student from the University for five years;

(c)

a recommendation to the President that he recommend to the Governing Council
that the Student be expelled from the University of Toronto; and

(d)

the reporting of this case to the Provost for publication of a notice of the decision
of the Tribunal and the sanction imposed, with the name of the student withheld.

72.

Although this matter was presented to the Panel by way of an Agreed Statement of Facts
and Joint Submission on Penalty (both of which were submitted voluntarily by the Student
after having been advised of his right to obtain independent legal advice and after having
done so), we are still required to consider the C factors (Case No. 1976/77-3 November 5,

- 15 1976) to support our decision on penalty: character of student, likelihood of repetition

of the offence, nature of the offence committed, existence of extenuating
circumstances, detriment to the University and general need for deterrence.
Character
73.

With respect to the Student’s character, we know that he has no prior history of academic
misconduct at the University. However, he violated the Code as a student, and engaged in
an extraordinary breach of trust as a teaching assistant. His actions were not isolated, but
repeated. The fact that the incidents occurred with two students and happened repeatedly
indicates that the Student did not suffer a momentary lapse of judgment. The Student then
actively concealed the true facts from the University. As the investigation proceeded, the
Student lied to the Dean’s designate and proffered a fabricated set of facts. The Student has
exhibited a disregard for the Code, which reveals a dishonesty in character. We note that
the Student, to his credit, has proceeded at hearing by way of a guilty plea, an Agreed
Statement of Facts and a Joint Submission on Penalty. This is evidence of his ultimate
cooperation and possibly remorse, however, his cooperation came only after having
engaged in a cover-up scheme and having been “caught”.
The likelihood of a repetition of the offence

74.

The Panel hopes that the Student has learned from this experience and will never commit
such ethical breaches again. The Student did ultimately confess to his dishonesty, but only
after having engaged in a conspiracy to mislead the University. The fact that the Student
originally conspired with the other students to avoid sanction suggests he would likely
commit such an offence if he thought he would not get caught. Furthermore, his own
academic dishonesty as a student, plus his academic dishonesty as a teaching assistant with
two students, not just one, and on repeated occasions, also contributes to the likelihood that
he would commit other offences.
The nature of the offence committed

75.

The offences committed by the Student are serious. He admits that he knowingly had Mr.
Meng personate him in order to obtain academic credit for work that he did not complete.
He admits that he knowingly provided his copy of the instructor’s solutions to two students

- 16 while serving as a teaching assistant. He also admits that he knew that he received those
solutions in his capacity as a teaching assistant and for his authorized duties only. He knew
that he was not permitted to give, show, or make the instructor’s solutions available to
students. He admits that he knew or ought to have known that doing so would breach the
Code and violate his obligations as a tutorial assistant. Yet he did so repeatedly, with two
students. He was aware of what he was doing, and he was aware that his actions were in
breach of the Code. He then deliberately misled the University in its investigation.
The extenuating circumstances
76.

Extenuating circumstances may be mitigating factors or aggravating factors.

77.

In this case, the mitigating factors are that the Student entered into guilty pleas. He
cooperated with the University by signing an Agreed Statement of Facts and agreeing to
Joint Submissions on Penalty. This allowed for time and expense to be spared.

78.

The aggravating factors are that the Student knowingly committed multiple offences and
engaged in a scheme to cover-up the true facts from the University. He could have stopped
at any time but did not do so. The Student engaged in a gross breach of the trust placed in
him as a teaching assistant.
The need to deter others from committing a similar offence

79.

The University has an important interest in protecting the integrity of the institution. Such
integrity is fundamental to the academic relationship. It is important that students are
deterred from committing offences of academic dishonesty. It is important that teaching
assistants, who are in a unique position of trust among the students at the University, be
beyond reproach. Students must know that knowingly breaching the Code will not be
tolerated. They must also know that they cannot seek to obtain unfair benefits from
teaching assistants. Teaching assistants must understand that any violation of their position
of trust will be treated with great severity.

80.

There is a very high threshold for departing from a joint submission on penalty requiring
the Panel to find that the acceptance of same would be contrary to the public interest and
bring the administration of justice in to disrepute.

- 17 81.

The Panel sees no reason to depart from the Joint Submission on Penalty. After considering
all of the above factors, and the cases provided by the University, the Tribunal is satisfied
that the suggested penalty in the Joint Submission on Penalty is appropriate.

82.

An Order was signed at the hearing by the Panel on the following terms:
1. The Student shall receive a final grade of zero in the course CSCD03;
2. The Student be suspended from the University of Toronto for five years from the date
of this Order;
3. A recommendation be made to the President of the University that he recommend to
the Governing Council that the Student be expelled from the University, and
4. This case shall be reported to the Provost for publication of a notice of the decision of
the Tribunal and the sanctions imposed, with the name of the Student withheld.

Dated on May 5th, 2020

________________________
Lisa Talbot
Chair

