Case 980

DATE:

   May 5, 2021

PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v. V. T.

HEARING DATE:

   January 29, 2020

Panel Members:

   Ms. Lisa Talbot, Chair
   Professor Margaret MacNeill, Faculty Panel Member
   Mr. Jin Zhou, Student Panel Member

Appearances:

   Mr. Robert Centa, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland
   Rosenberg Rothstein LLP

In Attendance:

   Ms. Krista Kennedy, Administrative Clerk & Hearing Secretary, Appeals,
   Discipline and Faculty Grievances

Not in Attendance:

   The Student

   The Student was charged withâ¯twoâ¯countsâ¯of academic misconduct under
   s. B.i.1(c) of theâ¯Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters, 1995â¯(the
   âCodeâ), and alternativelyÂ with one countÂ underÂ s.Â B.i.3(b)Â of
   theÂ Â Code,Â on the basis thatÂ for one courseÂ heÂ knowingly
   hadÂ another studentÂ in his classÂ personate himÂ by havingÂ the
   otherÂ studentÂ submit an in-class assignment in the Studentâs name.

   Additionally, the Student was chargedÂ with respect to another
   courseÂ with sevenÂ counts under s. B.i.1(b) of theÂ Code, and
   alternativelyÂ with one countÂ underÂ s.Â B.i.3(b) of
   theÂ Code,Â forÂ knowingly doing or omitting to do something for the
   purpose of aiding or assisting studentsÂ to obtain unauthorized
   assistance in connection withÂ course assignments.Â Specifically, the
   Student, in his capacity as a teaching assistant,Â provided
   unauthorized assistance to two studentsÂ registered in a programming
   course.Â He providedÂ solutions for coding exercises and
   assignmentsÂ that the Student had receivedÂ in his capacity as a
   teaching assistantÂ andÂ for his authorized duties only.Â The
   StudentÂ knew that he was not permitted to give, show, or make the
   instructorâs solutions available to students in Programming Languages.
   HeÂ alsoÂ knew or ought to have known that doing so would breach
   theÂ CodeÂ and violate his obligations as aÂ teachingÂ assistant.Â The
   studentsÂ who received assistance from the Student knew himÂ personally
   before the term in question. TheyÂ did not payÂ for the assistance
   received.

   Neither the Student nor a legal representative of the Student appeared
   at the hearing.â¯The hearing proceededÂ onÂ the basis ofÂ anÂ Agreed
   Statement of Facts (âASFâ), in which the Student pleaded guilty to all
   chargesÂ andÂ admitted that he had received a copy of the chargesÂ and
   reasonable notice of the hearing. The Panel acceptedÂ the
   StudentâsÂ consentÂ to proceed in his absence and to waive his right to
   any further notice of the proceedings.

   In determining theÂ appropriateÂ sanction, the PanelÂ considered the
   Studentâs character, the likelihood of repetition of the offences, the
   nature of the offences committed,Â extenuating circumstances, and the
   need for deterrence.Â AlthoughÂ the Student had no priorÂ history of
   academicÂ misconduct,Â the PanelÂ notedÂ that
   hisÂ repeatedÂ actionsÂ hadÂ occurred with twoÂ students. It further
   notedÂ that the Student hadÂ activelyÂ concealed the facts,Â lied to
   the Deanâs designateÂ andÂ exhibited a disregard for theÂ Code, which
   revealedÂ a dishonesty in character.Â In discussingÂ the Studentâs
   ultimate cooperation and possibleÂ remorse, the PanelÂ took into
   accountÂ that he had proceeded by way of a guilty plea,Â andÂ an ASF
   and JSP. The PanelÂ highlighted, however, that his cooperation came
   only after having engaged in a cover-up scheme and having been caught.

   According to the Panel,Â several factorsÂ contributed to the likelihood
   that the StudentÂ would commit other offences,Â namelyÂ the fact that
   he had conspired with other students to avoid
   sanctions,Â committedÂ academic offences as a studentÂ and
   committedÂ repeatedÂ academic dishonesty as a teaching assistant with
   two students.Â TheÂ PanelÂ held that these offences are
   serious.Â AsÂ mitigating factors, it consideredÂ the fact that the
   StudentÂ entered intoÂ guilty pleasÂ andÂ cooperated with the
   UniversityÂ by signing anÂ ASF and agreeing to a JSP. As for the
   aggravating factors, itÂ explained that the Student
   knowinglyÂ committed multiple offences and engaged in a cover-up
   scheme. In the Panelâs view,Â the Student engaged in a gross breach
   ofÂ theÂ trust placed in him as a teaching assistant.Â On the issue of
   deterrence, itÂ stressedÂ thatÂ integrity is fundamental to the
   academic relationshipÂ and thatÂ studentsÂ must beÂ deterred from
   committing offences of academic dishonesty. ItÂ also
   stressedÂ thatÂ teaching assistants, who are in a unique position of
   trust among the students at the University,Â mustÂ be beyond
   reproachÂ and understand that any violation of their position of trust
   will be treated with great severity.Â ItÂ furtherÂ added that students
   mustÂ understandÂ that knowingly breaching theÂ CodeÂ will not be
   toleratedÂ andÂ that they cannot seek to obtain unfair benefits from
   teaching assistants.

   The University withdrew the alternative charges under s.Â B.i.3(b) of
   theÂ Code.

   The Panel imposed the following sanctions: gradeÂ assignmentÂ of
   zeroÂ for course;Â five-year suspension; recommendation of
   expulsion;Â publicationÂ by the ProvostÂ of a notice of the decision
   and the sanctionsÂ imposed, with the name of the Student withheld.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/29288
