Case No.: 869
THE UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
IN THE MATTER OF charges of academic dishonesty filed on May 25, 2016,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters, 1995,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Act, 1971, S.O. 1971, c. 56 as amended S.O. 1978,
c. 88

BETWEEN:
UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO

- and -

I

H

■

L

REASONS FOR DECISION ON SANCTION

Hearing Date: June 29, 2017
Members of the Panel:
Ms. Johanna Braden, Barrister and Solicitor, Chair
Professor Faye Mishna, Faculty Panel Member
Mr. Eric Bryce, Student Panel Member
Appearances:
Ms. Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland, Barristers
Ms. Eva Mak, Barrister and Solicitor, Counsel for the Student
Mr. Thomas MacKay, Director, Faculty Governance and Curriculum Services, Faculty of
Arts and Science
Ms. H
L , the Student

I

■

In Attendance:
Ms. Tracey Gameiro, Associate Director, Office of Appeals, Discipline and Faculty
Grievances
Mr. Sean Lourim, Technology Assistant, Office of the Governing Council

2

BACKGROUND – THE FINDING OF ACADEMIC MISCONDUCT

1.

-

On May 1, 2017, this panel of the Trial Division of the University Tribunal (the
“Panel”) released its decision and reasons for decision, finding that Ms. H

-■

(

) L

(“the Student”) was guilty of one count of academic misconduct

under the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters, 1995
(“the Code”). On June 29, 2017, the Panel convened to determine the appropriate
sanction.

2.

The essence of the Panel’s finding was that the Student smuggled a false exam
with her into an examination room, and submitted that false exam as though it were
the real one that had been handed out to all students during the examination itself.
Her attempt at cheating was sophisticated in some senses but crude in others. The
false exam was a curious document. It had clearly been concocted with some
degree of difficulty and cunning, by cutting and pasting various old exams from the
same course so that it resembled a real exam without actually being one. Despite
these efforts, it was not hard for the exam markers to spot it as a fake.

3.

The Student testified in her own defence, and claimed ignorance of how it
happened that out of approximately 1,500 exams, hers was the only fake one. Her
evidence was not believed.

At the sanction hearing, the Student’s lawyer

submitted that the Panel had not actually found the Student to have been lying in
her evidence. This is not true. The Panel’s reasons for its finding might have been
put delicately.

However, to be clear, when the Panel rejected the Student’s

evidence as to how the fake exam ended up on the exam desk before her, the
Panel was finding that the Student did not tell the Panel the truth.

4.

The Panel could not find it was more likely than not that the Student herself falsified
the exam, or even that she knew or ought to have known it was falsified. It was just
as likely that she acquired the fake exam from someone else and believed it to be

3

the actual exam. Nevertheless, it was still a clear example of academic misconduct
(see paras 51 and 52 in the Reasons for Decision on Finding).

FURTHER EVIDENCE ON SANCTION

5.

The University submitted into evidence the Student’s updated ROSI record,
showing that the Student last took courses in the Winter 2017 term, which ended in
April, 2017.

The University led no other evidence on sanction.

This was the

Student’s first academic offence.

6.

The Student submitted two letters on her behalf. The first was a letter from Dr.
Proulx who taught the Student at the International College of Manitoba. She wrote
that the Student had been an excellent student in her Introduction to Psychology
course. The second letter was from Mr. Chau, a physiotherapist practicing in Hong
Kong where the Student had worked part-time in the summer of 2015 so that she
could improve her Cantonese.

Mr. Chau believes that the Student is mature,

reliable and honest.

PARTIES’ POSITIONS ON SANCTION

7.

The parties agreed that the Student should receive a final grade of zero in the
course MAT223H1F for the Fall 2015 term. In addition, the University requested a
suspension of two years, and an academic misconduct notation in the Student’s
transcript for three years. The Student requested a suspension of one year, and a
notation in the Student’s transcript for two years.

8.

Counsel for the University relied on numerous cases from this Tribunal, showing
that a suspension of two years is generally considered to be the minimum threshold
for cases of academic misconduct involving use of an unauthorized aid during an
exam.

Counsel for the Student recognized that the penalty she sought was

significantly more lenient than that ordered in any other similar case presented to

4

this Panel. However, picking up on a theme of this hearing, she suggested that
such an unusual case deserves an unusual penalty.

REASONS FOR DECISION ON SANCTION

9.

As a general point, the Panel considered the Student’s argument that an unusual
case deserves an unusual penalty. This submission ignores that the only reason
this case remains so unusual is because the Student has not explained why and
how she cheated. The mystery of this case could be solved easily if the Student
were to be truthful and explain herself. We don’t know exactly what happened, but
that is because the Student has not been truthful. The Panel understands the
Student has no obligation to explain herself to the Panel, bears no burden of proof,
and has the right to defend herself against charges of academic misconduct.
However, now that the Panel has made its finding of misconduct, the Student
cannot benefit from the uncertainty generated by her own actions.

10. More specifically, the Panel considered the principles and factors relevant to
sanction set out by this Tribunal in University of Toronto and Mr. C (November 5,
1976, Case No. 1976/77-3).

11. The first factor to be considered is the character of the Student. In the Student’s
favour, the character evidence submitted by the Student show she has the capacity
to do well in school and that she has shown tenacity and resilience in the past. The
Student participated in this hearing at both stages, demonstrating a willingness to
respect the University’s processes. Although she does not get the mitigating credit
that is typically awarded to students who admit misconduct before the Tribunal, the
fact that the Student defended the charges is not to be held against her. This is her
first academic offence. However, the circumstances of the offence show that the
Student engaged in a deliberate and premeditated effort to obtain unauthorized
assistance during a final exam by sneaking in a fake examination paper.

5

12. The second factor to consider is likelihood of a repetition of the offence. Counsel
for the Student submitted that the chance of reoffending was so low that we
shouldn’t even consider it. However, the essential basis for this premise is that the
Student is not the sort of person to cheat.
remorse.

There has been no expression of

The Student has indicated through her counsel that she still denies

having committed an offence. While the Tribunal sincerely hopes the Student will
not err in this fashion again, a significant period of suspension is required to bring
the message home to her. A transcript notation that lasts for a year beyond the
suspension will ensure that the Student is monitored should she return to the
University. A transcript notation for an additional year will also ensure the Student
knows that she may be watched more closely upon her return to the University,
thereby encouraging her to abide by the rules.
13. The third factor to consider is the nature of the offence committed. The integrity of
examinations is a cornerstone of academic life.

The University spends

considerable resources to ensure that examinations are fair.
14. The fourth factor to consider is whether there are any extenuating circumstances
surrounding the commission of the offence. Counsel for the Student argued that
there were unique and highly exceptional circumstances in this case, as follows:
this was the Student’s first offence; the Student had shown honesty and integrity
throughout this process; the Student had not made any admissions of liability; and
the Student had not been caught red-handed. Other than this being the Student’s
first offence, none of these circumstances weigh in the Student’s favour.

The

Student had a right to defend herself, but the Panel has found that the Student was
not truthful in doing so. This cannot be twisted into a mitigating factor.
15. The fifth factor to consider is the detriment to the University occasioned by the
offence.

Fortunately, the Student’s misconduct was detected relatively quickly,

thanks to the work of the exam markers. However, the evidence in this case
showed that the University undertakes significant and expensive measures to
protect the integrity of examinations, including through comprehensive processes

6

to ensure that the exams are not leaked ahead of time. This kind of misconduct is
a sad reminder of why the University must go to these lengths.
16. Finally, the Panel considered the need to deter others from committing a similar
offence. This is a key factor in any cheating case. It is important to send a clear
message that surreptitious attempts to undermine the academic integrity of
examinations will be taken very seriously. In this case, counsel for the Student
submitted that general deterrence should not be a great concern because the
Student was caught quickly. She said the fact the Student was caught is proof that
the system works. The Panel disagrees. The system will be shown to be working
when students stop cheating. That is when we can have some degree of faith that
all students, no matter how desperate or cornered they may feel, realize that
cheating has consequences that are worse than not cheating. That this Student
was caught does not show that the system works.

Instead, it shows why a

significant sanction is required for general deterrence.

17. The Panel considered these factors in light of what has been ordered in similar
cases. While the determination of an appropriate penalty in every case will depend
on an individual assessment of these principles and factors, it is important to have
general consistency in the Tribunal’s approach to sanction so that students are
treated fairly and equitably.

18. At this Tribunal, cheating during exams, whether through the giving or receiving of
unauthorized aid, generally results in what is sometimes called a “threshold”
suspension of at least two years if it is a first offence. The exact length of
suspension will depend on such factors as the student’s cooperation, evidence as
to mitigating factors, and the precise nature of the misconduct. While there is no
mandatory minimum, and it is entirely possible for a student who cheats on an
exam to receive a suspension of less than two years, there would probably have to
be clear evidence of very significant mitigating factors for that to be appropriate.
No such mitigating factors were present in the current case.

7

19. The Panel accepted that a two-year suspension (and a corresponding notation for
three years) was the appropriate sanction for this misconduct. In terms of the
timing of the suspension, the Panel recognized that there was a delay between the
first hearing date and the sanction hearing date that was not attributable to the
Student. Accordingly, the Panel thought it appropriate to deem the suspension to
have commenced May 1, 2017 (when the reasons for decision on finding were
released).

20. Accordingly, the Panel made an order as follows:

A.

THAT the Student is guilty of one count of unauthorized assistance, contrary

to section B.I.1(b) of the Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters;
B.

THAT the Student receive a final grade of zero in MAT223H1F in Fall 2015;

C.

THAT the Student be suspended from the University for a period of two

years, commencing on May 1, 2017 and ending on April 30, 2019;
D.

THAT the sanction be recorded for a period of three years on the Student’s

academic record and transcript to the effect that she was sanctioned for academic
misconduct, commencing on May 1, 2017 and ending on April 30, 2020; and
E.

THAT this case shall be reported to the Provost for publication of a notice of

the decision of the Tribunal and the sanction or sanctions imposed, with the name
of the Student withheld.
Dated at Toronto this 2nd

day of August , 2017
_____________________________
Johanna Braden, Chair

