Case #869 - Sanction

   [1]Case 869 - Finding

   DATE: August 2, 2017
   PARTIES: University of Toronto v. H.L. ("the Student")

   Hearing Date(s): June 29, 2017

   Panel Members:
   Ms. Johanna Braden, Barrister and Solicitor, Chair
   Professor Faye Mishna, Faculty Panel Member
   Mr. Eric Bryce, Student Panel Member

   Appearances:
   Ms. Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland,
   Barristers
   Ms. Eva Mak, Barrister and Solicitor, Counsel for the Student
   Mr. Thomas MacKay, Director, Faculty Governance and Curriculum
   Services, Faculty of Arts and Science
   The Student

   In Attendance:
   Ms. Tracey Gameiro, Associate Director, Office of Appeals, Discipline
   and Faculty Grievances
   Mr. Sean Lourim, Technology Assistant, Office of the Governing Council

   Trial Division - sanction decision - s. B.i.1(b) of Code - unauthorized
   aid - student submitted forged exam - zero on course, two year
   suspension, three year notation, publication of the decision with the
   name of the Student withheld

   The Student was found guilty of use of an unauthorized aid under s.
   B.i.1(b) of the Code. The Student brought a forged exam into the test
   room, composed of questions from previous years' exams and answers, and
   submitted it. Student continued to claim ignorance throughout the
   proceedings as to how their exam paper included different questions
   from every other students'.

   In determining the penalty, the Tribunal noted that the Student
   participated in the hearing, demonstrating a willingness to respect the
   process. The fact that the Student defended the charges is not to be
   held against them. This was a first offence, but it was deliberate.
   There was a risk of reoffending that a transcript notation could
   assuage, as a notation would ensure the Student is monitored. The
   integrity of exams is important to the University. There were no
   mitigating factors. There was significant detriment to the University
   because of the resources expended in protecting the integrity of exams.
   In light of these factors, the Student received a grade of zero in the
   course, a two year suspension, and a three year notation, and
   publication of the decision with the name of the Student withheld.
   [2]View Case

References

   1. http://live-the-office-of-the-governing-council.pantheonsite.io/media/12945
   2. file:///media/13075
