Case #56

   DATE : November 17, 2000

   PARTIES :Â University of Toronto v. T.P.

   HEARING DATE : October 10, 2000

   Panel Members:
   Rodica David, Chair

   Appearances:
   Salim Hirji, Counsel for T.P.
   Lily Harmer, Discipline Counsel

   The Student was charged with four counts of academic misconduct under
   the Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters, 1995 (the â Code â).

   The Student undertook a course at the University in the summer of 1997.
   The Student did not attend the final examination for the course;
   rather, the Student had the examination written by another person,
   K.C., who attended the examination at the University and presented
   himself as the Student. K.C. wrote the final examination in the
   Studentâs name and under his student number. The Student took no steps
   to report this academic offence to the University. During the same time
   period, the Student was enrolled in another course at the University.
   The Student did not write the final examination for that course either.
   The Student petitioned to be permitted to write the final examination
   for that course and claimed that he had been ill on the scheduled
   examination date. In support of this claim, the Student submitted two
   falsified medical documents.

   The Panel found the Student guilty of the charges. The Panel considered
   the offences of which the Student was charged to be extremely serious
   and warranting an extremely serious sanction. It noted that had it not
   been for the long period of time between the date of offence and date
   of trial, the Panel would have considered expulsion. The Panel noted,
   however, that in the intervening period, the Student had substantially
   improved his academic performance. The Panel further noted that the
   Studentâs charges surrounded a very short period of time and that he
   had no previous convictions or further misconduct to indicate that he
   would be likely to commit the offence again. The Panel stated that it
   believed that the Studentâs efforts to do better academically and to
   seek help were indicative of the positive aspect of his character. The
   Panel also stated, however, that it felt it should impose as strong a
   sanction short of expulsion as possible in view of the detrimental
   effect of this type of conduct to the University as a whole.

   The Panel imposed a five year suspension; publication of the sanction
   imposed on the Studentâs academic record for five years; a grade of
   zero; and publication by the Provost of a notice of the decision and
   sanction imposed with the Studentâs name withheld.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12732
