UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
Direct Line: (416) 978-8426
Facsimile: (416) 978-8182
E-mail:
m.mckone@utoronto.ca

November 17, 2000
Delivered by Hand
Personal and Confidential
Dear Mr. P.:
At its hearing held on October 10, 2000, the Trial Division of the University Tribunal
considered the following charges against you:
1. That on or about August 12, 1997 you knowingly had Mr. K. C. personate
you on an exam, contrary to Section B 1.1 (c) of the Code of Behaviour on
Academic Matters.
2. That on or about August 13, 1997 you knowingly omitted to report
Mr. C’s personation of you to the University for the purpose of aiding and
assisting Mr. C. to commit an offence contrary to Section B. II. 1. (a)(ii)
and B.I.1. (c) of the Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters.
3. That in or about September, 1997 you knowingly forged, altered or falsified a
doctor’s note required by the University, and/or circulated or made use of
such a forged, altered or falsified document contrary to Section B1.1. (a) of
the Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters.
4. That in or about September or October, 1997 you knowingly forged, altered or
falsified a medical certificate required by the University, and/or circulated or
made use of such a forged, altered or falsified document contrary to Section B
1.1. (a) of the Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters.
The particulars of the charges were as follows:
1. In the summer of 1997 you were a student in ECO 200Y. The final exam
for that course was held on August 12, 1997.
2. You did not attend on that examination, but rather had the examination
written by Mr. C. under your name, and under your student number.
3. When Mr. C. confirmed that he had written the exam under your name, the
day after the exam was written, you took no steps to report this academic
offence that was perpetrated in your name to the University.

-1-

4. During the same time period you were a student in ECO 220Y. You did
not write the final exam that took place on August 14, 1997.
5. In or about September, 1997 you petitioned to be permitted to write the
final for ECO 220Y. You claimed that you had been ill on the scheduled
examination date of August 14, 1997.
6. In support of your claim that you were ill you submitted to the University
a doctor’s note dated August 29, 1997 and a “University of Toronto
Student Medical Certificate” dated August 17, 1997. Both of these
medical documents were forged or falsified.
I am writing to confirm formally that the panel found you guilty of the charges and
imposed the following sanctions.
1. That you be suspended from the University for five years, commencing
September 1, 2000;
2. That the sanction imposed be published on the your academic record for
five years, commencing September 1, 2000;
3. That you be assigned a grade of zero, rather than the grade of 12%
previously assigned, for ECO 200Y; and
4. The your case be reported to the Provost, who may publish a notice of the
decision of the decision and the sanctions imposed in the University
newspapers, with your name withheld.
In rendering the decision of the Tribunal, the Chair provided the following reasons.
.
Firstly, I would like to deal with the various factors in the recorded case. We
consider the offences of which Mr. P. has been found guilty to be extremely
serious and warranting an extremely serious sanction. Had it not been for the
long period of time between the date of offence and the date of the trial we would
have considered expulsion, as recommended by the University. However, we feel
that there is evidence that in the intervening period, Mr. P. has made an effort to
substantially improve his academic performance. We have looked at submissions
made during the hearing, which indicate that Mr. P’s marks have increasingly
become better. We accepted evidence that he has tried harder and he has
obviously sought help and tried to deal with this. We also note that all four
charges surrounded a very short period of time. While they are different charges,
there were no previous convictions nor has there been any further misconduct to
indicate that Mr. P. is likely to commit this offence again. We believe that his
efforts to do better academically and to seek help are indicative of the positive
aspect of his character.

-2-

However, we felt that we should impose as strong a sanction possible short of
expulsion because it is important from the point of the University community as a
whole and a very detrimental effect to the University on the whole, students
engaging in this type of conduct.
Information concerning rights of appeal may be found in Section E. of the Code of Behaviour
on Academic Matters. The deadline for filing an appeal is December 8, 2000.
Yours sincerely,

Ms Margaret McKone
Acting Secretary
University Tribunal
cc:

Rodica David, Chair, Tribunal Panel
Paul Gooch, Vice-Provost
Lily Harmer, Discipline Counsel
Salim Hirji, Counsel for Mr. T. P.
Ian McDonald, Associate Dean, UofT at Scarborough

-3-

