Cases 694, 695 & 767

   [1]Cases 694,Â 695Â and 767 - Sanction

DATE:

   August 11, 2014

PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v J.L., H.L., A.Z.

Panel Members:

   Roslyn Tsao, Chair
   Markus Bussman, Faculty Member
   Adel Boulazreg, Student Member

Hearing Date(s):

   July 11, 2014

Appearances:

   Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel
   Samuel Greene, DLS, for the Student
   Lucy Gaspini, Manager, Academic Integrity and Affairs, University of
   Toronto Mississauga
   Nathan Innocente, Teaching Assistant
   Catherine Seguin, Senior Lecturer

In Attendance:

   Student 1 (J.L.)
   Natalie Ramtahal, Coordinator, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty
   Grievances
   Christopher Lang, Director, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances

Not in Attendance:

   Student 2 (H.L.)
   Student 3 (A.Z.)
   The Panel found JL and HL guilty of use of an unauthorized aid in an
   earlier decision but adjourned the hearing until after this hearing on
   personation charges against JL and AZ. HL and AZ did not attend. The
   Panel imposed a grade of zero in the course in question for HL.
   JL was charged with having another person personate her contrary to s.
   B.i.1(c), falsifying a T-card contrary to s. B.i.3(a) and, in the
   alternative, academic misconduct not otherwise described in the Code
   contrary to s. B.i.3(b) of the Code . AZ was charged with personating a
   student contrary to s. B.i.1(c) , falsifying a T-card contrary to s.
   B.i.3(a) and, in the alternative, academic misconduct not otherwise
   described in the Code contrary to s. B.i.3(b) of the Code .
   JL and the University entered into an Agreed Statement of Facts (ASF)
   confirming that JL persuaded AZ, who was not enrolled in the course, to
   take an exam for her using a forged T-Card. In a Deanâs Designate
   meeting JL claimed AZ was her cousin in high school, which was later
   contradicted by AZ in another meeting who claimed she was a University
   student and not JLâs cousin.
   The Deanâs Designate testified that she met with AZ who admitted to
   taking the exam for JL with a forged T-Card as she felt sympathy for JL
   who had broken up with her boyfriend.
   The Panel found AZ and JL guilty on the first two counts and the
   University withdrew the alternative charge.
   The University suggested a two year suspension for HL who has no
   academic offense history. The Panel accepted the recommended penalty
   and imposed a two year suspension with a notation on HLâs academic
   record for the length of the suspension.
   AZ had a previous infraction, had not participated in the process since
   meeting with the Deanâs Designate and the University recommended
   expulsion. The Panel imposed a five year suspension with a notation on
   AZâs academic record for the length of the suspension plus one year,
   taking into account that AZ gained no advantage in her personation and
   was trying to show JL sympathy.
   JL testified and submitted there were mitigating factors such that JLâs
   grandmother had died just before the infraction, she had no family in
   Toronto, she admitted her guilt at the Deanâs Designate meeting, her
   deception was not calculated, she had no prior offenses and a small
   likelihood of reoffending. JL sought a suspension for five years,
   deferred to allow completion of summer courses, with a notation on for
   the length of the suspension plus one year.
   The University submitted that JL had not taken advantage of the first
   opportunity to admit her guilt, continued to mislead the University as
   to AZâs identity. This and the T-Card forgery and continued attempts at
   deception warranted a sanction of expulsion, a grade of zero in the
   courses in question, suspension for five years, and a notation on JLâs
   academic record for the length of the suspension plus one year. The
   University cited several instances of personation in support of its
   position.
   The Panel did not view the first offense as a prior offense as that
   conviction took place after the hearing. The Panel also took into
   account JLâs grandmothers death, though it was concerned about the
   delay in providing this information. The Panel also noted JLâs
   cooperation through two years of proceedings.
   The Panel imposed a penalty of a grade of zero in the courses in
   question, suspension for five years, deferred to allow completion of
   summer courses, and a notation on JLâs academic record until August 31,
   2020.
   [2]View Case

References

   1. https://live-the-office-of-the-governing-council.pantheonsite.io/media/12857
   2. file:///media/12856
