Case 838

DATE:

   April 26, 2016

PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v J.E.

Hearing Date(s):

   March 28, 2016

Panel Members:

   John A. Keefe, Chair
   Graeme Hirst, Faculty Member
   Sean McGowan, Student Member

Appearances:

   Tina Lie, Assistant Discipline Counsel
   Mr. J.E., the Student
   David Pond, Instructor of the Course

In Attendance:

   Krista Osbourne, Administrative Assistant, Appeals, Discipline and
   Faculty Grievances
   Lucy Gaspini, Manager, Academic Integrity & Affairs, Office of the
   Dean, University of Toronto Mississauga

   Student charged with two offences under s. B.i.1(d) and, in the
   alternative, two offences under s. B.i.1(b) and two offences under s.
   B.i.3(b) of the Code . The charges related to allegations that the
   Student submitted two separate Essays with significant elements of
   plagiarism, portions of which were reproduced verbatim from internet
   sources, and which sometimes contained reference to the internet source
   without the proper quotations or footnoting. The Student pleaded guilty
   to both plagiarism charges. The University then withdrew the four
   alternative charges. The Panel took into account the fact that the
   Student attended the hearing, that he had no prior offences, and that
   though the plagiarism was extensive, there was some independent thought
   in the essays and some attempt to reference the sources of the
   information. The Panel noted that the main aggravating factor was that
   the second plagiarized Essay was submitted after the allegations of
   plagiarism concerning the first essay had already been raised, but not
   finally disposed of. In reviewing the cases submitted, the Panel noted
   that the range of penalties for a first offence of plagiarism was two
   to three years. Â The Panel contemplated whether the case was on the
   high or low end of the plagiarism spectrum, settling on a penalty in
   the mid-range of sanctions for a first-time offender on a charge of
   plagiarism. The Panel noted that the penalties were to run concurrently
   for both charges (i.e. the charges were treated as a single offence).
   The Panel imposed a grade assignment of zero in the Course; a 2-year
   and 5-month suspension; a 4-year notation on the Studentâs academic
   record and transcript; and that the case be reported to the Provost for
   publication.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12902
