Case 1444

   DATE:

   January 29, 2024

   PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v. J.W. ("the Student")

   HEARING DATE:

   October 11, 2023, via Zoom

   PANEL MEMBERS:

   R. Seumas M. Woods, Chair
   Professor Vivienne Luk, Faculty Panel Member
   Kerman Sekhon, Student Panel Member

   APPEARANCES:
   Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg
   Rothstein LLP
   Sonia Patel, Co-Counsel,Â Paliare Roland Rosenberg Rothstein LLP

   NOT IN ATTENDANCE:

   The Student

   HEARING SECRETARY:

   Carmelle Salomon-Labbe, Associate Director, Office of Appeals,
   Discipline and Faculty Grievances

   The Student was charged with two counts of knowingly obtaining and/or
   providing unauthorized assistance in connection with two tests,
   contrary to sections B.i.1(b) and B.ii.1 of the Code of Behaviour on
   Academic Matters, 2019 (the âCodeâ). In the alternative, the Student
   was charged with two counts of knowingly engaging in a form of
   cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or misrepresentation
   not otherwise described in the Code in order to obtain academic credit
   or other academic advantage of any kind, in connection with two tests,
   contrary to sections B.i.3(b) and B.ii.1 of the Code.

   Neither the Student nor a legal representative of the Student appeared
   at the hearing. At the commencement of the hearing, counsel for the
   University requested an Order that the hearing proceed in the absence
   of the Student. The Panel considered evidence submitted by the
   University that the Student had received notice of the charges and the
   hearing by via email, and that the email account had been accessed
   after such notice had been delivered. Based on this evidence, the Panel
   was satisfied that the Student had received reasonable notice of the
   charges and the hearing, and that the hearing could proceed in the
   Studentâs absence.

   The Panel first considered the affidavit evidence of the instructor in
   the course in which the term tests were submitted. In particular, the
   Professor deposed that after Test 3 was administered, they were alerted
   to the fact that individuals had shared screenshots of Test 2 and Test
   3 on a social media platform. The Professor identified the posted
   screenshots had been shared by the Student, and referred the matter to
   the Chair of the Department of Language Studies at the University of
   Toronto Mississauga (the âDeanâs Designateâ) for further action. The
   Panel further considered the affidavit evidence of the Deanâs
   Designate, who met with the Student to discuss the Professorâs concerns
   regarding the term tests. In particular, the Panel heard evidence that,
   at this meeting, the Student admitted to sharing answers for the term
   tests with other students, using a translation aid to complete Test 2,
   and checking their answers on Test 3 with another student. Based on the
   evidence submitted by the University, the Panel found the Student
   guilty of the charges of obtaining and providing unauthorized
   assistance on two tests.. In light of the Panelâs findings on the two
   counts under sections B.i.1(b) and B.ii.1 of the Code, the University
   withdrew the alternative charges.

   In determining the appropriate sanction, the Panel considered evidence
   adduced by the University which detailed the Studentâs two prior
   academic offences. The Panel further considered the sanctioning factors
   set out in the decision of University of Toronto v. Mr. C (Case NO.
   1976/77-3), namely, the character of the Student, the likelihood of
   repetition, the nature of the offence, detriment to the University and
   the need for deterrence. The Panel found the Studentâs absence from the
   hearing, and prior academic offences reflected poorly on the Studentâs
   character, and concluded that there was a real risk of a repeated
   offence absent a significant sanction. The Panel further noted that
   providing or obtaining unauthorized assistance is a very serious
   offence that strikes at the heart of the Universityâs evaluation
   process and the Universityâs core values of honesty and integrity,
   requiring the imposition of a serious sanction to achieve general
   deterrence. Finally, the Panel noted that there was no evidence of any
   extenuating circumstances in this case, particularly given that the
   Student failed to cooperate fully with the discipline process and to
   accept responsibility. After considering these sanctioning factors, and
   similar cases provided by the University, the Panel imposed the
   following sanction: a final grade of zero in the Course; a four-year
   suspension; and a five-year notation on the Studentâs academic record
   and; a report to the Provost for publication.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/31451
