Report #298

   DATE: May 10, 2005
   PARTIES: Ms. S. (the Appellant) v. UTSC
   Hearing Date(s): April 29, 2005
   Committee Members:
   Assistant Dean Bonnie Goldberg, Chair
   Dr. Pamela Catton
   Prof. Yuki Johnson
   Ms. Fancouse Ko
   Prof. Arthur Ripstein
   Acting Secretary:
   Mr. Andrew Drummond
   In Attendance:
   Ms. S., the Appellant
   Associate Dean Nick Cheng, UTSC
   UTSC â request to write deferred examination â subsequent request for
   late withdrawal without academic penalty â 3 examinations over twoâday
   period â anxiety and stress â examinations were not consecutive â UTSC
   standard for medical documentation not met â rules regarding deferred
   examinations understood â no ameliorative steps to seek academic
   assistance or reduce course load â confusion regarding difference
   between UTSC policy and Faculty of Arts and Science policy did not
   sufficiently disadvantage Student â appeal dismissed
   Request to write a deferred examination in one course. The request was
   made a day before the examination. The Student filed a subsequent
   request for late withdrawal without academic penalty because of the
   length of the time that had passed between the examination period and
   the Committee hearing. The Student was scheduled to write 3
   examinations over a twoâday period, one of which, the subject of the
   appeal, she did not write. The Student claimed that she was suffering
   anxiety and stress and she found it difficult to write three exams in
   30 hours. The Committee found that the Student was not entitled to
   relief on the grounds that she was writing three examinations over a
   twoâday period because the examinations were not consecutive. The
   Committee found that the Student did not meet the UTSC standard for
   medical documentation necessary to receive relief: the documentation
   did not prove that the Student was incapacitated; it did not indicate
   that one examination was more likely to be affected than another; and
   it did not refer to the Studentâs decision not to write the
   examination. The Committee found that the Student understood the rules
   regarding deferred examinations as she had had a previous request to
   defer an examination approved by the Faculty. The Committee found that
   the Student was aware of her academic difficulties yet did not take
   ameliorative steps to seek academic assistance or reduce her course
   load. The Committee found that the Studentâs confusion regarding the
   policy for reâwriting examinations at UTSC and the different policy at
   the Faculty of Arts and Science aggravated her situation but that the
   confusion did not sufficiently disadvantage her so as to necessitate
   providing relief. Appeal dismissed.
   [1]View Report

References

   1. file:///media/12559
