UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
GOVERNING COUNCIL
REPORT NUMBER 298 OF THE ACADEi\iIIC APPEALS COi\i:liWTTEE
May 10, 2005

Your Committee reports that it held a hearing on Friday April 29'\ 2005, at which the
following were present:
Assistant Dean Bonnie Goldberg, Chair
Dr. Pamela Catton
Professor Yuki Johnson
Ms. Fran~oise Ko
Professor Arthur Ripstein
Mr. Andrew Drummond, Acting Secretary of the Committee
In Attendance:
Ms S., the Appellant
Associate Dean Nick Cheng, University of Toronto at Scarborough
The Appeal
The student is appealing the decision of the University of Toronto at Scarborough Subcommittee on Academic Appeals, dated August 14, 2002 refusing her request to write a
deferred examination in the 2002 Winter session course HMB265S. The student requests
that the failure in the course be removed from her transcript, as the time has now
reasonably passed for the writing of a deferred examination (her original request).
Facts
The student enrolled in an Honours Bachelor of Science program, with a specialist in
Human Biology in the fall of 2000. At the end of the academic year, she was placed on
academic probation as a result of uot having achieved either an annual or a cumulative
GPA of at least 1.60.

She received a letter from the Director of Recruitment and Registrar dated May 31, 2001
providing information about ways in which to address her poor academic performance.
She was referred to academic advising, as well as such other resources as Health and
Wellness Services, Financial Aid Services, AccessAbility Services, and Teaching and
Learning services.
In the 2002 Winter session, the student registered for 5 courses and was scheduled to
write 3 of the examinations over a two-day period. UTSC policy is to grant students
relief from three consecutive examinations, but not 3 examinations within a 24-hour
period. She wrote 4 of her 5 scheduled examinations between Wednesday April l 7,
2002 and Tuesday April 30. She wrote MATA24H3S on Monday April 29 from 9-12
and BGYBI0Y3Y on Tuesday April 30 from 2-4. She did not write HMB265HlS as
scheduled on Tuesday April 30 from 9-12. This is the subject of her appeal.

During this time, the student was suffering from prolonged clinical depression. She had
difficulty acclimating to Toronto, having moved from Ottawa to attend University. She
experienced two deaths in her family. She began taking anti-anxiety medication in April
2002 and at the time, was concerned about side effects and confused as to the dosage and
type of medication.
The result of not writing the examination on the scheduled date is that the student failed
HMB265H1S with a grade of 41 %. Going into the examination her grade was 68.3% but
the final examination was worth 40%. Her results in her first year and second year
courses were mostly below average. As a consequence of her low annual and cumulative
GPA atthe end of the 2001-2002 academic year, the student was placed on a one-year
academic suspension.
Previous Decisions
On April 29t\ the student petitioned to write a deferred examination in HMB265H1S on
the grounds that she was suffering from anxiety and stress. She wrote in her petition of
her psychological and medical distress prior to the exam period. She described seeking
medical help and that she was diagnosed on April 16th as having anxiety and depression.
She was prescribed an anti-anxiety medication. She wrote of the difficulty she
experienced in the first term writing 3 exams in 30 hours. She stated that she did not
want to defer all her examinations, but "three exams again in 30 hours was just too
much." She wrote that she does "not want to discuss in this letter" her personal
circumstances but that her doctor "can tell you." She wrote of her desire to succeed and
her willingness to seek help. She believed that having this particular exam deferred
would relieve some of her stress and that "I really need this break."

The student submitted an April 24, 2002 University of Toronto Student Medical
Certificate from Dr. Joseph K.Wong. The certificate said that the student was suffering
from acute and chronic anxiety and depression, and that he had proscribed counseling and
anti-anxiety medication. He wrote that she is unable to concentrate, unable to fall asleep
and experiences drowsiness with the medication.
The student's petition was denied in a letter from Associate Dean Ian McDonald writing
for the Academic Committee, dated June 14, 2002. Under UTSC policy, a student who is
physically capable of writing an exam is expected to do so. A re-write is an option if,
after attempting the exam, the student can prove that she was seriously affected by either
an illness or other affliction. The letter states that the student did not present any
evidence to show that she was incapable of attempting the examination. The letter notes
that she wrote the exam scheduled for the afternoon of the day in question and wrote the
exam scheduled for the day prior to the exam in question. Further, contrary to UTSC
policy, the medical documentation did not indicate that she was examined on the day in
question or even close to the day. Her documentation provided evidence that she saw Dr
J. Wong on April 16 and April 24. There was no evidence in the document that she was
unable to write any or all of her examinations. The June 14 th letter also informed the
student that she was on academic suspension.
On June 24, 2002, the student appealed the denial of her petition to the UTSC Subcommittee on Academic Appeals. In her written submission, she provided more detail
regarding her medical issues. She stressed her belief that the responsibility was on the
University to contact her doctor for more information about her medical situation. The
student acknowledged that writing an examination on the afternoon of April 30th was
"questionable." She stated that her doctor suggested she defer the majority of her exams,
but she refused because of time constraints, financial constraints and personal issues. She
wrote about her confusion regarding her prescribed medication, as a result of receiving

2

2

conflicting medical advice from a doctor at the University of Toronto Health Services.
She noted that she had commenced psychological counseling with Drs. Choi and
Likwornik at the University of Toronto.
In support of her appeal, the student provided a U of T Student Medical Certificate from
Dr J. Choi of the University's Psychiatric Service dated July 19, 2002 and from Dr Wong
dated August 7, 2002. Dr. Choi's University of Toronto Medical Certificate noted that
the "student had had difficulty with mood, sleep, concentration, and appetite. A
significant lstressorJ contributing to this was learning of a petition denial at the end of
May 2002." She prescribed continued psychiatric follow-up and psychotherapy. The
second note from Dr Wong confirmed that the student was under his care on April 16th
and April 24 th . He reiterated her diagnosis and symptoms. He explained that she is alone
in Toronto, and lacking adequate emotional support from her family. He described her
treatment. He noted that her mental conditions coupled with the side effects of the
medication would certainly affect her work performance negatively.
The student did not appear at the hearing, but was represented by her brother, a New
York lawyer. The student's brother spoke to his sister's issues of anxiety, depression,
medical treat, family deaths, and loneliness in Toronto.
On August 10, 2002, the UTSC Subcommittee on Academic Appeals denied the appeal.
The Subcommittee found that the student had not made sufficient effort to ameliorate her
previously identified circumstances such as reducing her course load or seeking academic
advising as recommended. The student's petition was denied in accordance with UTSC
policy that students cannot petition in advance of the event in question, and the
Subcommittee noted that she ought to have seen her doctor on or close to the day of the
exam. Further, although the student had requested in her petition that the University
contact her doctor directly, the University did not do so because this is contrary to UTSC
policy which places the onus on the petitioner to prove her case.
On November 13, 2002, the student appealed to the Academic Appeals Committee of
Governing Council.
Decision
Your Committee is unanimously of the view that the student's appeal should be
dismissed.

The student was not entitled to other forms of relief because she was writing three
examinations over a two-day period, because the examinations were not consecutive.
With respect to deferred examinations, under UTSC policies, students must attempt to
write an examination if they are able to do so or must present appropriate medical
documentation to prove incapacitation at that time. The medical document submitted for
the petition stated only that the student was unable to concentrate, unable to fall asleep
and had experienced drowsiness with medication. The August 7 th letter elaborated on
these symptoms, but does not indicate that one examination was more likely to be
affected than another. This note does not speak to incapacity to write the examination
either. Dr. Choi's note is dated June 20, 2002 and does not speak to the appellant's
decision not to write the examination, but instead refers to the stress incurred by the
petition denial. In addition, the student wrote 4 of her 5 examinations. Thus the student's
medical documentation does not meet the standards necessary to provide relief.
The student understood the rules regarding deferred examinations having requested and
received permission to defer an examination in 200 l. In her first year, the student
petitioned successfully to write a deferred examination in PSYA0IY, which was

3

3

approved. UTSC policy states that students arc expected to take ameliorative steps to
avoid petitioning again on the same grounds, such as taking time off, redncing the course
load, or seeking academic counseling. When the student received her academic probation
letter in May 2001, she was offered several different ways of seeking assistance for her
academic difficulties but did not take any of these steps. The student had also
experienced difficulty during the December 2001 examination period when she was
taking only three courses, yet did not take measures to reduce her winter course load.
An additional matter was raised at the hearing. \Ve heard evidence of the student's
confusion regarding the policy for the re-writing of examinations at UTSC - her "home"
campus, and the different policy at the St. George Faculty of Arts and Science where she
was taking the course. UTSC acknowledges the conflict and your panel accepts the
student's evidence that this confusion aggravated her situation at the time in the sense
that she may have made different choices if she had been properly aware of the rule that
the "home" campus governs policy matters. However, we find that this peculiar problem
did not sufficiently disadvantage the student on the facts of this case as to necessitate
providing her relief on this ground.
Your Committee does have compassion for the student's academic and personal
difficulties during her first two years of University. We wish to note that upon her return
from the academic suspension, the student's grades improved dramatically. The student
shared with the Committee her positive experience at the University in the last two years,
the fact that she is graduating this June, her work in peer outreach on mental health
issues, and that she will be commencing another program at a different institution in the
fall. We commend her for her willingness to seek help and her great! y improved
academic performance. However, in the student did not meet the UTSC standard for
medical documentation necessary to receive a deferred examination. The medical
documentation was not concunent with the petition request, nor did it speak to the
student's inability to write the examination in question. The student's behaviour at the
time of the examination did not demonstrate incapacity to write the examination nor did
she allege incapacity. The student did not take ameliorative steps either prior to or during
the winter term.
For these reasons, the appeal is dismissed.

Andrew Drummond,
Acting Secretary

4

Bonnie Goldberg,
Chair

4

