Case 848

   [1]Case 848 - Appeal

DATE:

   November 2, 2016

PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v. D.H. (âthe Studentâ)

Hearing Date(s):

   March 16, 2016 and August 9, 2016

Panel Members:

   Mr. John A. Keefe, Barrister and Solicitor, Chair
   Professor Gabriele DâEluterio, Faculty Member
   Ms. Alice Zhu, Student Panel Member

Appearances:

   Ms. Tina Lie, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Palaire Roland Barristers
   Mr. Glenroy Bastien, Counsel for The Student
   Professor John Britton, Deanâs Designate, Office of Student Academic
   Integrity (March 16, 2016)
   Dr. Kristi Gourlay, Manager, Office of Student Academic Integrity,
   Faculty of Arts and Science

In Attendance:

   Mr. Christopher Lang, Director, Appeals, Discipline, and Faculty
   Grievances (March 16, 2016)
   Krista Osbourne, Administrative Assistant, Appeals, Discipline, and
   Faculty Grievances (August 9, 2016)
   The Student

   The Student was charged with two offences for attempting to circulate
   falsified academic records pursuant to s. B.i.3(a) and s. B.ii.2 of the
   Code, or alternatively, three charges under s. B.i.3(b), s. B.ii.2 and
   B.i.3(a) of the Code .Â  The charges related to the Studentâs attempt
   to order transcripts and obtain letters of good standing from the
   University once he had learned that he had been suspended for three
   years, but before the notation had been recorded on his record in the
   University system. The Panel convened for an initial hearing and then a
   subsequent sanction hearing.Â  At the initial hearing, the matter
   proceeded based upon an Agreed Statement of Facts. The Student pled
   guilty to the charges under s. B.i.3(a) and s. B.ii.2 of the Code .
   Upon the Panelâs finding of guilt on the two charges relating to s.
   B.i.3(a) and s. B.ii.2 of the Code , the University withdrew the
   remaining charges.

   The sanction hearing proceeded by way of Agreed Statement of Facts on
   Penalty which indicated that the Student had been guilty of two prior
   academic offences. The Studentâs first offence was academic dishonesty
   relating to an incident where he altered and re-submitted a test to be
   re-graded. He pled guilty and was sanctioned to a zero on the test and
   resulting reduction in his course mark, as well as a notation on his
   academic transcript for two years. The Studentâs second academic
   offence was for forging or otherwise falsifying his academic record.
   Those charges related to an application for employment where the
   Student submitted a transcript that omitted the notation of academic
   dishonesty from the prior year. The Panel considered the Studentâs
   mitigating circumstance of mental health issues and sanctioned the
   Student to a suspension for a period of up to three years; a notation
   on the Studentâs academic record for four years; and a report to the
   Provost.Â  Â The reasons for that decision were available on May 19,
   2015. Although the normal practice was to immediately record the
   Panelâs decision on the Repository of Student Information (ROSI), out
   of a concern for the Studentâs mental health, the Panel also postponed
   making the notation the Studentâs record until after the Student had
   the opportunity to read the decision with counsellors present, on June
   1, 2015.

   On June 2, 2015, the Student ordered ten transcripts, knowing the
   sanction had not yet been implemented on ROSI. On June 3, 2015, he
   requested that Woodsworth College provide letters on his behalf to
   Canada Immigration, CPA Ontario, and âTo Whom It May Concernâ stating
   that he was a student in good standing at the University and that he
   was expected to graduate in the Summer of 2017.Â  The Student knew that
   the transcripts that he had ordered online and the letters that he had
   requested did not reflect his academic record and he admitted that he
   intended to make use of them.
   The Panel found that the Studentâs actions were not spontaneous, but
   deliberate, since they took place over a three-day period. The Panel
   found that it was particularly troubling that the Student took
   advantage of the Panelâs sympathetic treatment because of the Studentâs
   fragile emotional state, but then took immediate steps to obtain
   transcripts that he knew were false.Â  Aggravating considerations were
   that the charge of falsification of an academic record is a very
   serious offence, this was the Studentâs third offence, and it occurred
   immediately after he received a three-year suspension for his second
   offence. The Panel considered mitigating circumstances that there was
   an Agreed Statement of Facts and an Agreed Statement of Facts on
   Penalty, that the Student admitted guilt at a very early stage, he
   attended the hearing, and that the Student was suffering from severe
   mental distress at the time the offence was committed. The Panel found
   that there was a pattern of dishonest conduct and prior convictions,
   and recommended that the Student be expelled, an interim notation until
   Governing Council makes decision on expulsion, and that the case be
   reported to the Provost.
   [2]View Case

References

   1. https://live-the-office-of-the-governing-council.pantheonsite.io/media/13077
   2. file:///media/12957
