Case No.: 848

THE UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL OF THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
IN THE MATTER OF charges of academic dishonesty made on January 18, 2016
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic
Matters, 1995,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Act, 1971, S.O. 1971, c. 56 as amended
S.O. 1978, c. 88

BETWEEN:
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
(University)
-AND-

(Student)

REASONS FOR DECISION
Date of Hearing: March 16, 2016 and August 9, 2016
Members of the Panel:
Mr. John A. Keefe, Barrister and Solicitor, Chair
Professor Gabriele D'Eleuterio, Faculty Panel Member
Ms. Alice Zhu, Student Panel Member
Appearances:
Ms. Tina Lie, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Barristers (March 16, 2016 and August 9,
2016)
Mr. Glenroy Bastien, Counsel for the Student (March 16, 2016 and August 9, 2016)
Professor John Britton, Dean's Designate, Office of Student Academic Integrity (March 16, 2016)
Dr. Kristi Gourlay, Manager, Office of Student Academic Integrity, Faculty of Arts and Science
(March 16, 2016 and August 9, 2016)

In Attendance:
Mr. Christopher Lang, Director, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances (March 16, 2016)
Krista Osbourne, Administrative Assistant Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances (August 9,
2016)
the Student (March 16, 2016 and August 9, 2016)
Mr. J

ia

-2-

THE HEARINGS
Initial Hearing- March 16, 2016
1.

The Trial Division of the University Tribunal was convened on March 16, 2016, to consider
charges brought by the University of Toronto (the "University") against J- - (the "Student") under the University Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters, 1995 (the

"Code").

2.

3.

The charges against the Student are as follows:

1.

On or about June 2 and 3, 2015, having an intent to commit an offence under the Code,
you did or omitted to do something for the purpose of carrying out your intention to
forge or in any other way alter or falsify an academic record, or utter, circulate or make
use of such forged, altered or falsified record, contrary to sections B.II.2 and B.I.3(a) of
the Code.

2.

In the alternative, on or about June 2 and 3, 2015, you knowingly engaged in a form of
cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or misrepresentation not otherwise
described in the Code in order to obtain academic credit or other academic advantage of
any kind, contrary to section B.I.3(b) of the Code.

3.

On or about June 2, 2015, you knowingly forged or in any other way altered or falsified
an academic record, or uttered, circulated or made use of such forged, altered or falsified
record in an email to Woodsworth College, contrary to section B.l.3(a) of the Code.

4.

In the alternative, on or about June 2, 2015, having an intent to commit an offence under
the Code, you did or omitted to do something for the purpose of carrying out your
intention to forge or in any other way alter or falsify an academic record, or utter,
circulate or make use of such forged, altered or falsified record, contrary to sections
B.II.2 and B.I.3(a) of the Code.

5.

In the further alternative, on or about June 2, 2015 you knowingly engaged in a form of
cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or misrepresentation not otherwise
described in the Code in order to obtain academic credit or other academic advantage of
any kind, contrary to section B.I.3(b) of the Code.

The initial hearing proceeded on the basis of an Agreed Statement of Facts which are attached
as Appendix 1 to these Reasons for Decision.

-3-

4.

The Student pleaded guilty to counts 1 and 3 of the Charges.

5.

The Tribunal accepted the plea of guilty on these counts and the rernammg counts were
withdrawn by the University.

6.

The hearing was then adjourned on consent for the penalty phase of the hearing.

7.

Based on the finding of guilt on counts 1 and 3, pending the outcome of the hearing on sanction,
on March 16, 2016 the Tribunal issued the following Order:
"That a notation be placed in Mr. H
' : academic record and
transcript to reflect that Mr. ~ has been found guilty of
academic misconduct from the date of this Order pending the
outcome of the hearing on sanction for Mr. ~
"

The Sanctions Hearing-August 9, 2016
8.

The sanctions hearing proceeded on August 9, 2016.

9.

At the outset of the sanctions hearing, the Tribunal considered a request by the Student to
submit ten documents even though they were not delivered in accordance with the agreed
timetable. Counsel for the University objected to one of the documents, a medical report dated
August 2, 2016 from Dr. Juan Kirn, on the basis that it was not delivered in accordance with the
agreed timetable, thereby depriving the University of the opportunity to consider and respond to
the report or to cross-examine the doctor.

The Tribunal allowed the report and the other

documents to be admitted in evidence. The medical report together with the other documents
(including other medical reports) submitted on behalf of the Student were marked as Exhibit 4.
10.

The parties filed an Agreed Statement of Facts on Penalty which is attached as Appendix 2 to
these Reasons for Decision.

-4-

Background Leading To The Charges
The First Offence

11.

The Charges that are the subject of this proceeding are the third offence committed by the
Student.

The background to the two earlier offences is important to understanding the

circumstances surrounding the offence in question in this proceeding. The Student was initially
disciplined for academic dishonesty in 2012. The incident involved the submission of a test for
a remark. Prior to submitting it, the Student corrected the test and then re-submitted it for a
remark.

On the day the test was re-submitted, the professor warned all the students in the

course that he was concerned that some of the students were re-submitting tests for remarks
after making corrections. The following day, the Student admitted his conduct to the professor.
The Student's conduct was submitted to the University's discipline process Ultimately, this
resulted in the following sanction:
(a)

a zero sum for Term Test 3 and a fmiher grade reduction equivalent to the value of the
test (16.67% ); and

(b)
12.

an annotation on Mr. ~

s transcript from March 1, 2012 to February 28, 2014.

The Student's appeal of this sanction to the Vice Provost, Academic and Faculty Life was
dismissed.

The Second Offence

13.

The second offence occurred in September 2013. It involved submitting an academic transcript
for a summer job to the Canadian Automobile Association (C.A.A.). The transcript sent to the

-5-

C.A.A. intentionally omitted the annotation on his transcript that he had been sanctioned for the
first offence.

14.

This led to a second disciplinary proceeding. The Student was charged with the offence of
forging or otherwise altering or falsifying an academic record.

15.

The hearing of the University Tribunal relating to the second offence was held on April 8, 2015.
The Student pleaded guilty to the charge based on an agreed Statement of Facts and there was a
hearing on sanction .

16.

In its Reasons for Decision, the Tribunal fully canvassed · the background facts and
circumstances relating to the first and second offence, including the evidence of the Student's
emotional and mental health issues and all of the mitigating circumstances concerning his
stressful time at the University.

After considering all these issues, the Tribunal made the

following order:

(a)

that the Student be suspended for a period of three years from the date of this decision;

(b)

that a notation be on his academic transcript for a period of four years; and

(c)

that the publication of this decision be done by the University with the name of the
Student withheld.

17.

The Reasons for Decision of the University Tribunal were available for release on May 19,
2015. However, they were not released to the Student until June 1, 2015.

The delay in the

release of the decision was because, at the request of counsel for the Student, the Tribunal
agreed to give counsel advance notice of the impending release of the decision so that

-6-

arrangements could be made to have the result released to the Student in the presence of
counsellors because of his fragile emotional state.
18.

Although the normal practice of the University would be to record the result of the Tribunal on
the Repository of Student Information ("ROSI") immediately after it is rendered, the University
decided not to implement the sanction out of concern for the Student's mental health and wellbeing.

19.

The conduct of the Student that gives rise to the current proceeding involves the Student's
conduct immediately following the release of the decision to him on June 1, 2015.

20.

The decision of the Tribunal was communicated to the Student at the University counselling
centre (CAPS) at 3:00 p.m. on June 1, 2015.

21.

Counsel for the Student notified the University on June 2, 2015 at 8:30 a.m. that the decision
had been communicated to the Student, but because University counsel was away from the
office, there was a delay in implementing the sanction on the University's system until after
June 3, 2015.

22.

On June 2, 2015 at 2:45 p.m., knowing that he had been suspended from the University for three
years commencing May 19, 2015 and that the sanction had not been implemented on ROSI, the
Student requested a total of ten transcripts using the University's online service.

23.

On June 2, 2015, the Student also asked Savitri Rose, Registrarial Assistant, Woodsworth
College to provide letters regarding his academic status. At her request, he emailed her on
June 3, 2015 at 10:01 a.m. and requested:

-74 copies to Immigration Canada containing:
•
•

is a full time student in good standing at the University
Expected to graduate in June 2017

4 copies to "To whom it may concern":
•
•

is a full time student in good standing at the University
Expected to graduate in June 2017

2 copies to "CPA Ontario":

24.

•

D

is a full time student in good standing at the University

•

Expected to graduate in June 2017

The Student knew that the transcripts that he ordered online and the letters he requested did not
reflect his academic record and he admitted that he intended to make use of them.

THE POSITION OF THE PARTIES ON SANCTION
25 .

Counsel for the University requested that the Tribunal make the following Order:

(a)

to recommend to the President that he recommend to Governing Council that he expel
the Student from the University;

(b)

that the Order dated March 16, 2016 continue until the final disposition of our Decision
and Reasons by the Governing Council; and

(c)

that this case be reported by the Provost for publication of a Notice of a Decision of the
Tribunal and the Sanction or Sanctions imposed remain with the name of the Student
withheld.

26.

Counsel for the Student requested a five year suspension. He urged the Tribunal to impose a
five year suspension rather than expulsion. He submitted that this incident would be a wake-up

-8call to him and it would be unfortunate if the Student was prevented from ever pursuing his
career at the University of Toronto given that he was operating in an extremely stressful
situation. He acknowledged that the conduct demonstrated monumental poor judgment. He
urged us to consider that the conduct was spontaneous.

THE EVIDENCE AT THE SANCTIONS HEARING
27.

The Student testified at the Sanctions Hearing and offered some evidence about his personal
background and an explanation for his conduct.

28.

He testified that during his childhood, he and his family lived in Korea. They moved to Canada
when he was ten years old. During his time in Korea, his family's life was comfortable until his
father (a medical doctor) and his mother separated. The separation and divorce was difficult
and his father did not provide support to his mother.

She was forced to take him to court

regularly to secure support for herself and their children. The Student and his mother moved to
British Columbia where they had a much lower standard of living. Through hard work and
determination, the Student achieved high grades in high school and was admitted to the
University of Toronto's Rotman School of Business.

29.

On several occasions during the hearing, the Student expressed his educational goal as
succeeding in school so that he could earn a Chartered Accountants designation and get a high
paying job.

30.

While in attendance at the University of Toronto the Student became involved in a romantic
relationship which ended in a dramatic fashion. During the relationship, his romantic partner
became obsessive and possessive. When the relationship ended there was an incident where the
Student was assaulted by his girlfriend. The police were called and this led to criminal charges

-9-

against her and a court case. Ultimately, his romantic partner entered into a peace bond. This
incident together with a number of incidents caused the Student to become extremely stressed
leading to his seeking treatment for mental illness.
31.

The Student explained that when the result was delivered to him on June 1, 2015, he left the
room at the University where the doctor was present. He explained that his mother called and
asked him for documents to be used for a court proceeding in Korea to verify that the Student
was still registered so that the mother could receive payment for these expenses. He testified
that the reason he sought the various transcripts and letters in question was to fulfill his
mother's request.

32.

On further review of the evidence, the Student's request for documentation from the University
went beyond merely seeking formal documentation to assist his mother in the court case. It
included a request for a letter addressed to the Chartered Professional Accountants Association
and to Immigration Canada.

33.

He requested that the letters state that he was a "full-time student in good standing at the
University and expected to graduate in June 2017". He knew that this was untrue. He admitted
in the Agreed Statement of Facts that "he intended to obtain transcripts that did not accurately
reflect his academic record and standing with the intention of uttering, circulating or making use
of those records".

34.

The Student suggested that he was acting spontaneously while under stress. However, the
conduct occurred over a three day period. It is quite clear that the Student was not acting
spontaneously, but rather quite intentionally in order to take advantage of the University's delay
in posting the suspension.

- 10 -

35.

In his evidence he said that after speaking to his mother, he went on the computer and noted that

ROSI had not picked up the sanction imposed by the Tribunal. He said he "needed the money"
and rushed to get the transcripts and the letters. Obviously, the Student was hoping to get the
transcripts and letters before the suspension was recorded so that he could use them knowing
they were false. Clearly, his actions involved deliberate steps rather than spontaneous actions.
36.

What is particularly troubling is that the Student received sympathetic treatment from the
Tribunal and the University because of his fragile mental state, yet upon receiving the result, he
immediately took steps to obtain copies of his academic record which he knew were false. This
demonstrates a lack of real remorse and a complete lack of respect for the basic principles of
integrity embodied in the Code.

THE TRIBUNAL'S CONCLUSION ON SANCTION

37.

University counsel presented the Tribunal with a number of Tribunal cases that supported her
position that, where there is a pattern of dishonest conduct and prior convictions, expulsion was
the appropriate penalty. The charge in the case is forgery or uttering, circulating or making use
of a forged or false document. It is a very serious offence.

38.

The Tribunal decisions referred to by University counsel make it clear that forgery is at the high
end of the scale of wrongdoing. This offence is a third offence for the Student and it occurred
immediately after being notified of the three year suspension for the second offence.

39.

The Tribunal considered a number of mitigating circumstances. The Student admitted guilt on
this and the prior occasions at a very early stage.

- 11 40.

The Student cooperated in this proceeding by agreeing to the Agreed Statement of Facts and the
Agreed Statement of Facts on Penalty.

The Student attended the hearing.

The medical

evidence submitted indicates that the Student was suffering from significant mental distress at
the time of the offence. The offence in question occurred at the lowest point in the Student's
academic career, having just been told that he was going to be suspended for three years.

41.

Counsel for the Student urged us to consider the statement of the Supreme Court of Canada in

R. v. Proulx that:
"82
The Court has held on a number of occasions that sentencing is an
individualized process, in which the trial judge has considerable discretion in
fashioning a fit sentence. The rationale behind this approach stems from the
principle of proportionality, the fundamental principle of sentencing, which
provides that a sentence must be proportional to the gravity of the offence and
the degree of responsibility of the offender. Proportionality requires an
examination of the specific circumstances of both the offender and the offence
so that the "punishment fits the crime". As a by-product of such an
individualized approach, there will be inevitable variation in sentence imposed
for particular crimes .... "
42.

Having considered all the evidence and the submissions, it is clear to the Tribunal that the
Student has little or no understanding of the significance of the University's fundamental values
of integrity embodied in the policies and procedures and the Code.

43.

It is obvious to the Tribunal that the Student did not learn his lesson from the first or the second

incident. It is not possible to conclude that the Student would never do it again.

44.

Based on a consideration of all the evidence of this offence and the offender the Tribunal
concludes that the appropriate penalty is expulsion from the University.

- 12 ORDER
45.

Accordingly, the Tribunal makes the following order:
(a)

The Tribunal recommends to the President that he recommend to Governing Council
that it expel the Student from the University;

(b)

that the Order of the Tribunal dated March 16, 2016 continue until the final disposition
of the order made in paragraph (a); and

(c)

That this case be reported to the Provost for publication of a notice of the decision of the
Tribunal and the sanction or sanctions imposed with the name of the Student withheld.

Dated at Toronto, this [

day ofNovember, 2016.

APPENDIX 1
THE UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL OF THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO

IN THE MATTER OF charges of academic dishonesty made on January 18, 2016
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters, 1995,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Act, 1971, S.O. 1971, c. 56 as amended
S.0. 1978, C. 88

BETWEEN:
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
-AND-

--HAGREED STATEMENT OF FACTS

1.

H.

This hearing arises out of charges of academic misconduct filed by the Provost of

the University of Toronto (the "Provost") under the Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters
("Code"). For the purposes of this hearing, the Provost and J

have

prepared this Agreed Statement of Facts ("ASF") and a joint book of documents ("JBD").
The Provost and Mr. rllllllagree that:

(a)

each document contained in the JBD may be admitted into evidence before
the Tribunal for all purposes, including for the truth of the document's
contents, without further need to prove the document; and

(b)

if a document indicates that it was sent or received by someone, that is prima
facie proof that the document was sent and received as indicated.

A.

Notice of hearing, charges, guilty plea

2.

Mr. H - admits that he received a notice of hearing for March 16, 2016, at 5:45

pm, and that he received reasonable notice of the hearing. The notice of hearing is included
in the JBD at Tab 1.
3.

Mr. -admits that he received a copy of the charges filed by the Provost, which

are included in the JBD at Tab 2.
4.

Mr. H - waives the reading of the charges, and hereby pleads guilty to charges

#1 and #3. If the University Tribunal convicts Mr. -

under charges #1 and #3, the

Provost will withdraw charges #2, #4 and #5.
5.

Mr.

has been a registered student at the University of Toronto since Fall

2011. He is a member of Woodsworth College.

Since Fall 2012, Mr. H

has been

enrolled in the Management Specialist program, which is offered jointly by the Faculty of
Arts and Science and Joseph L. Rotman School of Management. He has accumulated 10.0
credits. A copy of Mr. - s current academic record and history is found in the JBD at
Tab 3.

B.

Previous Tribunal hearing

6.

On April 8, 2015, the University Tribunal ("Tribunal") convened to hear charges that

were filed against Mr. •, dated June 13, 2014.
counsel, Glenroy Bastien, at the hearing. Mr. -

Mr. H - was represented by

pleaded guilty to the offence charged

and executed an Agreed Statement of Facts. The Tribunal accepted the guilty plea and
convicted Mr.
7.

of the charged offence.

The sanction was contested at the hearing. The University submitted that a three-

year suspension and four-year transcript notation commencing on the date the Tribunal
rendered its decision was appropriate. Mr.

i a submitted that a two-year suspension

retroactive to September 2014 and a transcript notation of two to three years was
appropriate.
2

8.

The Tribunal reserved its decision on sanction.

C.

Delay in the implementing the Sanction to accommodate student

9.

Prior to the hearing, Mr.

had received assistance from Dr. Robert Friedman,

a psychiatrist at the University of Toronto's Counselling and Psychological Services
("CAPS"), and Becky Smith, Coordinator, Student Crisis Response Programs ("Crisis
Services"). Out of concern for Mr. H . ' s mental health and well-being, the University
sought to ensure that Mr. H - would have the appropriate supports in place when the
Tribunal's decision on sanction was communicated to him. This included requesting that
the Office of the Governing Council provide Mr. Hllll's counsel with advance notice that
the decision would be released to permit him to make any necessary arrangements with
CAPS and/or Crisis Services to ensure that Mr. H . received the supports he needed.
Such advance notice is not routinely requested or offered by the University in respect of the
release of Tribunal decisions.
10.

The day after the hearing, on April 9, 2015, Christopher Lang, Director, Appeals,

Discipline and Faculty Grievances, Office of the Governing Council, sent an email to Tina
Lie, counsel for the University, and Mr. Bastien, advising that the Tribunal might not have a
decision on sanction that week. A copy of the email exchange from April 9 to 15, 2015
between Mr. Lang, Ms. Lie and Mr. Bastien, regarding the arrangements that Mr. Bastien
would make for Mr. H. ., is included in the JBD at Tab 4.
11.

On April 30, 2015, Mr. Lang sent an email to Ms. Lie and Mr. Bastien, advising that

his office had just received draft reasons from the Chair of the Tribunal, and giving "a
heads-up in case there are arrangements" that needed to be made. A copy of the email
exchange that day between Mr. Lang and Mr. Bastien is included in the JBD at Tab 5.
12.

On May 19, 2015, Mr. Lang sent an email to Ms. Lie and Mr. Bastien, advising that

the Tribunal decision had been finalized. In response, Ms. Lie and Mr. Bastien discussed
the arrangements that needed to be made to ensure that the necessary supports were in

3

place for Mr.

. A copy of the email exchange that day between Mr. Lang, Ms. Lie

and Mr. Bastien is included in the JBD at Tab 6.

13.

The next day, on May 20, 2015, Natalie Ramtahal, then Coordinator, Appeals,

Discipline and Faculty Grievances, Office of the Governing Council, released the decision of
the Tribunal, dated May 19, 2015, by email, to Ms. Lie and Mr. Bastien. In its decision, the
Tribunal ordered that:

(a)

Mr. H

be suspended for a period of three years from the date of the

decision;
(b)

a notation be placed on Mr.

's academic transcript for a period of four

years; and
(c)

the decision be published with Mr. • · s name withheld

(collectively, the "Sanction").

A copy of the email from Ms. Ramtahal, together with the

Tribunal's decision dated May 19, 2015, is included in the JBD at Tab 7.
14.

That day, on May 20, 2015, the University decided not to implement the Sanction in

the University's system (the Repository of Student Information ("ROSI")) and record it on
Mr.

rllllllll's transcript until it received confirmation that the Sanction had been

communicated to Mr.

, with the appropriate supports in place. A copy of an email

exchange between Yvette Ali, Associate Faculty Registrar, Records & Registration, Faculty
of Arts & Science, and Dr. Kristi Gourlay, Manager and Academic Integrity Officer, Office of
Student Academic Integrity, regarding the implementation of the Sanction is included in the
JBD at Tab 8. In the ordinary course, the University implements sanctions imposed by the
Tribunal immediately. However, the University decided not to implement the Sanction for
Mr.

15.

HIIIIIIII on May 20, 2015 out of concern for Mr. H - ' s mental health and well-being.
On May 21 and 28, 2015, Ms. Lie sent emails to Mr. Bastien to request confirmation

that the Sanction had been communicated to Mr. H . , so that the University could
proceed to implement the Sanction. On May 29, 2015, Mr. Bastien advised that a meeting
was scheduled for Monday, June 1, 2015 at 3:00 pm at CAPS.
4

H.
16.

On Monday, June 1, 2015 at 3:00 pm, the Sanction was communicated to Mr.
at CAPS. Accordingly, as of the afternoon of June 1, 2015, Mr. - w a s aware

that the Tribunal had ordered, among other things, that he be suspended for three years
commencing on May 19, 2015 (the date of the decision) and that a notation be placed on
his transcript for four years.
17.

The next day, on June 2, 2015, at 8:22 am, Mr. Bastien sent Ms. Lie an email in

which he confirmed that the Sanction had been communicated to Mr. H

. A copy of the

email exchange from May 21 to June 2, 2015 between Ms. Lie and Mr. Bastien is included
in the JBD at Tab 9.
18.

Ms. Lie was on vacation at the time that Mr. Bastien sent his email on June 2, 2015.

H..

Accordingly, she did not immediately notify the University that the Sanction had been
communicated to Mr.

The next day, on June 3, 2015, at 12:26 pm, Janice

Patterson, Ms. Lie's assistant, sent an email to Mr. Bastien asking for confirmation that the
Sanction had been communicated. That day, at 2:56 pm, Mr. Bastien confirmed again that
the Sanction was communicated to Mr.

HIIIIIIII on Monday, June 1, 2015. A copy of the

email exchange on June 3, 2015 between Ms. Patterson, Mr. Bastien and Ms. Lie is
included in the JBD at Tab 10.
19.

On June 3, 2015, at 6:20 pm, Ms. Lie advised Ms. Ali that the Sanction had been

communicated to Mr.

~

and that the University could proceed to implement the

Sanction. A copy of Ms. Lie's email to Ms. Ali is included in the JBD at Tab 11.
20.

Mr. H

knew that the University had delayed implementing the Sanction,

including by entering it into ROSI and on Mr. - · s transcript, out of concern for his
mental health and well-being.

D.

Mr.H

21.

On June 2, 2015 at 2:45 pm, and on June 3, 2015 from 10:29 to 11 :22 am, Mr.

's requests for transcripts and letters

requested a total of ten transcripts and paid the corresponding fee using Student
5

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - --- ----·-----·-· -

Web Services ("SWS"). SWS is an online service that provides students with access to
their records in ROSI, and to request official transcripts in exchange for a fee.

To Mr.

- • s knowledge, the Sanction had not yet been implemented in ROSI and on his
transcript, at the time he submitted the requests. A copy of Mr.

's SWS Activity Log

for June 2 and 3, 2015 is included in the JBD at Tab 12.
22.

On June 2, 2015, Mr. H

spoke with Savitri Rose, Registrarial Clerk,

Woodsworth College on the phone in which he requested that Woodsworth College provide
him with letters regarding his academic status at the University.

Ms. Rose asked Mr.

H . t o send his request to her in an email.
23.

On June 3, 2015, at 10:01 am, Mr.

sent an email to Ms. Rose, in which he

wrote:
Hi Savitri,
Good morning. Thanks for taking the time to talk to me on the phone yesterday. My
student number is I need a total of 10 letters - here are the details:
4 copies to Immigration Canada containing:

" o■ is a full time student in good standing at the University
•

Expected to graduate in June 2017

4 copies to "To whom it may concern"

• olll is a full time student in good standing at the University
•

Expected to graduate in June 2017

2 copies to "CPA Ontario"

•
•

o■

is a full time student in good standing at the University
Expected to graduate in June 2017

Thanks!

24.

That day, Mr. Rose forwarded Mr. - s email to Jennifer Guyatt, Associate

Registrar, Woodsworth College, who forwarded the email to Dr. Gourlay, asking if the
outcome of the Tribunal had been reported. A copy of Mr. H . ' s email, as well as Ms.

6

Rose's email to Ms. Guyatt and Ms. Guyatt's email to Dr. Gourlay, is included in the JBD at
Tab 13.

E.

Meeting with Dean's Designate

25.

On August 5, 2015, Mr. -

met with Professor John Britton, Dean's Designate

for Academic Integrity for the Faculty of Arts and Science to discuss the allegation that he
had violated the Code by engaging in the conduct described above. Mr. the meeting with his counsel, Mr. Bastien.

Mr.

attended

r-.il admits that Professor Britton

provided the warning that was required to be given to him under the Code.

26.

Mr. -

F.

Admissions and acknowledgements

27.

Mr.
(a)

denied that he had committed an academic offence at the meeting.

admits that:

He knew on April 8, 2015, the day of the Tribunal hearing, that he would likely
be suspended by the Tribunal.

(b)

He was notified on June 1, 2015 that the Tribunal had ordered that he be
suspended for three years, commencing on May 19, 2015.

(c)

He knew that the University had delayed implementing the Sanction until it
received

confirmation from

his counsel that the Sanction had been

communicated to him, out of concern for his mental health and well-being.
(d)

When he requested the ten transcripts using SWS on June 2 and 3, 2015, he
knew that the transcripts that he requested did not accurately reflect his
academic record and standing with the University. In particular, he knew that
the Sanction had not yet been entered into ROSI and on his transcript. By
requesting the transcripts, he intended to obtain ten transcripts that did not
accurately reflect his academic record and standing, with the intention of
7

uttering, circulating or making use of those records, in violation of sections
B.I1.2 and B.l.3(a) of the Code.
(e)

When he sent Ms. Rose his email on June 3, 2015, in which he requested ten
letters from Woodsworth College, he knew that:
(i)

he was not in "good standing" with the University.

In particular, he

knew that he had been suspended by the University for academic
misconduct; and
(ii)

he was not expected to graduate from the University in June 2017. In
particular, he knew that he was suspended from the University until
May 19, 2018, and needed to accumulate an additional 10 credits
before he would be eligible to graduate.

By misrepresenting his academic record and standing in his email to Ms.
Rose, he altered or falsified his academic record, in violation of section

H.

B.l.3(a) of the Code.

28.

Mr.
(a)

acknowledges that:

the Provost of the University of Toronto has made no representations or
promises as to what sanction the Provost will seek in this case; and

(b)

he is signing this ASF freely and voluntarily, knowing of the potential
consequences he faces, and does so having been given the chance to obtain
the advice of legal counsel and having done so.

Signed on March 13, 2016.

8

Signed on March 14-, 2016.

rinale
Assistant Discipline Counsel
University of Toronto
Doc 1727582 v2

9

APPENDIX 2
THE UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL OF THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
IN THE MATTER OF charges of academic dishonesty made on January 18, 2016,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters, 1995,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Act, 1971, S.O. 1971, c. 56 as amended S.O.
1978, c.88

BETWEEN:

THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
- AND -

AGREED STATEMENT OF FACTS ON PENALTY

1.

This hearing arises out of charges of academic misconduct filed by the Provost of

the University of Toronto (the "Provost") under the Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters
("Code"). For the purposes of the penalty phase of this hearing, the Provost and

vllrll

~ ("Mr. ~ " ) have prepared this Agreed Statement of Facts on Penalty

-

("ASF on Penalty").

2.

The Provost and Mr. ~ agree that each document attached to this ASF on

Penalty may be admitted into evidence before the Tribunal for all purposes without further
need to prove the document.

A.

Prior Offence - Winter 2012

3.

In Winter 2012, Mr. ~ was enrolled in ECO100Y1 (Introduction to Economics),

which was taught by Dr. Gusatvo lndart. On or about February 17, 2012, M r . ~ wrote
Term Test 3 in ECO100Y1, which was worth 16.67% of his final grade in the course.

1

4.

On or about February 27, 2012, the graded Term Test 3 was returned to Mr. ~ -

Mr. ~ received a mark of 80/100. The solution to the test was posted on the course
website and students were given seven days from February 27, 2012 to submit their test
papers for remarking, if they wished.

5.

Mr. ~ submitted his Term Test 3 to Dr. lndart for remarking within the seven

day period.

In his submission, Mr. ~ indicated that the explanations to three of the

multiple choice questions were marked incorrectly and questioned the marking of several
multi-part questions.
6.

Dr. lndart reviewed Mr. ~ s request to remark Term Test 3 and determined -

with one exception - that for each of the questions that Mr.

~

had identified for

remarking, there was either no merit in the request or the answer appeared to have been
altered after the test paper was returned to Mr. ~ - The one exception related to one
multi-part question, which was marked incorrectly for all students.
7.

On March 7, 2012, before the remarked test papers were returned to students

(including to Mr. ~ ) and before Dr. lndart discussed his concerns with Mr. ~ · s
test paper with him, Dr. lndart announced in class that some students appeared to be
abusing the system by requesting a remarking of the test without proper cause and/or by
submitting altered test papers for remarking.

Dr. lndart also mentioned in class that he

sometimes photocopied test papers before returning them to students in order to detect
alterations.
8.

Shortly after Dr. lndart's announcement in class, on March 7, 2012, Mr. ~

contacted Dr. lndart to request an appointment.

The next day, on March 8, 2012, Mr.

~ met with Dr. lndart and admitted to altering some of his answers on the test paper

that he had submitted for remarking. The matter was subsequently forwarded to the Dean's
office.
9.

On April 12, 2012, Mr. ~ met with Professor Adrienne Hood, Dean's Designate

for Academic Integrity for the Faculty of Arts and Science, and Dr. Gourlay regarding the
2

allegation of academic misconduct.

Mr. ~ admits that Professor Hood provided the

warning that was required to be given to him under the Code.

10.

During the meeting on April 12, 2012, Mr. ~ admitted that he had altered his

test paper for Term Test 3 before submitting it for remarking, and he knew that it was wrong
to do so. He explained that his parents were divorced and he was under a lot of pressure to
take care of his sister and mother. He had studied very hard for Term Test 3, but suffered
from test anxiety, and was ultimately disappointed with his grade. He was apologetic for his
conduct. He described his conduct as shameful and explained that it was his shame that
caused him to confess to altering the test paper to Dr. lndart. He stated that he had learned
his lesson and the importance of ethics and integrity.

11.

Professor Hood and Dr. Gourlay advised Mr. ~ that the typical penalty for a

serious offence of the nature that Mr. ~ had committed was a zero in the course and a
suspension of some length.

However, Professor Hood advised Mr.

~

that she

appreciated the fact that he was honest with both her and Dr. lndart, including by
proactively approaching Dr. lndart to admit his mistake.

As a result, Professor Hood

imposed a more lenient sanction of:

(a)

a zero for Term Test 3 and a further grade reduction equivalent to the value
of the test (16.67%) in ECO1 00Y1; and

(b)

an annotation on Mr. ~ s transcript from March 1, 2012 to February 28,
2014.

12.

On April 17, 2012, Professor Hood sent an email to Mr. ~ . summarizing their

meeting of April 12, 2012 and imposing the sanction described above.

Professor Hood

concluded her letter by stating:
I strongly recommend that you seek the advice of your registrar regarding your academic
goals and how best to achieve them while adhering to the highest standard of academic
integrity. If you suffer from test/exam anxiety, there are resources at the University to
assist you in developing strategies to overcome this challenge.

3

While I trust that you have learned from this experience, this letter is a warning to you
that all future academic work must be conducted in accordance with the rules and
regulations of the University, with which you are expected to be familiar. If you should
come to my attention again for another allegation of academic misconduct, the
consequences will be much more severe.

13.

A copy of Professor Hood's email is attached at Tab 1. Mr. ~ acknowledges

that Professor Hood's letter accurately describes the contents of their meeting on April 12,
2012.
14.

On or about May 4, 2012, Mr. ~ sent a letter to Professor Edith Hillan, Vice-

Provost, Faculty and Academic Life, requesting reconsideration of the sanction imposed by
Professor Hood. A copy of Mr. ~ s letter is attached at Tab 2.
15.

On or about June 1, 2012, Professor Hood sent Professor Hillan a response to Mr.

~ s request for reconsideration of the sanction. A copy of Professor Hood's letter is
attached at Tab 3.
16.

On

June

15,

2012,

Professor

Hillan dismissed

Mr.

~s

request for

reconsideration of the sanction. A copy of Professor Hillan's letter is attached at Tab 4.

B.

Prior Offence- Fall 2013

17.

On June 13, 2014, M r . ~ was charged under the Code as follows:
On or about September 13, 2013, you knowingly forged or in any other way altered or
falsified an academic record, and/or uttered, circulated or made use of such forged,
altered or falsified academic record, namely, a transcript that you submitted to a
prospective employer, contrary to section B.l.3(a) of the Code.

18.

On April 8, 2015, the Tribunal convened to hear the charge.

Mr. ~ pleaded

guilty. He admitted, among other things, that:
(a)

On or about September 12, 2013, he submitted an application for a summer
internship program with the Canadian Automobile Association ("CAA").

His

application included a document purporting to be his academic history with
4

the University of Toronto (the "Purported Academic History"). The Purported
Academic History did not include Mr. ~ ' s academic record in Fall 2011
and Winter 2012; and
(b)

when Mr. ~ submitted his application to CAA, the annotation respecting
his sanction for academic misconduct in ECO1 00Y1 remained on his
transcript.

He deliberately omitted his academic record in Fall 2011 and

Winter 2012 from his application to CAA in order to conceal from CAA both
his grade in ECO1 00Y1 and the annotation relating to his prior academic
misconduct.
19.

On May 19, 2015, the Tribunal released its decision.

The Tribunal imposed the

following sanction on Mr. ~ :
(a)

that the Student be suspended for a period of three years from the date of this
decision;

(b)

that a notation be on his academic transcript for a period of four years; and,

(c)

that the obligation of this decision be done by the University with the name of the
Student withheld

20.

A copy of the Tribunal's decision is attached at Tab 5.

C.

Acknowledgements

21.

M r . ~ acknowledges that:
(a)

the Provost has advised Mr. ~ of his right to obtain legal counsel and
that Mr. ~ has done so; and

(b)

he is signing this ASF on Penalty freely and voluntarily, knowing of the
potential consequences he faces, and does so with the advice of counsel.

5

Signed on March/~~2016.

Signed on March l7. 2016.
Tina~
Assistant Discipline Counsel
University of Toronto
Doc 1746806 v1

6

