Case No. 1475
THE UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
IN THE MATTER OF charges of academic dishonesty filed on March 2, 2023,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters,
1995,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Act, 1971, S.O. 1971, c. 56 as am. S.O.
1978, c. 88
B E T W E E N:
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
- and H

Z

REASONS FOR DECISION
Hearing Date: May 16, 2023, via Zoom
Members of the Panel:
Alexandra Clark, Chair
Professor Faye Mishna, Faculty Panel Member
Jennifer Chen, Student Panel Member
Appearances:
Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg Rothstein LLP
Joseph Berger, Co-Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg Rothstein LLP
Chew Chang, Representative for the Student, Chang Legal & Notary Public
Hearing Secretary:
Carmelle Salomon-Labbé, Associate Director, Office of Appeals, Discipline and Faculty
Grievances
In Attendance:
H
Z

2
A.

Charges

1.

On May 16, 2023, this panel of the University Tribunal held a hearing to consider the

charges brought by the University of Toronto (the “University”) against H

Z

(the

“Student”) under the Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters, 1995 (the “Code”).
2.

Those charges were set out in a letter to the Student dated March 2, 2023, as follows:
1.

On or about December 19, 2020, you knowingly had someone personate you at the final exam
in MGAB03H3 (the “Course”), contrary to sections B.I.1(c) and B.II.2 of the Code.

2.

In the alternative, on or about December 19, 2020, you knowingly obtained unauthorized
assistance in connection with the final exam in the Course, contrary to sections B.I.1(b) and
B.II.2 of the Code.

3.

In the further alternative, on or about December 19, 2020, you knowingly engaged in a form
of cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or misrepresentation not otherwise
described in the Code in order to obtain academic credit or other academic advantage of any
kind in connection with the final exam you submitted in the Course, contrary to section B.I.3(b)
of the Code.

3.

The Student is currently an undergraduate student at the University of Toronto

Scarborough (“UTSC”). She participated in the hearing and was represented by a Licensed
Paralegal.
B.

Evidence Tendered

4.

The Provost tendered an Agreed Statement of Facts executed by the Student on April 30,

2023, and by Assistant Discipline Counsel on May 2, 2023 (the “ASF”) and an attached Joint Book
of Documents (the “Joint Book”). The Student agreed that these documents should be accepted
and reviewed by the panel. The summary of events set out below is drawn from the ASF and the
Joint Book.

3
5.

The Student has been enrolled at UTSC since the Fall 2019 term. She has completed 19.0

credits and has a cumulative grade point average of 2.81.
6.

In the Fall 2020 academic term, the Student was enrolled in the Couse, which bore the title

“Introduction to Management Accounting”. The Course was taught by Professor Douglas Kong.
7.

The Course’s syllabus emphasized the importance of academic integrity and provided a

link to the Code. Further, on December 10, 2020, the Chair of the Department of Management
sent a letter via the University’s intranet to all registered Management and Economics Students.
This letter reminded students that all answers provided in their upcoming examinations, which
would be held online due to the COVID-19 pandemic, should be their own answers. Students were
provided a link to the Code and were reminded that receiving help during an examination or using
answers provided by someone else was a violation of the Code.
8.

The final exam in the Course took place on Saturday, December 19, 2020, from 8:00 a.m.

to 10:00 a.m. Eastern Daylight Time and was administered online (the “Final Exam”). The Final
Exam was weighted to account for a total of 40% of students’ final marks in the Course.
9.

The Final Exam contained 10 multiple choice questions and 4 multi-part written questions,

and was written using an online program called Quercus.
10.

On December 19, 2020, at 9:17 a.m. while the Final Exam was in progress, Professor Kong

received an email from an individual identifying herself as Jennifer. Jennifer wrote that she had
been paid by a tutoring company to write the Final Exam for the Student. Jennifer provided
Professor Kong with the Student’s log-in credentials including the Student’s Quercus username
and password. Jennifer wrote that she felt guilty and that her actions were unfair to honest students

4
but that if she stopped writing the exam all of her salary owing from the tutoring company would
be forfeited.
11.

At approximately 9:33 a.m. on December 19, 2020, Professor Kong responded to Jennifer

and asked that she not continue to write the Final Exam for the Student. Jennifer replied in an email
to Professor Kong at 9:50 a.m. indicating that she had already submitted some answers on the
Student’s behalf. She said that she would let the remaining time to write the Final Exam elapse
without submitting any further answers.
12.

Professor Kong engaged in follow-up email correspondence with Jennifer to obtain

additional information regarding the tutoring company. On December 23, 2020, Jennifer provided
the following additional information:
(a)

A student could pay the tutoring company for exam writing services and the
tutoring company would then assign a tutor to write his or her exam. The student
would not be told who the exam writer would be and would not have any direct
communications with the exam writer;

(b)

The tutoring company initially asked Jennifer to write two final exams for the
Student (the Course and MGHB02H3), but in the end Jennifer was only engaged to
write the Final Exam; and

(c)

Jennifer did not know the full name of the tutoring company, and understood that
it only operated online on WeChat, an instant messaging, social media, and mobile
payment application. Jennifer had first seen an advertisement for the tutoring
company on a “Yorkbbs” forum and had communicated with the tutoring company
over WeChat.

13.

The Student’s Final Exam answers were submitted on December 19, 2020. Answers were

submitted for all of the multiple-choice questions 1 through 10. Of the multiple-choice questions,

5
all but question 9 were answered correctly. The Student received a score of 22.5/25 on the multiplechoice questions. Questions 11 through 14 were short answer written questions. No answers were
submitted on the Student’s behalf for Questions 11 or 14. Answers were submitted on the Student’s
behalf for Questions 12 and 13 and the Student received scores of 8/10 and 4/27 respectively. The
Student received an overall grade of 34.5/100 on the Final Exam.
14.

On June 1, 2021, the Student met with Professor Christine Berkowitz, Dean’s Designate

for Academic Integrity at UTSC, to discuss the allegation that the Student had paid someone to
write her Final Exam. The meeting was conducted over Zoom and the Student was joined at this
meeting by legal counsel. The Student acknowledged that Professor Berkowitz had provided her
with the Dean’s warning contained in the Code.
15.

The Student initially asserted that she had written the Final Exam on her own. After a brief

recess, the Student returned to the meeting and admitted that she had paid someone to write the
Final Exam for her.
16.

The Student explained that she was under a significant amount of pressure from her parents

to succeed and was nervous about doing poorly in the Course. The Student advised that she had
received a grade of 29% in the Course’s midterm exam and was concerned about failing the
Course.
17.

The Student said that, through an online advertisement, she had found a tutoring company

to write the Final Exam for her. The Student indicated that she did not have any information about
the specific individual whom the tutoring company had paid to write the Final Exam for her.

6
18.

The Student admitted that she had not written the Final Exam. The Student admitted that

she had committed an academic offence by paying for someone else to write the Final Exam for
her. Specifically, she provided her Quercus username and password to the tutoring company so
that someone paid by that company could write the Final Exam on her behalf.
19.

In our view, the Provost’s evidence, which was admitted on consent, establishes to the

required standard of proof that the Student is guilty of Charge 1. In light of our finding regarding
Charge 1, the Provost withdrew Charge 2 and Charge 3.
C.

Sanction

20.

The Provost sought an order imposing the following sanctions on the Student:
(a)

a final grade of zero in the Course;

(b)

a suspension from the University of Toronto for a period of five years from the date
of the Tribunal’s order; and

(c)

a notation of the sanction on her academic record and transcript from the date of
the Tribunal’s order to the date of her graduation from the University.

(d)

This case shall be reported to the Provost for publication of a notice of the decision
of the Tribunal and the sanction or sanctions imposed in the University of Toronto
newspapers, with the name of the Student withheld.

21.

Assistant Discipline Counsel submitted a book of authorities, including a chart

summarizing the sanctions imposed in the cases submitted. We found that these authorities
provided a helpful summary of the sanctions that are normally imposed by the Tribunal in cases
involving findings that a student has paid to have someone personate them in a test or final exam.

7
22.

We are conscious that the Tribunal, in determining the appropriate sanction in a given case,

should generally consider the factors set out in the decision of the University of Toronto and Mr.
C (Case No. 1976/77-3, November 5, 1976), namely (a) the character of the person charged; (b)
the likelihood of a repetition of the offence; (c) the nature of the offence committed; (d) any
extenuating circumstances surrounding the commission of the offence; (e) the detriment to the
University occasioned by the offence; and (f) the need to deter others from committing a similar
offence.
23.

Cases such as the University of Toronto and S.J. (Case No. 1423, January 3, 2023), the

University of Toronto and F.Z. (Case No. 1243, December 20, 2022), the University of Toronto
and P.L. (Case No. 1211, September 23, 2021) and the University of Toronto and M.A. (Case No.
837, August 31, 2016) show that for students with no prior offences, and who entered into an
agreed statement of facts with the Provost, a conviction for paying to have someone personate
them in a test or exam invariably results in a mark of zero in the affected course. The cases tendered
by Assistant Discipline Counsel likewise show that a suspension of five years, and an equivalent
notation or a notation until graduation are generally imposed in addition to the mark of zero. We
were therefore satisfied that the sanctions proposed by the Provost were proportional to those that
have been awarded in similar cases.
24.

On behalf of the Student, Mr. Chang pointed out that she had admitted the offence at the

very outset of the disciplinary process in June of 2021. He stated that the Student was very
remorseful for her actions and agreed with the penalties of a mark of zero in the Course, and of a
notation until graduation.

8
25.

He proposed, however, that the Student should receive a four year rather than a five year

suspension. The reason for this proposal was that the Student had been waiting for just under two
years for a hearing before the Tribunal, and that this period of waiting and uncertainty has been
very stressful for the Student.
26.

Assistant Discipline Counsel agreed that the wait for a hearing date in this case had been

somewhat longer than normal due to a high volume of cases engendered by the COVID-19
pandemic. Mr. Chang acknowledged that he did not have any precedents to support his request for
a four year suspension, and that all of the precedents provided by the Provost contained a
suspension of at least five years.
27.

The panel retired to consider the appropriate sanctions in this case. We decided to impose

a suspension of five years rather than four years principally because the Student had been
continuously enrolled in the University since the date of the offence and had, in fact, recently
completed all of the courses required to complete her program.
28.

While the wait for a hearing had undoubtedly been stressful for her, it had nevertheless

allowed the Student to complete her studies. Given the gravity of the offence that she had admitted
to, which is one of the most serious contemplated by the Code, we felt that a five year suspension
was necessary to meet the goals of both specific and general deterrence in this case.
29.

At the conclusion of the hearing, and for the reasons outlined above, we signed an order

imposing the following sanctions on the Student:
(a)

a final grade of zero in the Course;

(b)

a suspension from the University of Toronto for a period of five years from the date of
the Tribunal’s order;

9
(c)

a notation of the sanction on her academic record and transcript from the date of the
Tribunal’s order to the date of her graduation from the University; and

(d)

this case shall be reported to the Provost for publication of a notice of the decision of the
Tribunal and the sanction or sanctions imposed in the University of Toronto newspapers,
with the name of the student withheld.

Dated at Toronto, this 17th day of July, 2023.
Original signed by:
____________________________________
Alexandra Clark, Chair
On behalf of the panel

