Case #681

   DATE: May 14, 2013
   PARTIES: University of Toronto v. A.K.
   Hearing Date(s): February 11, 2013
   Panel Members:
   Mr. Paul Morrison, Chair
   Prof. Faye Mishna, Faculty Member
   Ms. Jenna Jacobson, Student Member
   Appearances:
   Robert Centa, Assistant Discipline Counsel for the University
   In Attendance:
   Don Dewees, Deans' Designate
   Christopher Lang, Director, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances

   Trial Division â s. B.i.1(a) of the Code â forged documents â submitted
   petition containing information known to be false and forged death
   certificates â Student did not attend hearing â Agreed Statement of
   Facts â guilty plea accepted â Joint Submission on Penalty â grade
   assignment of zero in five courses; recommendation that the Student be
   expelled; five-year suspension; report to Provost for publication

   Student charged with fifteen offences under s. B.i.1(a) and in the
   alternative, one charge under s. B.i.3(b) of the Code . The charges
   related to an allegation that the Student, on five distinct occasions
   over several years, filed petitions to defer examinations or (in one
   case) to request late withdrawal without academic penalty that the
   student knew contained false information and forged, altered or
   falsified documents, including death certificates for various
   individuals sharing the Studentâs last name. The Student did not attend
   the hearing, but the panel was satisfied notice requirements were met
   on the basis of a consent filed by the University and the hearing and
   therefore proceeded. The Student pleaded guilty to the charges and the
   matter proceeded by way of an agreed statement of facts. The Panel
   accepted the Studentâs guilty plea. The University nevertheless
   withdrew the alternative charge and the Student was found guilty of
   fifteen offences. The parties submitted a joint submission on penalty.
   The Panel observed the seriousness of the offences. The Panel noted
   that to reject a joint submission the Panel would have to conclude that
   accepting the joint submission would bring the administration of
   justice into disrepute. The Panel concluded this was not such a case
   and therefore accepted the joint submission on penalty. The Panel
   imposed a final grade of zero in five courses, a recommendation that
   the Student be expelled from the University, a five-year suspension,
   and ordered that the case be reported to the Provost for publication.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12802
