Case 1471

FILE:

   Case #1471 (2023-2024)

DATE:

   October 4, 2023

PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v A.L. (‚the Student‚)

HEARING DATE(S):

   June 16, 2023, via Zoom

PANEL MEMBERS:

   Alexi Wood, Chair

   Professor Alex Koo, Faculty Panel Member

   Garrick Burron, Student Panel Member

APPEARANCES:

   William Webb, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg
   Rothstein LLP

   Sanghyun Park, Summer Student, Paliare Roland Rosenberg Rothstein LLP

NOT IN ATTENDANCE:

   The Student

HEARING SECRETARY:

   Samanthe Huang, Coordinator & Hearing Secretary, Office of Appeals,
   Discipline and Faculty Grievances

   The Student was charged with three counts of knowingly using or
   possessing unauthorized aid(s) or obtaining unauthorized assistance in
   connection with a final exam in two courses, and an assignment in
   another course, contrary to s. B.i.1(b) of the Code of Behaviour on
   Academic Matters, 1995 (‚Code‚). In the alternative, the Student was
   also charged with three counts of knowingly representing as their own,
   an idea or expression of an idea or work of another in a final exam in
   two course, and an assignment in another course, contrary to s.
   B.i.1(d) of the Code. In the further alternative, the Student was
   charged with three counts of knowingly engaging in a form of cheating,
   academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or misrepresentation not
   otherwise described in the Code in order to obtain academic credit or
   other academic advantage in connection with two exams and an
   assignment, contrary to s. B. i.3(b) of the Code.

   Neither the Student nor a representative for the Student appeared at
   the hearing. The University filed evidence outlining their attempts to
   serve and contact the Student. Various documents, including the Notice
   of Electronic Hearing, were sent to the Student via their utoronto
   email address. The University attempted to reach the Student via
   telephone at the two telephone numbers listed in ROSI but the person
   that answered both numbers indicated that they were not the Student and
   did not know anyone by the Student‚s name. The Panel also received
   evidence that the last time someone accessed the Student‚s email
   address was in December of 2022. The Panel noted that s. 7 of the
   Statutory Powers Procedure Act (‚SPPA‚) and rule 21 of the University
   Tribunal Rules of Practice and Procedure (‚Rules‚) outline that the
   Tribunal may proceed in the absence of a student where reasonable
   notice was given. Furthermore, when proceeding in the absence of a
   student, the University must demonstrate it took reasonable steps to
   notify the Student of the charges and the hearing. The Panel further
   noted that pursuant to rule 13 of the Rules, a Notice of Hearing may be
   served on a Student by various means including emailing a copy of the
   document to the Student‚s email address as recorded in the Repository
   of Student Information (‚ROSI‚). The Panel found that the University
   complied with the SPPA and the Rules and demonstrated that it took
   reasonable steps to notify the Student of the charges and the hearing.
   The Panel determined it would proceed to hear the matter on its merits
   in the absence of the Student.

   At the outset of the hearing, the University advised the Panel that
   they were withdrawing one count of each of the charges in relation to
   the final exam in one of the courses. The Panel did not hear any
   evidence with respect to those charges. Regarding the charges stemming
   from a final exam in the other course, the Professor found that the
   answer to a similar question was posted on a website called
   ‚Slader.com,‚ a website that ‚verify solutions and answer when students
   have questions.‚ The Panel received evidence that the answer on
   Slader.com contained striking and unusual similarities to the Student‚s
   answer to one of the questions on their exam. The Panel also received
   evidence from the department‚s representative for academic integrity
   who outlined that he met with the Student online in 2021 and the
   Student admitted to having a second monitor during the final exam and
   was part of a group chat where they received screen shots of answers
   from the final exam. Regarding the charges related to the assignment in
   the third course, the Panel received evidence that the Student
   submitted an assignment which contained the answer to a question that
   was from an assignment in a different section of the same course. The
   Panel considered the Professor‚s evidence that the Student‚s answers to
   the assignment were similar answers to those of another student in a
   different section of the same course. Furthermore, their answers used
   the same words in the same order, the same punctuation, the same
   structure, and tables. Based on the evidence before it, the Panel found
   the Student guilty of one count of knowingly using or possessing an
   unauthorized aid or aids or obtaining unauthorized assistance, contrary
   to s. B.i.1(b) of the Code and one count of knowingly representing as
   their own, an idea or expression of an idea or work of another in an
   assignment, contrary to s. B.i.1(d) of the Code. The University
   withdrew the remaining charges made in the alternative.

   In determining sanction, the Panel considered the factors and
   principles related to sanction outlined in University of Toronto and
   Mr. C. (Case No. 1976/77-3, November 5, 1976). The Panel noted that the
   Student did not participate in the hearing, and therefore chose to
   forgo their opportunity to provide evidence on mitigation. Furthermore,
   the Panel had no evidence before it to explain their actions, nor did
   the Panel have any information regarding what, if any, sanctions the
   other individuals in the group chat received or the other student whose
   assignment was similar. The Panel noted that there were several factors
   that weighed in favour of a severe penalty, including the seriousness
   of the offence, the fact that the Student engaged in misconduct while
   they were already under investigation for a separate allegation of
   misconduct, the detriment to the University, and the need to deter
   others from committing similar offences. The Panel was concerned about
   the length of time it took to prosecute this case. The University
   argued that even with the delay, the time sought for suspension and
   transcript notation was appropriate since in exceptional circumstances
   a penalty can be back dated but as outlined in The University of
   Toronto and D.S. (Case No. 451, August 24, 2007), a ‚principled reasons
   must be given for doing so; to do otherwise would result in a wide
   disparity amount sanctions.‚¬  The Panel found that since the Student
   did not participate in the hearing, it had no evidence on which it
   could find a principled reason to depart from the general rule. The
   Panel imposed the following sanctions: a grade of zero in the two
   courses; a three-year suspension; a four-year notation on the
   transcript; and a report to the Provost for publication.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/31311
