Case 1041

DATE:

   December 15, 2020

PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v. D.S. (âthe Studentâ)

HEARING DATES:

   September 28, 2020, via Zoom

Panel Members:

   Mr. Douglas F. Harrison, Chair
   Professor Julian Lowman, Faculty Panel Member
   Ms. Julie Farmer, Student Panel Member

Appearances:

   Ms. Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg
   Rothstein LLP

Not in Attendance:

   The Student

In Attendance:

   Ms. Krista Kennedy, Administrative Clerk & Hearings Secretary, Office
   of the Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances, University of
   Toronto

   TheÂ StudentÂ was charged underÂ s. B.i.1(b) of theâ¯Code of Behaviour
   on Academic Matters, 1995â¯(the âCodeâ) on the basis that heÂ knowingly
   used or possessed an unauthorized aid,Â or aids,Â or obtained
   unauthorized assistance in a final exam. In the alternative,
   theÂ StudentÂ was charged underÂ s.Â B.i.3(b)Â of theÂ CodeÂ on the
   basis that theÂ StudentÂ knowingly engaged in a form of cheating,
   academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or misrepresentationÂ in order
   toÂ obtain academic credit or other academic advantageÂ in connection
   with use or possession ofÂ study notes in a final exam.

   Neither the Student nor a legal representative of
   theÂ StudentÂ appeared at the hearing.â¯The University provided
   evidence that theÂ StudentÂ had been served at his ROSI-listed email
   address with theâ¯chargesâ¯and notice of hearing.Â The
   UniversityâsÂ Policy on Official Correspondence with StudentsÂ provides
   that students enrolled at the University are responsible for
   maintaining current contact information in the Repository of Student
   Information (âROSIâ) database inclusive of a valid University-issued
   email account. Rule 9(c) of theÂ RulesÂ provides that service can
   beÂ effectedÂ on a studentÂ by email to a studentâs email address as
   recorded in ROSI.Â The Panel noted that there was evidence that
   theÂ StudentÂ had accessed his email account after service of
   theâ¯charges andÂ after various emails fromÂ Assistant Discipline
   Counsel enclosing disclosureÂ andÂ requests toÂ scheduleÂ the matter.
   TheÂ StudentÂ was subsequently provided an opportunity to provide
   submissions in relation to the request of Assistant Discipline Counsel
   for this matter to proceed electronically due to the COVID-19 pandemic.
   TheÂ StudentÂ did not respond to this request and the hearing was
   ordered to proceed electronically.Â The charges,Â notice,Â and other
   email correspondence to theÂ StudentÂ went unanswered.Â Â Relying on
   RuleÂ 13 andÂ 17 of theÂ UniversityÂ TribunalâsÂ Rules of Practice and
   ProcedureÂ (âRulesâ)Â andÂ s. 7(3)Â of theÂ Statutory Powers Procedure
   ActÂ (âSPPAâ),Â theÂ Panel ordered that the hearing proceed in
   theÂ StudentâsÂ absence asÂ itÂ found thatÂ reasonable noticeÂ of the
   hearing and chargesÂ had been provided to theÂ Student.

   Regarding the charges laid under s.Â B.i.1(b)Â of theÂ Code, theÂ Panel
   examined the evidence ofÂ Deanâs DesignateÂ and twoÂ Chief Presiding
   OfficersÂ where it was determined that theÂ StudentÂ was
   usingÂ variousÂ studyÂ notes in a final exam
   withoutÂ authorization.Â There was further evidenceÂ that
   theÂ StudentÂ admitted to the Deanâs Designate that he possessed an
   unauthorized aid during the final exam, butÂ theÂ StudentÂ did not
   admit to using it during the exam.Â The PanelÂ outlined that a finding
   of possession of an unauthorized aid does not require any evidence that
   the unauthorized aid was used during the final exam.Â On the
   evidenceÂ presented by the UniversityÂ and the Panelâs review of the
   final exam answer booklet and the study notes,Â theÂ Panel found that
   theÂ StudentÂ was guilty of one count ofÂ knowingly usingÂ or
   possessingÂ an unauthorized aid in a final exam, contrary to section
   B.i.1.(b) of theÂ CodeÂ asÂ the Student had copied a significant amount
   of the material from the study notes into his final exam
   booklet.Â Given the Panelâs finding, the University withdrew the charge
   underâ¯s.Â B.i.3(b)Â of theÂ Code.

   In determining sanction,â¯the Panel considered that
   theÂ StudentÂ brought extensive notes into the final exam and disguised
   those notes by handwriting them in a term exam answer booklet that
   could easily be mistaken for a final exam answer booklet and might
   therefore go unnoticed by the invigilators.Â TheÂ PanelÂ declined
   toÂ accept the Universityâs position on penaltyÂ as the Panel
   foundÂ thatÂ in this case theÂ StudentâsÂ actions were evidence of a
   calculated,Â pre-meditated effort to cheat on the exam, with complete
   disregard forÂ rules at theÂ final exam.Â The PanelÂ further found
   thatÂ academic honesty is a fundamentalÂ principle of the
   UniversityÂ andÂ when a student is foundÂ cheating or flouting the
   rules of the University, the Panel must take a strong standÂ to
   sanction theÂ StudentÂ and send a strong message to the University
   community that these actions will not be tolerated.Â Without the
   Studentâs participation,Â the PanelÂ found no evidence of mitigating
   circumstances or factorsÂ that would prevent the Panel from imposing a
   strong sanction.Â Given the seriousness of the offence the
   PanelÂ imposedÂ the following sanctions:Â a final grade of zero in the
   course;Â a three-yearÂ suspension;Â aÂ four-yearÂ notation on
   transcript; andÂ aÂ publication by theÂ ProvostÂ of a notice of the
   decision and sanctionsâ¯imposedâ¯with theÂ StudentâsÂ name withheld.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/29554
