Case 522

DATE:

   May 5, 2009

PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v. F. M.

Hearing Date(s):

   January 12, 2009

Panel Members:

   Mr. Andrew Pinto, Chair
   Professor Annette Sanger, Faculty Panel Member
   Mr. Song Li, Student Panel Member

Appearances:

   Mr. Robert Centa, Assistant Discipline Counsel
   Professor Grant Allen, Vice-Dean, Undergraduate, Applied Science and
   Engineering
   Ms. Betty-Ann Cambell, Law Clerk, Paliare Roland
   The Student was charged with two offences under s. B.i.1(a) and
   alternatively, two offences under s. B.i.3(b) of the Code. The charges
   related to allegations that the Student submitted for re-grading an
   altered mid-term examination in one course and an altered term test in
   another course. The Student did not attend the hearing and was not
   represented by counsel. There had been no communication from the
   Student in relation to the charges. The Panel considered the efforts
   made by the University to serve the Student, the Policy on Official
   Correspondence with Students and the Statutory Powers Procedure Act and
   found that all reasonable attempts to provide the Student with Notice
   of the hearing had been made. The Panel permitted the hearing to
   proceed in the Studentâs absence. According to evidence submitted by
   the University, the Student denied that the submitted test booklet was
   his own and he claimed that he had asked a friend to submit the
   document on his behalf. The Student claimed that the friend, another
   student, submitted a different test booklet because he wanted to get
   him into trouble. The Student also denied submitting the documents
   regarding the mid-term exam and claimed that the documents submitted
   were not his own. The Student also implicated the other student in the
   events associated with the mid-term exam. The Panel considered the
   method of marking for the courses, the evidence, including testimony
   from the course professors, and the submissions of the University and
   found that the evidence was overwhelming. The Panel returned a finding
   of guilt on the two charges under s. B.i.1(a). The Panel considered the
   case of Mr. S.B. (Nov. 14, 2007) and whether the Studentâs misconduct
   constituted a serious breach of trust giving rise to at least a
   two-year suspension and whether a two-year suspension should be imposed
   for each of the Studentâs two infractions. The Panel concluded that the
   penalty requested by the University should be imposed. The Panel found
   that the Student had engaged in an on-going campaign of deception
   beyond the falsification of documents. The Panel found that on the
   balance of probabilities, the examination booklet and midterm test that
   the Student denied having submitted were the Studentâs own. The Panel
   found that the Student denied sending emails from his own email account
   and that his claims regarding his health changed during the course of
   the hearing process. The Panel found that the Studentâs implication and
   naming of a third party was a significant aggravating factor. The Panel
   imposed a grade of zero in the two courses; a four-year suspension; a
   six-year notation on the Studentâs academic record and transcript; and
   that a report be issued to the Provost.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12734
