UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO

IN THE MATTER OF charges of academic dishonesty made on July 22, 2011,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic
Matters, 1995,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Act, 1971, S.O. 1971 , c. 56 as amended
S.O. 1978, C. 88

BETWEEN:
UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
- and -

Hearing Date: November 23, 2011
Members of the Panel:
Mr. William McDowell, Barrister and Solicitor, Chair
Dr. Chris Koenig-Woodyard, Faculty of English, Faculty Panel Member
Mr. Jake Brockman, Student Panel Member

Appeaa·ances:
Mr. Robert Centa, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Banisters
Mr. Damon Chevrier, Registrar St. Michael's College
Ms. Deanne Saunders, Director Academic Services
Professor John Britton, Dean's Designate, Faculty of Arts and Science
In Attendance:
Ms. Betty-Ann Campbell, Law Clerk, Paliare Roland Banisters
Mr. Jason Marin, Administrative Assistant> Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances
Ms. Natalie Ramtahal, Coordinator, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances

Not in Attendance:
Ms. r:1111, the Student

[1]

l9s

Ms.
matter came before the University Tribunal on November 22, 2011. She did
not appear and was convicted in her absence of the offences charged, as set out, inji'c1.
Having heard submissions from counsel for the University, we directed that Ms.
receive the final grade of 0 in the course of specifying the order and that she suspended
from the University for five years. The Tribunal further recommended to the President
that he recommend to the Governing Council that Ms.
be expelled from the
University.

LIi

1=-

[2]

Mr. Centa on behalf of the Provost, presented a Notice of Hearing charging Ms.
with the following:

ra

1.

In December 2010, you knowingly forged or in any other way altered or
falsified a document or evidence required by the University of Toronto, or
uttered, circulated or made use of any such forged, altered or falsified
document, namely, a University of Toronto Student Medical Certificate,
dated December 12, 2010, which you submitted to the Faculty of Arts and
Science Committee on Standing ("Committee") in suppo1t of your request
for academic accommodations or relief, contrary to Section B.1.1 (a) of the
Code.

2.

On February 22, 2011, you knowingly forged or in any other way altered
or falsified a document or evidence required by the University of Toronto,
or uttered, circulated or made use of any such forged, altered or falsified
document, namely, a University of Toronto Student Medical Certificate,
dated Febrnary 15, 2011, which you submitted in support of your request
for academic acconunodations, contrary to Section B.l. l(a) of the Code.

3.

On February 28, 2011, you knowingly forged or in any other way altered
or falsified a document or evidence required by the University of Toronto,
or uttered, circulated or made use of any such forged, altered or falsified
document, namely, a University of Toronto Student Medical Certificate,
dated February 28, 2011, which you submitted in support in suppo11 of
your request for academic accommodations, contrary to Section B.1.1 (a) of
the Code.

4.

On March 1, 2011, you knowingly falsified evidence required by the
University of Toronto, namely, a 11Personal Statement to the Committee on
Standing 11 , which you submitted to the Committee in suppo11 of your
request for academic accommodations or relief, contrary to Section
B.l.l(a) of the Code.

5.

On March I, 20 I I, you knowingly forged or in any other way altered or
falsified a document or evidence required by the University of Toronto, or
uttered, circulated or made use of any such forged, altered or falsified
document, namely, a University of Toronto Student Medical Ce1iificate,
dated December 12, 2010, which you submitted to the Committee in

-3support of your request for academic accommodations or relief, contrary
to Section B.I.l(a) of the Code.

[3]

6.

On April 27, 2011, you knowingly falsified evidence required by the
University of Toronto, namely, a J>ersonal Statement, which you submitted
to the Committee in support of your request for academic accommodation,
contrary to Section B.I.l(a) of the Code.

7.

On April 27, 2011, you knowingly forged or in any other way altered or
falsified a document or evidence required by the University of Toronto, or
uttered, circulated or made use of any such forged, altered or falsified
document, namely, a document that purported to be a University of
Toronto Medical Certificate, dated April 5, 2011, which you sent to the
Commit1ee in supp01t of your request for academic accommodations,
contrary to Section B.I.l(a) of the Code.

8.

In the alternative to each of the charges above, you knowingly engaged in
a form of cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or
misrepresentation not othenvise described in order to obtain academic
credit or other academic advantage of any kind by submitting falsified or
forged documents to the University of Toronto in suppmt of various forms
of academic accommodation or relief, contrary to Section B.1.3(b) of the
Code.

For the reasons which follow, the Tribunal found that patticulars 1 through 7 had been
established. Mr. Centa withdrew charge 8. The Tribunal accepted the submission made
on behalf of the University that Ms
should be expelled.

ra

Service
[4]

Mr. Centa took us through the documents related to notice of the hearing. In brief, the
Assistant Discipline Counsel and his office had attempted to reach Ms.
1·epeatedly
since August 2011. The student had moved from her residence at 4 4 - S t r e e t
and it proved difficult to serve notice. There was a telephone call between Betty-Ann
Campbell, a Jaw clerk who works with the Assistant Discipline Counsel, and Ms.
on November 4, 201 1 and on November 19, 2011 a process server, Mervyn Archdall,
served the student with the disclosure brief and Notice of Hearing. While three days'
notice might be considered in other circumstances to have been short notice for a hearing
of this importance, the student has not appeared, or communicated in any way an
intention to take a position with respect to these proceedings. Accordingly, we directed
that the matter proceed before us.

ra

J:al

The Merits
[5]

We ultimately accepted the allegations in the Notice of Hearing that the student filed a
number of petitions with supporting medical documentation which was found to have
been forged.

-4[6]

On December 12, 2010, Ms. £9 submitted a medical certificate ostensibly signed by
Dr. Paul Arnold which attested to a diagnosis of food poisoning. Ms. {9 also made a
personal statement that claimed that she had suffered from food poisoning together with
the usual gastrointestinal symptoms. The medical certificate was forged, and the personal
statement was false. Curiously, the student attached the business card of Dr. Paul Arnold,
a paediatric psychiatrist at the Hospital for Sick Children, who would not have been a
likely candidate to have made the claimed diagnosis. Dr. Paul Arnold, the psychiatrist,
suggested that there was another physician at the University Health Network of the same
name who practised emergency medicine. Of course, neither physician treated Ms.

Ill·
[7]

On April 27, 2011, the student submitted a petition to the authorities at St. Michael's
College. She explained in her personal statement that medical circumstances required her
to defer writing her final exams:
The reason of my petition is illness. I was determined a
spontaneous pneumothorax at the begim1ing of April. When l went
to the clinic, the doctor told me it was a collection of air in my
chest that causes the lung to collapse, sharp chest pain and
sho1tness breath. After physical examination, he said I needed to
do a chest surgery to repair the hole in my lung. The surgery was
given on April 7, 2011 and although it was successful I am still
required to stay in bed for at least a month. There will be no
outdoor activities allowed for me until I am fully recovered. This is
why I had to miss all my final exams. [the syntax has not been
corrected from the original document]

[8]

In support of this broad request, the student furnished a student medical ce11ificate on the
standard University form with her student number. Asked to describe the nature of the
problem, the physician had written "Spontaneous Pneumothorax, a collection of air in the
chest causes the lung to collapse". The physician went on to answer the question related
to the effect on the "student's ability to meet, or prevent the student from meeting,
academic commitments[... ]" as follows:
The student got a chest surgery [sic]. She is required to stay in bed
for more than one month and she is not allowed to do any other
activities. If worse, admission to emergency is recommended.

[9]

It would appear to a reader of the form that D1·. James McNally, a general practitioner at
the Bay College Medical and Lockwood Diagnostics Clinic on Bay Street near the
University had provided the medical fotm. The form raised suspicion, however, in that
the attending doctor identified himself only as "James M.D." Mr. Chevrier, the Registrar
of St. Michael's College, testified that the signature raised sufficient suspicion that other
medical certificates and documents submitted by the student were examined.

[IO]

Dr. McNally did not appear or give evidence. We admitted a note from a member of his
office staff, one Helena (surname unknown), in answer to an inquiry from Mr. Chevrier

-5of St. Michael's ColJege. Helena offered the sensible view that the note appeared to be
forged and handwritten by the patient in that Dr. McNally did not sign the way it was
written down. The patient was never seen by Dr. McNally and that all the U of T notes
are stamped with a note from the clinic. Thete were apparently no records for the patient
of a visit in 20 I 1. We advised counsel that we did not give much weight to this evidence
having regard to the fact that it was not under oath and that it was not even
correspondence from the physician, but rather from a member of the staff.
[ 11 ]

The student made significant admissions to Professor John Britton. Professor Britton
interviews students who are alleged to have been involved in an academic misconduct.
The University requires, pursuant to the Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters, that
once an investigation is complete, a student be given a warning by the Dean of the
relevant faculty or school or his or her designate. Professor Britton met with Ms. r:tl
and issued the warning in response to which Ms. r:tl advised that she had provided
forged certificates on four occasions. The Code requires that the Dean advise a stlident
that anything that is said in the meeting may be received in evidence against the student
at the hearing of any charge with respect to the alleged offence in question. We are
satisfied that Ms. DIii made the admissions described by Professor Britton during the
comse of their meeting.

[12]

Given that on the occasions on which a forged medical certificate was submitted to the
Committee, and the forgeries were accompanied in each instance by a false personal
statement, we are satisfied that the seven counts of misconduct have been made out as
aUeged.

Penalty
[13]

We were persuaded that this was an appropriate case in which to recommend to the
President that he recommend to Governing Council that it expel the student. We would
likely have made such a finding on penalty if even one forgery had been submitted
together with one false personal statement given the premeditation involved although we
leave that scenario for another day.

[ 14]

In the present case, however, the case for expulsion is extremely strong having regard to
the fact that the student neither appeared before us nor offered any explanation for why
she had acted as she did.

[15]

We have taken account of the factors listed in the matter of Mr. C, November 5, l 976, as
they are set out at page 12 of the reasons of the late John Sopinka Q.C. (as he then was).
The factors are as follows:
a)

the character of the repetition of the offence;

b)

the likelihood of a repetition of the offence;

c)

the nature of the offence committed;

-6-

[16]

d)

any extenuating circumstances surrounding the commission of the offence;

e)

the detriment to the University occasioned by the offence;

t)

the need to deter others from commit1ing a simi lar offence.

ca.

In the present case, we know nothing of the character of Ms.
the likelihood of a
1~e~ tion of the offence, or of any extepuating circumstances. It would have been for Ms.
·~
to lead evidence about these matters. We do think that the principle of deterrence is
important in determination of a fit penalty. ln hindsight, the forgeries appear to be
obvious. Having said that, they were sufficiently credi ble to mislead senior officials in
two pa1is of the University. This to us makes it obvious that any penalty imposed rnust be
sufficient to deter others who might consider engaging in this conduct.

Dated at Toronto, this]~ ay of January, 2012.

l/_
William C. McD\?well, Chair

