Case #954

   DATE: July 31, 2018
   PARTIES: University of Toronto v. C.S. (âthe Studentâ)
   Hearing Date(s):Â  Â  June 15, 2018
   Panel Members:
   Ms. Roslyn M. Tsao, Chair
   Professor Michael Evans, Faculty Panel Member
   Ms. Alanis Ortiz Espinoza, Student Panel Member
   Appearances:
   Mr. Robert A. Centa, Assistant Discipline Counsel for University,
   Paliare Roland Barristers
   Ms. Yadesha Satheaswaran, Summer Law Student, Paliare Roland Barristers
   In Attendance:
   Ms. Nisha Panchal, Student Conduct & Academic Integrity Officer, Office
   of the Dean and
   Vice-Principal, University of Toronto Scarborough
   Ms. Sana Kawar, Manager, University of Toronto Transcript Centre,
   Faculty Arts and Science
   Ms. Tracey Gameiro, Associate Director, Office of Appeals, Discipline
   and Faculty Grievances
   Mr. Sean Lourim, IT Support, Office of the Governing Council
   Not in Attendance:
   The Student
   Trial Division - s. B.i.3(a) â forging or falsifying an academic
   recordÂ  Â â forged transcript â student had not been enrolled at the
   University for a number of years prior to the offenceÂ  âÂ  prior
   academic misconductÂ  âÂ  student not present âÂ  notice provided â
   recommendation of expulsion, suspension of up to five years pending
   expulsion, and a report to the Provost with the Studentâs name withheld
   The Student was charged with one charge of forging or falsifying an
   academic record contrary to s.B.i.3(a) of the Code , or in the
   alternative one charge of academic dishonesty not otherwise described
   contrary to s. B.i.3(b) of the Code . The charge related to a
   transcript that had been submitted in support of the Studentâs
   application to a program at York University.Â  York contacted the
   University to authenticate the transcript that the Student had
   submitted in support of her application, and the Universityâs
   administrator remarked that all of the courses and the grades reported
   on the transcript that had been provided to York were inaccurate.
   The Student did not attend the hearing.Â  The Panel found that adequate
   notice of the hearing had been provided to the Student based on
   evidence that the Student had attended an earlier scheduled hearing and
   had obtained an adjournment. Thereafter, the University had attempted
   to contact her through the contact details in ROSI and had received no
   response.Â  On the basis of affidavit evidence provided by the
   administrator who was asked to verify the transcript, the Panel found
   that the Student was guilty of forging an academic record contrary to
   s.B.i.1(a) of the Code. The University withdrew the alternative charge.
   The University requested: (1) that the Student's degree be suspended
   for a period of up to five years pending expulsion; (2) that the
   Committee recommend that the Student be expelled from the University;
   and (3) that the case be reported to the Provost with the Studentâs
   name withheld.Â  The Panel applied the Mr. C. [Case No. 1976/77-3;
   November 5, 1976] factors, noting that the Student had committed two
   prior offences, forgeries, that had been resolved at the faculty level
   prior to the offence at issue.Â  The goal of individual rehabilitation
   was minimized here because the prior sanctions had failed to deter the
   Student from committing the subsequent, more serious offence in this
   case. Of paramount importance were general deterrence and protection of
   the public â which made expulsion appropriate to ensure that the
   Student did not re-enroll at the University and to prove that the
   University continues to exercise oversight over students after they
   have graduated. The Panel found that the Universityâs proposed sanction
   was in line with other cases and ordered that: (1) the Student be
   suspended for a period of up to five years pending expulsion; (2) a
   recommendation that the Student be expelled; and (3) that the case be
   reported to the Provost with the Studentâs name withheld.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12970
