Case 886

DATE:

   March 16, 2017

PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v. H.L. ("the Student")

Hearing Date(s):

   December 16, 2016

Panel Members:

   Ms. Amanda Heale, Chair
   Professor Pascal Riendeau, Faculty Panel Member
   Ms. Grace Lee, Student Panel Member

Appearances:

   Ms. Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg
   Rothstein LL

In Attendance:

   Ms. Lucy Gaspini, Manager, Academic Integrity & Affairs, Office of the
   Dean, University of Toronto, Mississauga (via Skype)
   Dr. Jaimal Thind, Assistant Professor, Mathematical & Computational
   Sciences, University of Toronto, Mississauga
   Ms. Krista Osbourne, Administrative Clerk and Hearing Secretary, Office
   of Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances
   Mr. Sean Lourim, Technology Assistant, Office of the Governing Council

Not in Attendance:

   The Student

   The Student was charged with one offence of using or possessing an
   unauthorized aid under s. B.i.1(b) of the Code, and alternatively,
   academic dishonesty under s. B.i.3(b) of the Code. The charges related
   to a cell phone found ringing on the student's person during a final
   exam.

   The Student did not attend the hearing. The University proved that
   service of notice was properly attempted. There was no evidence of the
   student actually using the phone. Yet the student was found guilty of
   possessing an unauthorized aid on the testimony of the professor who
   heard it ringing and found it during the exam. The student had been
   properly warned not to have a phone on their person.

   Following the University's submission, the Tribunal imposed a mark of
   zero on the course, a two year suspension, a notation for one year
   longerÂ than the suspension, and publication of the decision with the
   name of the Student withheld. The Tribunal rejected the University's
   request that the suspension not start until 2018, as the student was
   already suspended due to an insufficient grade point average. The
   University argued that a suspension for academic misconduct would have
   no deterrent effect for the period during which it overlapped with the
   academic suspension. The Tribunal found that this would be unduly harsh
   given that the exam paper stated that a "typical penalty" for an
   unauthorized aid was failing the course, that this was a first offence,
   and the lack of evidence that the Student used or intended to use the
   cell phone.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12931
