Case #456

   DATE: information not available
   PARTIES: University of Toronto v. Mr. J.D.
   Hearing Date(s): February 6, 2007
   Members of the Panel:
   Mr. Raj Anand, Chair
   Prof. James Rini, Faculty Panel Member
   Ms. Sara Ageorlo, Student Panel Member
   Appearances:
   Ms. Lily Harmer, Counsel for the University of Toronto
   Mr. Guy Giorno, Counsel for the Student
   Mr. J. D., the Student
   In attendance:
   Professor Susan Pfeiffer, Dean, School of Graduate Studies, & Vice
   Provost, Graduate Education
   Trial Division - s. B.i.1(f)of Code â concoction â altered clinical
   data in thesis â Agreed Statement of Facts â guilty plea â altered
   research included in report and published papers â data altered
   contrary to s. 3(i) of Policy on Ethical Conduct in Research â Agreed
   Statement of Fact silent on details of motive â Joint Submission on
   Penalty â academic status â proposed suspension informed by duration
   Student could be absent from research work - extenuating circumstances
   unique in jurisprudence - academic misconduct admitted despite no
   possibility of discovery - nature of detriment to University unclear -
   no evidence supporting stress experienced by Student and stress not
   unusual in academic life â Joint Submission on Penalty accepted -
   recommendation that the Studentâs Master of Science Degree be cancelled
   and revoked, as per s. C .ii.(b)(j)(i) of Code; six-month suspension;
   grade assignment of NCR for course; two-year notation on transcript;
   and report to Provost
   Student charged with two offences under s. B.i.1(f) and, and
   alternatively, under s. B.i.3(b) of the Code. The charges related to
   allegations that the Student submitted a Masterâs thesis containing the
   results of research that included altered clinical data. The matter
   proceeded on an Agreed Statement of Facts. The Student pleaded guilty
   to the charge under s. B.i.1(f) of the Code. The altered research data
   was also included in a final report to the WSIB Research Advisory
   Council and in two papers submitted for publication by two of the
   Studentâs thesis committee members. By altering data, the Student acted
   contrary to s. 3(i) of the Universityâs Policy on Ethical Conduct in
   Research. The Student voluntarily disclosed that he had altered the
   research data. The Panel considered the Studentâs motives for altering
   the data and found that the Agreed Statement of Facts was silent on
   whether by âbetter resultâ the Student meant to achieve comparable
   sample sizes or to change the outcome of his research. The Panel
   accepted the Studentâs guilty plea to the charge under s. B.i.1(f) of
   the Code. The parties submitted a Joint Submission on Penalty. The
   Panel considered the impact of the proposed sanction on the Studentâs
   status as a doctoral student. The University argued that although a
   suspension of six months appeared lenient compared to previous Tribunal
   decisions, six months was the longest that the Student could be absent
   from his research work before his work would have to be given to
   another researcher. The Panel considered a Book of Authorities and
   observed that there had been only one other revocation case on record,
   the case of Mr. R. (November 13, 1996). The Panel observed that
   discussions regarding the Studentâs further registration status had
   been of a hypothetical nature and that the case was the only case on
   record wherein a student came forward and admitted academic misconduct
   despite there being almost no possibility of being discovered. The
   Panel found that the fabrication of data, followed by the publication
   of the falsified data in published research papers and a thesis,
   undermined the integrity, reputation and credibility of the University.
   The Panel observed that the proposed penalty was serious, in that the
   Student would lose his masters degree and the permanent notation would
   require him to explain the cancellation in any university or employment
   application, but that it would not prevent him from rehabilitating
   himself by resuming his studies. The Panel observed that the case
   presented extenuating circumstances unique in the Tribunal
   jurisprudence: had it not been for the Studentâs voluntary disclosure,
   the alteration of the data would not likely have been discovered; he
   cooperated fully with the University; and he expressed his remorse
   throughout the proceedings.Â  The Panel found that the remorse the
   Student expressed militated against the likelihood that he would repeat
   similar misconduct. The Panel considered the Agreed Statement of Fact
   and found that the nature of the detriment to the University was
   unclear because there was no independent validation of the conclusion
   that the Student's fabrications of data did not affect the validity of
   his research. With regard to the Studentâs motive for his actions, the
   Panel found it difficult to evaluate the weight to be given to the
   agreed facts as an extenuating circumstance because there was no
   medical or other expert evidence supporting that the Student had been
   experiencing stress from his research and academic workload, and
   because stress was not unusual in the course of academic life. The
   Panel accepted the Joint Submission on Penalty and imposed a
   recommendation to Governing Council, further to s. C .ii.(b)(j)(i) of
   the Code, that the Studentâs Master of Science Degree be cancelled and
   revoked; a six-month suspension from the University; a grade assignment
   of NCR in the course; a two-year notation on the Studentâs academic
   record and transcript; and that a report be issued to the Provost.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12698
