Case #866

   DATE: November 4, 2016
   PARTIES: University of Toronto v. Y.X. (âthe Studentâ)
   Hearing Date(s): August 30, 2016
   Panel Members:
   Mr. Paul Morrison, Chair
   Dr. Pascal van Lieshout, Faculty Panel Member
   Ms. Sue Mazzatto, Student Panel Member
   Appearances:
   Ms. Tina Lie, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Barristers
   Mr. Terry Johnston, Assistant Director, Office of Convocation
   Mr. Tom Percy (via teleconference), owner, AuraData
   In Attendance:
   Ms. Lucy Gaspini, Manager Academic Integrity & Affairs Office of the
   Dean, University of Toronto - Mississauga
   Ms. Krista Osbourne, Administrative Assistant, Office of Appeals,
   Discipline and Faculty Grievances Mr. Sean Lourim, Technology
   Assistant, Office of the Governing Council
   Ms. Amanda Heale, Observer, New University Tribunal Chair
   Not In Attendance:
   The Student
   Trial Division â s. B.i.3(a) of the Code â forged academic record â
   Student submitted a forged degree as part of a job application â
   hearing not attended â reasonable notice of hearing provided â finding
   of guilt on evidence - Â recommendation of expulsion; permanent
   notation on the Studentâs academic record and transcript; 5-year
   suspension; case reported to Provost for publication
   Student charged under s. B.i.3(a) of the Code. The charge related to
   allegations that the Student knowingly forged, altered or falsified a
   document that purported to be a degree from the University. The Student
   submitted the altered document in a job application. The altered degree
   was brought to the Universityâs attention by a company that provided
   degree verification services. The Student was not present at the
   hearing. The Panel concluded that reasonable notice of the hearing had
   been given pursuant to the Code and the Rules of Practice and
   Procedures of the University Tribunal. The Panel concluded that it
   could proceed with the hearing.
   The Panel accepted the evidence of the owner of the degree verification
   service provider that he had been asked to verify the information that
   the Student had submitted in an application for employment by the
   prospective employer. The Office of Convocation for the University
   confirmed that no degree had been granted to the Student by the
   University. Â The Panel found that the degree that had been provided to
   the prospective employer was a forgery and entered a finding of guilt.
   The Panel was referred to Appendix C to the Code - Â the Provost's
   Guidance on Sanctions - Â and found that forgery or falsification of an
   academic record is an offence of the utmost seriousness where the
   Provost will ask the Tribunal for an order of expulsion. Â The Panel
   imposed a recommendation of expulsion; a permanent notation on the
   Studentâs academic record and transcript; a 5-year suspension; and that
   the case be reported to the Provost for publication.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12923
