Case 818

DATE:

   September 6, 2016

PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v M.N.

Hearing Date(s):

   May 27, 2016

Panel Members:

   William C. McDowell, Chair
   M Evans, Faculty Member
   Raylesha Parker, Student Member

Appearances:

   Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel
   Rabiya Mansoor, Law Student for the Student
   Kristi Gourlay, Manager Office of Academic Integrity

In Attendance:

   Tracey Gameiro, Associate Director, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty
   Grievances
   M.N., the Student
   Mother, Mother of Student
   Student charged with six offences under s. B.i.1(a) of the Code . The
   charges related to six forged documents in two separate medical
   Petitions for accommodation sent by the Student. The Student pleaded
   guilty to the charges under s. B.i.1(a) and the matter proceeded by way
   of an Agreed Statement of Facts (ASF). The Panel also received a Joint
   Submission on Penalty (JSF).
   The ASF described the Student as seeking various academic
   accommodations in 2015. In support of this request the Student
   submitted a Medical Verification Form which she admitted to altering
   the dates of and a University Verification of Student Illness or Injury
   Form. As well, the Student submitted documents from turnitin.com which
   she had also altered.
   In 2016 the Student submitted a falsified Verification of Student
   Illness or Injury Form to be granted academic accommodation in a course
   as well as a further Verification Form. The Student met with the Deanâs
   Designate and admitted that she had forged, altered and/or otherwise
   falsified documents submitted in support of her Petitions. She
   cooperated with the University investigation.
   The parties presented a Joint Submission on Penalty (JSP) recommending
   a grade of zero in the courses; a five-year suspension; and a six-year
   notation on the Studentâs academic record and transcript. The Panel
   noted the length of time of the Studentâs dishonesty and that she had
   deceived three different instructors. The Panel also noted the presence
   of mitigating factors including the Students religious background, the
   difficult process of disclosure of her sexual orientation to her
   parents, personal challenges, and suicide attempt. The Panel accepted
   the JSP noting that given the exceptional circumstances submitted,
   Â the mitigating factors might have warranted a shorter suspension.
   Â However, it acknowledged that the Panel should not depart from the
   JSP unless the proposed result would amount to an error in principle,
   which was not the case in this circumstance.
   The Panel imposed the penalty submitted in the JSP.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12912
