THE UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO

IN THE MATTER OF charges of academic dishonesty filed on October 28, 2015 and March 9,
2016,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters,
1995,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Act, 1971, S.O. 1971 , c. 56 as am. S.O.
1978,c. 88

BETWEEN:
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO

- and -

REASONS FOR DECISION
Hearing Date: May 27, 2016
Members of the Panel:
Mr. William C. McDowell, Lawyer, Chair
Professor M. Evans, Faculty Panel Member
Ms. Raylesha Parker, Student Panel Member
Appearances:
Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Barristers
Ms. Rabiya Mansoor, Law Student for the Student, Downtown Legal Services
Dr. Kristi Gourlay, Manager of Office of Academic Integrity, Office of Student
Academic Integrity
In Attendance:
Ms. Tracey Gameiro, Associate Director, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty
Grievances
Ms. fv'III N■, the Student
Ms.
the Student's Mother

WIii

N
.

1.

Ms. N■ appeared before the Tribunal charged with a series of offences

involving the alternation or forgery of medical notes.
2.

We were advised that Ms.

N
.

and the Provost had come to an

agreement with respect to the facts, and an Agreed Statement of Facts was filed.
There was also a joint disposition as to Penalty. In the result, Ms. N■ agreed to
plead guilty to the following charges:
The October 28, 2015 Charges

(a)

On or about June 7, 2015, you knowingly forged or in any other
way altered or falsified a document or evidence required by the
University of Toronto, or uttered, circulated or made use of any
such forged, altered or falsified document, namely, a University of
Toronto Verification of Student Illness or Injury form, dated June 7,
2015, which you submitted in support of your request for academic
accommodations in SOC364H1 F (the "Course"), contrary to
Section B.1.1 (a) of the Code.

(b)

On or about June 23, 2015, you knowingly forged or in any other
way altered or falsified a document or evidence required by the
University of Toronto, or uttered, circulated or made use of any
such forged, altered or falsified document, namely, a University of
Toronto Verification of Student Illness or Injury Form, dated June
23, 2015, which you submitted in support of your request for

2

academic accommodations in the Course, contrary to Section
B.1. 1(a) of the Code.
(c)

On or about June 30, 2015, you knowingly forged or in any other
way altered or falsified a document or evidence required by the
University of Toronto, or uttered, circulated or made use of any
such forged, altered or falsified document, namely, purported
receipts from Turnitin.com, dated June 30, 2015, which you
submitted in support of your request for academic accommodations
in the Course, contrary to Section 8.1.1 (a) of the Code.

(d)

On or about June 30, 2015, you knowingly forged or in any other
way altered or falsified a document or evidence required by the
University of Toronto, or uttered, circulated or made use of any
such forged, altered or falsified document, namely, what purported
to be the submission page from Turnitin.com, which you submitted
in support of your request for academic accommodations in the
Course, contrary to Section B.1.1 (a) of the Code.

The March 9, 2016 Charges

(e)

On or about October 23, 2014, you knowingly forged or in any other
way altered or falsified a document or evidence required by the
University of Toronto, or uttered, circulated or made use of any
such forged, altered or falsified document, namely, a University of
Toronto Verification of Student Illness or Injury form, dated October

3

23, 2014, which you submitted in support of your request for
academic accommodations in PCJ460, contrary to Section B.1.1 (a)
of the Code.
(f)

On or about March 9, 2015, you knowingly forged or in any other
way altered or falsified a document or evidence required by the
University of Toronto, or uttered, circulated or made use of any
such forged , altered or falsified document, namely, a University of
Toronto Verification of Student Illness or Injury Form, dated March
9, 2015, which you submitted in support of your request for
academic accommodations in HIS202, contrary to Section B. 1.1(a)
of the Code.

DISCUSSION

(a)

October 28, 2015 Charges

3.

Ms. t-1111 registered in course SOC364H1 F which was taught by Professor

Anthony Lombardo. She sought various extensions for term work and
assignments which were either missed or not completed.
4.

In support for her request for accommodation, she submitted a University

of Toronto Verification Illness or Injury Form dated June 7, 2015. This medical
note was forged or altered. She also supplied a Medical Verification Form dated
June 25, 2015 in support of her request, but altered the date on which the doctor
had examined her as well as the date on which the doctor had signed the form.

4

5.

■ submitted documents from turnitin.com which she had

As well, Ms. N

then altered in order to attempt to persuade the instructor that pieces of academic
work had been submitted when this had not been done.
(b)

The March 9, 2016 Charges

6.

The University subsequently learned that some time earlier, on October 23,

■ had submitted a falsified Verification of Student Illness or Injury
Form dated October 23, 2014. Ms. N
■ had submitted this Verification Form in
2014, Ms. N

order to be granted academic accommodations in course PCJ460. As well, Ms.

■ submitted a further Verification Form dated March 9, 2015.

N

7.

■ met with the Dean’s designate, she readily admitted that

When Ms. N

she had falsified and forged medical notes. She otherwise cooperated with the
University investigation. She admitted that the offences alleged had been proven.
The University agreed to withdraw the alternative charges.

PENALTY

8.

The University and counsel for the student jointly submitted that the

following should be imposed as a penalty:
(a)

she shall receive a final grade of zero in each of the courses
SOC364H1F, PCJ460, and HIS202;

(b)

she shall be suspended from the University for 5 years from the
date of the order; and

(c)

the sanction will be recorded on her academic record and transcript

5

for six years from the day the Tribunal makes its order.
9.

In our consideration of this matter, we were struck by two things. Ms.

r9

had participated in dishonesty over a significant period of time. This was not a
case in which she could be said to have acted impulsively to falsify a single
medical note, or a series of related documents on a single occasion. She had
instead acted dishonestly over most of an academic year. She had deceived or
attempted to deceive three separate instructors at the University.

All of this

would have tended to increase the period of suspension, or indeed to have led us
to consider imposing expulsion as a penalty, recognising that the penalty
imposed in such a case must reflect not only the gravity of the offence, but must
also serve as a deterrent to others who are engaged in similar conduct.
10.

At the same time, Ms.

N
.

through her counsel, persuaded us that her

case involved truly extenuating circumstances. Ms. N■ grew up in a very
conservative and religious family. She did not know how to advise her family of
her sexual orientation. Her academic work began to spiral. She found herself in
excruciating turmoil, and attempted suicide. We were provided with hospital
documentation which reflected that she had been involuntarily admitted to the
Centre for Addiction and Mental Health following her suicide attempt.
11 .

In these exceptional circumstances, we accept that the Joint Submission

with Respect to Penalty is appropriate. Indeed, as we advised the parties at the
conclusion of t he hearing about the joint submission, we might have imposed a
shorter period of suspension. That said, the Joint Submission with Respect to

6

Penalty is consistent with a number of decisions reviewed with us by Ms. Harmer
on behalf of the Provost. We should not depart from the Joint Submission with
Respect to Penalty unless the proposed result amounts to an error in principle,
and that is certainly not the case. A five-year suspension is often handed down
by this Tribunal in cases of forgery of medical notes.
12.

We were heartened to hear that Ms. NIis family has proven to be quite

supportive of her, and that she has other professional supports in place. We
accept the position of Ms. Mansoor on her behalf that it seems quite unlikely she
will offend the University's academic regulations in the future.
13.

We impose the penalty set out in paragraph 8, above.

DATED at Toronto, this

/f

day of

vv
William C. McDowell, Co-Chair

7

~

, 2016.

