THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
THE GOVERNING COUNCIL
Report #434 of the Academic Appeals Committee
March 26, 2024
To the Academic Board
University of Toronto
Your Committee reports that it held a hearing on November 23, 2023, at which the following
members were present:
Academic Appeal Committee Members:
Professor Hamish Stewart, Senior Chair
Professor David Zingg, Faculty Governor
Seyedereza Massoum, Student Governor
Hearing Secretary:
Nadia Bruno, Special Projects Officer, Office of Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances
For the Student Appellant:
the “Student”)
For the Rotman School of Management:
Lily Harmer, Paliare Roland Rosenberg Rothstein LLP
Joseph Berger, Paliare Roland Rosenberg Rothstein LLP
Introduction
The Student appeals from a decision of the Graduate Academic Appeals Board (GAAB), which
dismissed an appeal from a decision of Professor Craig Doidge, Vice-Dean of the Rotman School
of Management (the “Faculty”), accepting the recommendation of the Faculty’s Graduate
Department Academic Appeals Committee (GDAAC) that he dismiss the Student’s appeal from
the grade of B+ that the Student received in RSM1160 (the “Course”). A majority of your
Committee dismisses the appeal. One member of your Committee would allow the appeal and
substitute a notation of CR.
All otherwise unspecified references in this decision are to the Student’s appeal materials.

1

Overview
In September 2021, the Student was enrolled in the Course at the Faculty. He received a grade of
B+ for the Course. The grade included three components: class participation, a group
presentation, and a reaction paper. The grading scheme was as follows:
•
•
•

Class participation: 10%
Group presentation: 45%
Reaction paper: 45%

The Student was assessed as follows (p. 383):
•
•
•

Class participation: 6/10
Group presentation: 77% or 34.65/45
Reaction paper: 36/45

This assessment translated into a final mark of 76.65%, which the instructor rounded up to 77%.
This grade is in the B+ range.
The Student sought a review of the grade. The Faculty declined to provide a review of the first
two components of the grade. The review process therefore involved a re-reading of the paper by
an anonymous second reader. The second reader confirmed the grade for the reaction paper. The
Student appealed the Course grade. The GDAAC recommended that his appeal be dismissed.
The Vice-Dean accepted that recommendation. The Student’s further appeal to the GAAB was
dismissed.
The Student now appeals to your Committee. The remedies he seeks are as follows:
•
•
•

“a change in the grading basis for the Course from the letter grade scale to a pass-fail
scale” (p. 33), or
in the alternative, a grade based solely on the reaction paper, or
in the further alternative, a substantive re-evaluation of all three components of his grade.

Procedural matters
The Chair of your Committee alone made decisions on the procedural matters discussed under
this heading.
The Faculty’s request to file revised materials
The Student submitted his appeal materials on May 15, 2023. The Faculty’s response was
submitted on July 17, 2023. In his reply, dated September 5, 2023, the Student, among other
matters, pointed out two incomplete case citations in the Faculty’s submissions. The Faculty
sought to file a revised version of its submissions to correct those errors. In a letter dated October
15, 2023, the Student objected strenuously to the Faculty’s request, arguing that if your Chair
2

were to accept the revised versions of the Faculty’s materials, his position would be prejudiced
and the hearing of the matter would be delayed by the need for the Faculty to provide a
systematic comparison of the two versions of its submissions and by his to need reply to the
revised revisions.
The Chair was very surprised by the Student’s objection. In the Chair’s view, the incomplete
citations in the Faculty’s original submissions were minor errors. Correcting them would in no
way prejudice the Student’s ability to put forward his position. There was no need for a
comparison of the two versions because there was no reason to think that counsel for the Faculty
would have done anything other than correct the two minor errors that the Student had pointed
out. If the Student was concerned that there might have been other changes, instead of requesting
a detailed comparison of the two versions, the Student could have requested an assurance (in the
form of an undertaking, if necessary) from the Faculty’s counsel that there were none. There is
no doubt that such an assurance would have been given and that it would have been reasonable
for the Chair and the Student to accept it. But the Chair was also of the view that the minor
errors in the original version made little or no difference to the Faculty’s ability to put its position
forward. The Chair therefore rejected the Faculty's request to file revised materials.
The Student’s request to call witnesses
On November 14, 2023, the Student wrote to the Senior Chair, requesting that the Senior Chair
issue summonses pursuant to s. 10.1 and 12 of the Statutory Powers Procedure Act, R.S.O. 1990,
c. S.22, compelling the following persons to appear at the hearing of his appeal: Professor
Richard Powers, who was the course instructor in RSM1160; Professor Liao; and Professor
Michael Ryall (a member of the Faculty). On November 15, 2023, counsel for the Faculty
provided written submissions opposing the Student’s request. The Senior Chair denied the
Student’s request and subsequently gave reasons for that decision (see Report #429).
The admissibility of the SGS policy on “Re-reading & Retention of Examinations”
The hearing was held on the afternoon of November 23, 2023. Towards the end of the hearing,
during the Faculty’s oral submissions, reference was made to the SGS Re-Reading Policy,
available at https://facultyandstaff.sgs.utoronto.ca/managing-student-records/retentionexaminations/. The text of this policy was not included in either party’s materials. Wondering
whether the SGS Re-Reading Policy might have some bearing on the appeal, the Chair asked
counsel for the Faculty where it could be found. Counsel promptly provided the link noted
above. The Chair was not able to determine in the moment whether the SGS Re-Reading Policy
was relevant to the issues in the appeal and so asked the parties to provide submissions on that
question. On December19, 2023, the Student provided written submissions consisting of an
introduction, two substantive points, and a conclusion. The Student included the SGS ReReading Policy as an exhibit to his submissions and described it as “Ambush Evidence.” The
Chair read the Student’s submissions in early January and found that the Student’s first
substantive point (concerning procedural fairness) was without merit. On January 10, 2024, he
offered the Faculty an opportunity to reply to the Student’s second substantive point (concerning
relevancy). On January 11, 2024 the Student wrote to the Chair, objecting to the Faculty’s having
been given the opportunity to make submissions. On January 12, 2024, the Faculty provided its

3

response to the Student’s submissions of December 19, 2023. Your Chair concluded that the
policy was of little relevance and that your Committee would not be significantly assisted by
considering it. He therefore chose not to add it to the materials to be considered by your
Committee during its deliberations. Written reasons for this decision were provided to the parties
on February 5, 2024 (see Report #431).
The Positions of the Parties
The Student has characterized the issues to be decided by your Committee as follows (p. 7):
(A) Were the prior decisions to uphold the Appellant’s failing class participation grade
and presentation grade without a substantive re-evaluation into the Appellant's
performance reasonable?
(B) Were the prior decisions to uphold the Appellant's reaction paper grade reasonable?
(C) Were the prior decisions made in a procedurally fair manner?
Under issue (A), the Student makes five submissions:
(i)

(ii)

(iii)
(iv)

(v)

The Faculty’s policy concerning disputes about grades provides that “participation
points or presentations are not subject to a re-read …” (p. 8). The Student submits
that the GAAB’s decision to uphold this policy was unreasonable (pp. 8-13). The
Faculty defends its policy (Faculty submissions, paras. 37-44).
The Student submits that neither (a) the GDAAC nor (b) the GAAB conducted a
substantive review of the participation and presentation components of his grade and
that their refusal to do so was unreasonable (p. 14). The Faculty does not dispute the
fact that the GAAB refused to conduct a substantive review, but submits that it was
not required to do so, and indeed should not have done so. (Faculty submissions,
paras. 45-47.)
The Student submits that the participation grade awarded by the course instructor was
unreasonable and unjustified (pp. 15-19) and
that the presentation grade awarded by the course instructor was unreasonable (pp.
19-21). With respect to these two points, the Faculty submits that your Committee
“has no jurisdiction to consider the merits of the grades assigned with respect to the
Participation or Presentation elements of [the Student’s] grade” (Faculty submissions,
para. 48) and urges your Committee to defer to the GAAB’s finding that the Student
had not demonstrated any procedural unfairness in the course instructor’s procedures
for assigning or reviewing those grades (Faculty submissions, paras. 49-54).
The Student submits that the grading scheme for the course violated the Faculty’s
policies (pp. 21-22). The Faculty submits that the grading scheme for the Course was
consistent with its policies (Faculty submissions, para. 52).

Issue (B) concerns the third component of the Student’s grade, the reaction paper. For reasons
that will be briefly spelled out below, on a grade appeal neither the GAAB (from whose decision
the Student appeals) nor your Committee will consider the substantive academic merits of a

4

student’s work. Issue (B) therefore requires your Committee to review the fairness of the
procedures by which the Student’s reaction paper was reassessed. The central allegation of
unfairness in the Student’s written submissions is what he characterizes as a “lack of
transparency,” namely, the Faculty’s refusal to disclose the identity of the second reader.
Relatedly, he submits that “the Academic Director failed to provide the [Student] with an
opportunity to object to the appointment of the Anonymous Regrader” (p. 28). The Faculty
agrees that it failed to disclose the second reader’s identity and that it did not consult with the
Student before selecting the second reader. The Faculty submits that its process “adhered to the
provisions of the Faculty Policy providing for re-read requests” (Faculty’s submissions, para.
56).
Issue (C) involves several allegations of procedural unfairness that overlap to some extent with
issues (A) and (B).
(i)

(ii)

(iii)

(iv)

(v)

The Student submits that he was entitled to a high degree of procedural fairness in the
academic appeal process (pp. 26-27). The Faculty’s position is that the Student
received the degree of procedural fairness to which he was entitled (Faculty
submissions, paras. 53, 59).
The Student submits the course instructor impermissibly delegated his authority over
grading the participation component of the grade to the teaching assistant (pp. 16-17
and 27-28). The Faculty submits that the Student has not shown that the course
instructor delegated his authority (Faculty submissions, para. 51).
The Student submits that he was not consulted “when the instructor carried out his
evaluation of the [Student’s] class participation” and when the Academic Director
assigned the second reader (p. 28). The Faculty accepts that the Student was not
consulted but submits that it acted in accordance with its policies (Faculty
submissions, paras. 60-61).
The Student submits that the conduct of (a) the course instructor and (b) the GAAB
demonstrated reasonable apprehension of bias. The Faculty submits that neither the
conduct of the course instructor nor the conduct of the hearing before the GAAB
gives rise to a reasonable apprehension of bias (Faculty submissions, paras. 63-67).
The Student submits that “the instructor’s assessment was procedurally unfair
because of the inordinate delay in rendering his decision” (p. 32). The Faculty agrees
that there was a delay in the Student’s receipt of his Course grade but submits that the
delay did not create procedural unfairness (the Faculty’s submissions, paras. 73-77).

Jurisdictional matters
The matters under this heading were determined by the Chair of your Committee alone.
The primary remedy sought by the Student is outside your Committee’s jurisdiction
As noted above, the primary remedy sought by the Student is “a change in the grading basis for
the Course from the letter grade scale to the pass-fail scale.” Your Chair originally interpreted

5

this as a request that the Student’s grade in RSM1160 should be changed from B+ to CR.
Granting such a remedy is likely within the jurisdiction of your Committee. However, it appears
from the Student’s written submissions (p. 33, para. 151), from his oral submissions at the
hearing, from a letter to Professor Liao early in the appeal process (p. 52), and from the
GDAAC’s recommendation (p. 182) that he is seeking something quite different, namely, that the
grade of every student enrolled in RSM1160 in the Fall 2021 term be changed from a letter grade
to CR or NCR. That is, every student who received a grade of B- or higher would be reassigned a
grade of CR and every student (if any) who received a grade of less than B- would be reassigned
a grade of NCR. The Student refers to your Committee’s Report #358, in which he says your
Committee granted “this exact remedy”, demonstrating that your Committee “has full authority
to change the grading basis of a course” (para. 152).
If the Student is in fact seeking “a change in the grading basis for the Course from the letter
grade scale to the pass-fail scale”, it is not only an “inappropriate” remedy, as the GDAAC
rightly said (p. 182), but also outside the jurisdiction of your Committee. There are three reasons,
each sufficient on its own, why that is so. First, your Committee’s primary function is “[t]o hear
and consider appeals made by students against decisions of faculty, college or school councils (or
committees thereof) in the application of academic regulations and requirements” (AAC Terms
of Reference, Article 2.1). This function does not extend to modifying the grading scheme of a
course. Second, changing the method of evaluation for a course may be done only in accordance
with Article 1.3 of the University’s Assessment and Grading Practices Policy (the AGPP). The
procedure described there is no longer available for a course offered in the Fall 2021 term. Third,
the other students enrolled in RSM1160 are not parties to this appeal and it would be, to say the
least, profoundly unfair for your Committee to purport to make an order that affected their
grades.
The Student’s reference to Report #358 does not assist him. In that case, your Committee
changed the student appellant’s grade from B+ to CR but did not purport to change the grading
basis of the course in which she was enrolled.
Your Committee proceeded on the assumption that, although it did not have jurisdiction to grant
the primary remedy sought by the Student, it did have jurisdiction to change his grade from B+
to CR.
Your Committee has no jurisdiction over the grading scheme for the Course
Some of the Student’s submissions amount to an attack on the grading scheme for the Course
(see in particular paras. 4, 149-151). Your Committee’s discussion of two of the Student’s
specific objections to this scheme may be found below. However, the Chair holds that your
Committee has no jurisdiction to allow a student’s appeal on the basis of that student’s
dissatisfaction with the grading scheme for a course. As noted above, your Committee’s function
is to hear appeals concerning “the application of academic regulations and requirements …” It is
well-established that your Committee has no jurisdiction to modify or invalidate an academic
regulation or requirement. For the purposes of a grade appeal, the academic regulation or
requirement in question is the grading scheme for the course in which the student was enrolled.
Therefore, your Committee cannot consider the validity or wisdom of the scheme but only its

6

application to the student appellant in the case at hand. So if, for example, your Committee were
to agree with the Student that the methods used to evaluate students’ work in RSM1160 were
“seriously flawed” or “unfair” or “problematic” (p. 33), that would not be a basis for allowing his
appeal. It is not for your Committee to tell the Faculty, or any other division of the University,
what grading schemes and methods of evaluation it may or may not use in evaluating its
students.
Your Committee will therefore not give effect to any of the Student’s submissions that the
grading scheme for RSM1160 was unfair or unreasonable.
The Student’s submission that the grading scheme for RSM1160 was not authorized by the
Faculty’s own policies (submission A(v)) is another matter. The Chair is tentatively of the view
that your Committee has no jurisdiction over this issue. However, the Faculty did not make that
argument but instead urged your Committee to accept the GAAB’s holding that there was no
inconsistency between its policies and the grading scheme for RSM1160 (Faculty submissions,
paras. 52-54). Your Committee’s decision on this issue may be found below.
The Student’s submissions concerning substantive review of his reaction paper are outside the
jurisdiction of your Committee
As submission A(ii)(b), the Student submits that the GAAB’s decision was unreasonable because
it refused to conduct its own substantive review of his reaction paper (para. 107). He also invites
your Committee to make its own judgment about the academic merits of his reaction paper
(paras. 108-110).
It is well-established that, on a grade appeal, your Committee will not consider the substantive
academic merits of a student’s work. (See, for example, Report #415.) Instead, your Committee
will consider whether the division in question reasonably applied its own policies and procedures
concerning grading; if not, your Committee will provide a remedy. (See, for example, Report
#413.) The same principles apply to proceedings before the GAAB. It is not your Committee’s
role to reassess the academic merits of a student’s work and your Committee lacks the expertise
to do so.
Your Committee will therefore not give effect to any of the Student’s submissions to the effect
that the original evaluation or the second reader’s evaluation of his reaction paper was
substantively unreasonable.
It is unnecessary to consider the Student’s submissions concerning the conduct of the appeal
before the GAAB
The Student makes a number of submissions (C(iv)(b)) concerning the conduct of the appeal by
the GAAB: specifically, that the GAAB Chair suffered from reasonable apprehension of bias, or
actual bias, because she had previously presided over some of his other appeals (para. 139); that
one member of the panel may have been in an undisclosed conflict of interest (para. 139); and
that the panel was actually biased against him (para. 142). If your Committee were to accept
them, the proper remedy would be a new hearing before a differently constituted panel of the

7

GAAB. The Student has not sought that remedy. Therefore, the Chair of your Committee finds
that it is unnecessary for your Committee to consider these submissions.
The Chair adds that if the Student was concerned that the GAAB Chair might actually be, or
reasonably appear to be, biased against him, or that a GAAB panel member was in a conflict of
interest, or that the composition of the GAAB panel raised an apprehension of bias, he should
have raised those issues with the GAAB Chair at the time of the hearing. It is too late to do so
now.
Majority Decision
(A) Were the prior decisions to uphold the Appellant’s failing class participation grade and
presentation grade without a substantive re-evaluation into the Appellant's performance
reasonable?
(A)(i)
The Faculty refused to provide a reassessment, or “re-read” of the class participation and group
presentation components of his grade. The basis for the refusal was that the Faculty’s policy
concerning disputes about grades provides that “participation points or presentations are not
subject to a reread …” (p. 8).
As noted above, your Committee has no jurisdiction to modify or invalidate the policies of a
division of the University. The Faculty’s refusal was in accordance with its policy. Normally, that
would be sufficient to dismiss this argument. However, the Student argues that the policy in
question is invalid, not because it is unreasonable or inherently flawed (though he also submits
that it is), but because, in his submission, it is inconsistent with SGS policies, which provide that
“Graduate students may appeal substantive or procedural academic matters …” (SGS
Regulations, s. 10.1) and which take precedence over departmental policies. The Faculty submits
that the SGS Regulations are consistent with the AGPP (Faculty submissions, para. 40).
The Chair of your Committee is unsure whether an academic appeal is a suitable vehicle for a
challenge to the validity of a divisional or departmental policy on the ground that it is
inconsistent with another University policy. That is because, as noted above, your Committee
does not have jurisdiction to modify or invalidate a divisional policy. However, the Faculty did
not make this jurisdictional argument. Instead, the parties framed their arguments in terms of
whether the Faculty’s policy was compliant with SGS policy, and your Committee dealt with this
issue on that basis.
Assuming for the sake of argument that your Committee could invalidate a policy on the ground
that it was inconsistent with a policy that was higher in the hierarchy of University norms, a
student would have to show that the impugned policy was, in light of the higher policy,
unreasonable. That is because the standard of review on an academic appeal is reasonableness
(Policy on Academic Appeals Within Divisions [PAAWD], article 2.ii). Your Committee also
notes the preference for local decision-making in the PAAWD, which provides in article 3.i that

8

“Divisions should decide how best to implement this policy …”, suggesting that even if your
Committee does have the power to invalidate a divisional policy for inconsistency with other
University policies, that power would have to be exercised with great deference towards a
division’s choices as to how to structure its own academic appeal processes.
Article 2 of AGPP requires divisions to ensure that students have access to their written
examinations and states that divisions “should provide, in addition to the customary re‐checking
of grades, the opportunity for students to petition for the re‐reading of their examination where
feasible …” Article 5 of AGPP requires every division to establish a procedure for the appeal of
final grades. PAAWD provides general guidance to divisions concerning academic appeal
processes. But AGPP and PAAWD do not require divisions to have any specific procedures for
reviewing final grades, and they do not require divisions to have any particular procedures, or
any procedures at all, for substantive review of individual components of course work such as
grades assigned for class participation, group work, lab reports, reaction papers, in-class quizzes,
etc. Consistent with AGPP and PAAWD, SGS provides for appeals of “substantive or procedural
academic matters”, which includes final grades (SGS Regulations, s. 10.1). In light of AGPP, this
policy should likely be read as requiring every division to establish a procedure for the rereading of examinations “where feasible.” It does not, however, specifically require re-reads or
other forms of reassessment or any other form of evaluation. The Faculty’s appeal policy
provides for re-reads of all written work (not just examinations). But it specifically states that
“participation points or presentations are not subject to a re-read.” This exclusion is consistent
with AGPP, PAAWD, and the SGS regulations. Substantive review of a grade does not
necessarily require independent reassessment of every component of the grade. Your Committee
notes that even the AGPP’s requirement that every division permit petitions for re-reading of
examinations is qualified by the phrase “where feasible.” Even if your Committee were to read
the relevant policies as implicitly requiring the reassessment of every component of a final grade
(and we do not), that requirement would by analogy also be subject to feasibility. It is in general
not feasible to reassess class participation and group presentations. The Faculty’s choice to
exclude class participation and presentations from rereading on appeal is reasonable. Thus, even
if the Faculty’s grade review procedures are subject to review by your Committee, your
Committee would not modify them as urged by the Student.
A(ii)
As noted above, your Committee will not hear the Student’s submission that the GAAB failed to
provide a substantive reconsideration of the Student’s participation and group presentation
marks. Since the Faculty’s grade review and appeal policy does not require substantive
reconsideration of class participation and group presentations, the GDAAC also made no error in
declining to conduct a substantive review of those elements of the Student’s grade.
If it had chosen to do so, the GDAAC could have conducted its own substantive review of the
Student’s reaction paper to supplement the substantive review conducted by the second reader
(as occurred in Report #415). It was the appropriate body with the expertise to do so. But it was
not unreasonable for the GDAAC to rely on the second reader’s detailed assessment of the

9

reaction paper, read in light of the course instructor’s original explanation for the grade. There is
no merit in this ground of appeal.
A(iii)
The Student submits that the participation grade awarded by the course instructor was
unreasonable (pp. 15-19). To the extent that this submission seeks substantive review of that
grade, for the reasons given above, your Committee will not consider it. The Student’s argument
that the process of arriving at the grade was procedurally unfair is within your Committee’s
jurisdiction and is discussed below.
A(iv)
The Student submits that the presentation grade awarded by the course instructor was
unreasonable (pp. 19-21). To the extent that this submission seeks substantive review of that
grade, for the reasons given above, your Committee will not consider it.
However, the Student also has procedural objections to the grade. First, the Student submits that
“the Instructor’s reasons [for awarding the grade] were not justifiable, intelligible, or
transparent” (p. 19). Your Committee rejects this submission. The instructor’s reasons are clear
and touch upon all aspects of the grading criteria for the group presentation (p. 37). Second, the
Student submits that “the Instructor failed to consider [that] the [Student’s] group was at a
serious disadvantage” because his group consisted of four rather than, as most other groups did,
five or six persons. Your Committee rejects this submission. The Student has not offered
anything beyond generalities to explain how the smaller group size would have disadvantaged
him in particular. Nor is there any evidence that he, or the other members of the group, asked the
course instructor to take this factor into consideration when evaluating the group presentation.
Your Committee dismisses this ground of appeal.
A(v)
The Student submits that the grading scheme for the Course violated the Faculty’s policies (pp.
21-22). He argues that “the Faculty policies dictate that the total weight of group work must not
exceed 40% of the overall evaluation for any course” (p. 21). This submission depends entirely
on a one-page internal Faculty document, titled “Course Syllabus Checklist” (p. 403).
The Checklist is a guide for instructors as to how to prepare their course syllabus and upload it to
Quercus. The Checklist begins by stating that “The course syllabus (or outline) is a contract
between you and the students. As with all contracts, language matters and should be consistent to
avoid misunderstandings and appeals.” The Chair of your Committee does not believe that a
course syllabus is a “contract” in the common law sense. But your Committee nevertheless
agrees with the spirit of the introduction to the Checklist: a course syllabus should clearly outline
the course requirements, the evaluation scheme, and the instructor’s expectations of students, so
that from the outset of the course students will have a good idea of what is expected of them. It is
not suggested that the syllabus for RSM1160 failed to do that. Rather, the Student argues that the

10

grading scheme was invalid because it was inconsistent with the Checklist. One of the 15 points
on the checklist reads in part as follows: “Couse Grade Components. No deliverables more
than 80%; group work maximum 40%; class participation maximum 20% …” The Student
submits that this point on the checklist is a strictly enforced policy of the Faculty and that the
grading scheme for RSM1160 was invalid because it did not comply with this point (pp. 21-22).
He supports this submission with email correspondence between himself and Caroline Pye,
Assistant Director of Academic Services at the Faculty. Ms. Pye told him, “group work may
comprise no more than 40% of a course grade. That is the process and I likely might have
communicated this to [a] new instructor. Unfortunately, I cannot find a record of it. A deviation
to exceed 40% requires Vide-Dean approval” (p. 405). Your Committee has been provided with
no other material indicating that the 40% limit stated in the Checklist is a Faculty policy.
By the Student’s reckoning, group work for the Course was weighted at 55%, counting both the
group presentation and class participation (para, 92). Your Committee rejects the Student’s
contention that individual class participation marks are “group work.” Participation points are
assigned to individual students. Your Committee therefore finds that the weight for group work
was 45%, as stated above. This weighting would still exceed what the Student says is the 40%
limit. The Faculty submits that the grading scheme for the Course was consistent with its
policies.
This submission is an attack on the reasonableness of the grading scheme for the Course, which,
as noted above, your Committee will not entertain; moreover, the Chair is unsure whether an
academic appeal is a suitable vehicle for a challenge to the validity of a grading scheme.
In any event, your Committee is satisfied that the grading scheme for the Course did not violate
the Faculty’s policies. On the material before it, your Committee is not satisfied that the Faculty
even has a policy limiting group work to 40% of a course grade. If the 40% limit stated in the
Checklist does originate from a Faculty policy document, your Committee has not been provided
with that document. It does not appear in the Faculty’s ehandbook for instructors (pp. 166-179).
On the material before your Committee, if there is such a policy, it is best interpreted not as a
strict limit but as a guideline for instructors. Your Committee accepts Professor Liao’s statement
that the Checklist provides merely a “suggestion regarding maximum groupwork allocations”
and that the MBA program “does not generally intervene if a faculty member uses their
discretion to deviate from these guidelines, so long as the deviation is not significant” (p. 102).
B. Were the prior decisions to uphold the Appellant's reaction paper grade reasonable?
As part of the appeal process within the Faculty, the Student met with the course instructor on
Zoom to discuss his reaction paper. Two weeks later, on February 7, 2022, the instructor emailed
the Student some comments on the paper, concluding with the remark that “it was an A- paper”
(p. 42). Your Committee finds that the instructor’s comments clearly identified the strengths and
weaknesses of the paper. The instructor stated that the paper was “long on the story but not as indepth a discussion around the models and methods used in determining ethical v unethical
behaviour”; he noted certain assertions that the Student made that were not well-supported; and
he identified certain respects in which the A papers in the class were superior to the Student’s.

11

Your Committee finds that this feedback was more than sufficient to inform the Student of the
instructor’s reasons for assigning the paper a grade of 36/45.
The Student sought a re-read of his reaction paper. In a letter to Professor Liao, he disputed the
instructor’s feedback (pp. 48-52). He repeats some of these points in his submissions to your
Committee (pp. 24-25). This material has to do with the substantive academic merits of the
Student’s paper and accordingly your Committee has not considered it.
Professor Liao then sent the Student’s paper to another faculty member with expertise in business
ethics, together with the Student’s statement and material from the course instructor concerning
the evaluation of the reaction paper. On April 18, 2022, the Academic Director wrote to the
Student, summarizing the second reader’s assessment of the paper and informing the Student that
his grade would stand. The second reader found that the course instructor’s “assessment was, if
anything, generous” and provided a detailed discussion of the strengths and weaknesses of the
reaction paper (pp. 143-144). Your Committee finds that this discussion was more than sufficient
to inform the Student of the second reader’s reasons for upholding the grade.
To the extent that the Student’s submissions on the second reader’s report might be characterized
as issues of procedural fairness, rather than matters of substantive academic merit, your
Committee rejects them. The Student says, for example, that the second reader’s reasons “did not
justify his assessment with reference to the grading outline that the instructor had provided in
advance” (para. 112). Those criteria characterize A- papers as making “a good case for their
opinion” and using “the facts [properly] to support their opinion”; an A- paper should be
“convincing regardless of the position taken” (para. 112). But the second reader’s opinion refers
to those very criteria. It finds that the grade of A- “was, if anything generous” exactly because
the paper does not meet the criterion of making “a good case” for the Student’s opinion; instead,
in the second reader’s view, it “simply makes a series of unsupported assertions” and provides no
demonstration of the assertion that it begins with (p. 143).
The Student submits that the process of choosing the second reader was unfair in that he was not
informed of the identity of the second reader. As noted above, the second reading was conducted
on a double-blind basis; that is, neither the Student nor the second reader were informed of the
other’s identity. The Faculty continues to maintain the anonymity of the second reader’s identity;
it has refused to disclose the name of the second reader to the Student (p. 23) and has not
identified that person in its submissions your Committee. The Student believes that the second
reader is Professor Michael Ryall (para. 103), and he argues that the Faculty is motivated to
conceal his identity as the second reader because “Professor Ryall’s conception of business ethics
and approach to teaching [RSM1160] is so irreconcilably different from the [course instructor’s]
that it would be impossible for the Faculty to justify its choice of Professor Ryall” (para. 104,
and see para. 105). He also maintains that procedural fairness required him to be consulted as to
the choice of second reader (p. 28).
This submission is so inextricably intertwined with the Student’s submissions on the substantive
academic merits of his paper that it cannot succeed. It is not contested that the second reader,
whoever that person was, had expertise in business ethics. To that extent, the second reader was
qualified to serve a second reader. Whether that person’s approach to business ethics was or was

12

not “irreconcilably different” from the course instructors is a substantive question of academic
merit that was appropriately considered by the GDAAC and by Professor Liao. It is a question of
academic merit that your Committee will not consider. There is no merit in the Student’s
submission that the choice of second reader was substantively unreasonable.
The Student’s submissions concerning the procedure for choosing the second reader are
considered below.
(C)

Were the prior decisions made in a procedurally fair manner?

C(i)
The Student submits that he was entitled to a high degree of procedural fairness in the academic
appeal process (paras. 116-117). The Faculty does not contest that the Student is entitled to
procedural fairness and submits that that the entire process was procedurally fair.
The Student also submitted that he, in particular, was entitled to a high degree of procedural
fairness in this appeal process because of the consequences of the B+ grade for him. The Student
argued that the B+ grade in RSM1160 was “a shocking blemish on what would otherwise be an
exemplary straight-A academic record”. He argued further that because of this “blemish”, “[h]e
will likely be called to appear before a Character and Fitness Committee to explain his inferior
performance in [RSM1160], and may need to take extra steps to demonstrate his ethics” (para.
118). This submission is utterly without merit and does not assist the Student. B+ is not a
“blemish” but a good grade. There is no prospect that any licensing authority would have the
slightest concern about the character or fitness of a candidate for the bar who had received a
good grade in business ethics.
To the extent that Student’s argument is that the “blemish” arises from a contrast between the B+
in RSM1160 and the rest of the Student’s academic record, and that the Student is therefore
entitled to a high degree of procedural fairness, your Committee rejects it.1 The Student’s
invocation of his academic record does not assist him. The degree of procedural fairness owed to
a student in the appeal process does not depend on the student's academic record or academic
standing. The relevant degree of procedural fairness is the same regardless of whether the student
is a “straight A- student” or a student with a weak academic record.
C(ii)
The Student submits the course instructor impermissibly delegated his authority over grading the
participation component of the grade to the teaching assistant (pp. 16-47 and 27-28). The Faculty
Your Committee is not wholly persuaded by the Student’s description of himself as a “straight-A student.” Apart
from the B+ in RSM1160, his grades in the Faculty of Management include A+, A, H (honours), and CR, while his
grades in the Faculty of Law include HH (high honours), H, P (pass with merit), and CR. Your Committee was not
provided with the Student’s undergraduate transcripts, which would have been irrelevant to the issues on appeal.
But, for the reasons explained in the text, the quality of his transcript is in any event irrelevant.
1

13

notes that the GAAB rejected the allegation of impermissible delegation and submits that your
Committee should defer to that conclusion (Faculty submissions, paras. 50-53). Its position is, as
Professor Doidge put it in his submissions to the GAAB, that in assessing class participation
“[t]he Instructor complemented the TA’s records with his own qualitative assessment” (p. 324).
Class participation accounted for 10% of the Course grade. The Student’s participation was
assessed at 6/10. The record indicates that participation grades in the section of the Course in
which the Student enrolled, the highest participation grade was 7/10 and that over both sections
the range of grades for participation was between 5/10 and 9/10 (p. 387). The process for
determining the participation grade was as follows. A teaching assistant (referred to in the
materials as a “pilot” or “co-pilot”) kept track of the number of times each student made a
comment in class. The teaching assistant’s discretion was limited to determining whether a
student’s intervention amounted to a “comment” for the purposes of the Course (p. 27).2 The
course instructor assigned the participation grade on the basis of the teaching assistant’s records
and his own qualitative impressions. In an email to the Student, the course instructor stated that
“Based on records kept by the TA, and my own comments, you had a total of 4 comments, none
of which I had highlighted as insightful or added significantly to the topic and/or discission”; on
this basis, he assigned a grade of 6/10, which he said “was the average for the class” (p. 38).
The Student has three procedural objections to this process. First, he says that because the
teaching assistant “was free to decide whether a contribution amounted to a comment …” the
course instructor “clearly contravened faculty policies” by permitting the teaching assistant to
exercise judgment. The policy in question is found in the Faculty’s ehandbook for instructors,
which states (p. 176):
Instructors must assume responsibility for all components of the final grades even when
markers or teaching assistants have done some of the marking. This implies that markers
and/or teaching assistants should only mark those questions where the marking requires
no judgment by the marker.
The Student says the grading procedures for the Course violated this policy. As he puts it, “It was
procedurally unfair for the instructor to have the [teaching assistant] exercise any judgment at
all” (para. 125).
Your Committee rejects this submission. The “no judgment” limit in the policy explicitly applies
to the assessment of written work, not to the assessment of class participation; it is therefore
questionable whether it is applicable here. But, more fundamentally, there can be no decisionmaking without judgment. As the course instructor put it, the teaching assistant was required to
determine whether an intervention by a student “amounted to a comment” for the purpose of the
Course; if so, the teaching assistant would record it; if not, the teaching assistant would not
record it. The teaching assistant therefore had to exercise this very basic level of judgment. As
counsel for the Faculty put it in her oral submissions, if a student intervened to point out that the
instructor or another student was on “mute,” or that the conversation was being disrupted by
background noise, that intervention would not qualify as a “comment” for the purposes of the
The source for this statement is said to be an “internal email.” That email does not appear in the documents filed in
support of the Student’s submissions; however, the Faculty did not take issue with its existence.
2

14

course, and the teaching assistant would be correct not to record it as such. Asking the teaching
assistant to determine whether an intervention by a student “amounted to a comment” was
unavoidable, reasonable, and fair.
The Student’s second objection falls under issue A(iii) but is best considered here. The Student
asks your Committee to infer (as he asked the GAAB and the GDAAC to infer) that the course
instructor did not actually provide his own assessment of class participation but relied
“exclusively on the qualitative metrics recorded by the [teaching assistant].” He asserts that there
is “no evidence” that the course instructor made a qualitative assessment of class participation
(para. 64). He notes that in responding to his freedom of information request, the Faculty
produced no records of any notes or comments made by the instructor and asks your Committee
to infer that no such records ever existed (para. 63). In the Student’s submission, this delegation
of authority to the teaching assistant was procedurally unfair.
Your Committee rejects this submission. Contrary to the Student’s assertion, there is evidence
that the course instructor performed a qualitative evaluation. This evidence is the course
instructor’s explanation of how he assigned the participation grades: in addition to the records
kept by the teaching assistant, he relied on the Zoom chat log, which he looked at after each
class, and on his recollection, which was fresh at the time, of how the class had progressed (p.
27). If the course instructor made any written notes on class participation, which is not clear from
the record, your Committee infers that they were made for the use of the course instructor at the
time and were not, and were not intended to be, permanently retained. With respect to the
Student in particular, the course instructor told him that “you had a total of 4 comments, none of
which I had highlighted as insightful or adding significantly to the topic and/or discussion” (p.
38). That judgment combines the teaching assistant’s metrics with a qualitative assessment. The
record supports the Faculty’s position that class participation marks in RSM1160 were assigned
in accordance with its policies.
The Student’s third objection was raised under issue C(iii) but is more conveniently considered
here. He submits that he was not consulted “when the instructor carried out his evaluation of
[his] class participation” (p. 28). The Student notes that in some courses at the Faculty, students
are permitted to submit “participation logs” to assist course instructors in assessing participation
grades (see p. 416 for an example). Your Committee finds this submission to be utterly without
merit.
To the extent that this submission concerns the grading scheme for the Course (as para. 131
suggests), your Committee will not consider it because, as indicated above, an academic appeal
is not a suitable vehicle for challenging the grading scheme for a course. Course instructors may,
if they choose, consider some form of self-evaluation, such as the participation logs referred to
by the Student, in evaluating students’ work, but no University or Faculty policy requires that
they do so.
To the extent that this submission is a complaint that the course instructor did not give the
Student an opportunity to make submissions concerning the evaluation of his class participation
mark (as para. 133 suggests), your Committee rejects it. Students have no right to be consulted
about or to participate in the evaluation process; in a course evaluated by written work, for

15

example, students have no right to make submissions as to what their grade should be or to
participate in the course instructor’s reading and evaluation of the written work. If an individual
student were to offer such submissions, a course instructor should not consider them because
considering such submissions would be contrary to the instructor’s duty to evaluate work only on
its academic merits and would be procedurally unfair to other students enrolled in the course.
To the extent that the Student’s claim is that in January 2022, he offered his own records of class
participation to the course instructor and that the course instructor refused to consider them (as
para. 131 suggests), your Committee declines to consider it because it is a new issue. The
Student did not raise this argument with the Academic Director, with the GDAAC, or with the
GAAB (compare pp. 41-42, 46, 71-72, 196-99). The Student has never previously asserted that
at the meeting of January 2022, he offered to provide his own records to the course instructor and
that the course instructor refused to consider them. These facts do not appear in either the
Student’s detailed description of the meeting (pp. 41-42) or in the course instructor’s brief
recollection of the meeting (p. 388).
To the extent that the Student’s point is that his grade was unfair because there is a conflict
between his own recollection of his performance and the instructor’s (as para. 132 and his
submission to the GAAB at p. 199 suggest), that is a question of substantive academic merit that
your Committee will not consider.
C(iii)
The Student submits that he was denied procedural fairness because, when the Academic
Director assigned the second reader, he was not consulted (p. 28). The Student points to a
previous instance in which he was asked “whether he had any objections to the selection of a rereader” (para. 135). This submission is connected with the Student’s submission that he should
have been informed of the identity of the second reader (para. 134). These facts are not in
dispute. The Faculty accepts that the Student was not consulted but submits it acted in
accordance with its policies.
The Faculty’s appeal policies do not specify whether a student is or is not to be consulted about
the identity of the second reader and is silent as to whether the re-reading process should be
anonymized. The PAAWD is silent on this matter. The question, therefore, is whether, in
applying its appeal policy, it was reasonable for the Faculty to select the second reader without
consulting with the Student and to employ a double-blind process. Your Committee finds that it
was. It is not contested that the second reader had expertise in the field of business ethics. The
Student provided a vigorous response to the second reader’s report (pp. 74-75). Consultation and
knowledge would have added nothing to the Student’s ability to respond. The Student’s
knowledge of the second reader’s identity would, however, have created the possibility of
irrelevant ad hominem attacks on the second reader’s qualifications and character, one of the
types of mischief that a double-blind process is intended to avoid. Your Committee is hesitant to
infer that a student would engage in such attacks, but notes that the Student is explicit in his
intention to challenge the second reader’s credentials (para. 134) and that the Student has
mounted an irrelevant attack on the character of the course instructor (para. 138), suggesting that
the danger of this mischief was real in this case.

16

C(iv)
The Student submits that the conduct of (a) the course instructor and (b) the GAAB
demonstrated reasonable apprehension of bias.
C(iv)(a)
The topic chosen by the Student’s group for their presentation related to the “WE Charity
scandal” involving the Liberal government led by Prime Minister Justin Trudeau. The Student
submits that the course instructor was a “well-documented supporter of the Liberal Party…
[who] has a demonstrated history of commenting publicly in favour of the Liberal Party [and
who] in 2009, … passionately defended the Liberal government’s handling of a spending
controversy” (para. 137). The Student submits that the course instructor should have alerted the
Student’s group to his “political leanings” at the time they proposed their topic (para. 138) and
suggests that the course instructor may have been biased in his evaluation of the group work
(para. 137).
It is not clear what remedy the Student thinks these allegations, if established, would support. In
any event, your Committee rejects the allegation of reasonable apprehension of bias. The test for
reasonable apprehension is well-established. The question is: “what would an informed person,
viewing the matter realistically and practically—and having thought the matter through—
conclude”?3 The reasonable person would interpret the material filed by the Student as showing
the course instructor’s support for certain policy initiatives of the Liberal government. The
reasonable person would not read it as “lavish[] praise” or “passion[ate] defence” of the
government. None of it speaks to the WE Charity matter and so sheds no light on the course
instructor’s attitude towards that incident.
The supplementary material filed by the Student in his reply weakens rather than strengthens his
claim of reasonable apprehension of bias. Accepting for the sake of argument that it is true (a
point on which your Committee makes no finding), it suggests that the course instructor is
acquainted with politicians affiliated with both the Liberal and Progressive Conservative parties
and with the principal of a consulting firm that does work for public figures of any political
persuasion. It is therefore of no assistance in establishing reasonable apprehension of bias based
on the course instructor’s supposed partisanship.
There is no merit in this submission.
C(iv)(b)
For the reasons given above, your Committee will not consider this submission.
C(v)
Committee for Justice and Liberty et al. v. National Energy Board et al., [1978] 1 S.C.R. 369, per DeGrandpré J.
dissenting on other grounds.
3

17

The Student submits that “the instructor’s assessment was procedurally unfair because of the
inordinate delay in rendering his decision” (p. 32). The Faculty does not challenge the Student’s
assertion that he received his grade after some time, but submits that the delay did not create
procedural unfairness (Faculty submissions, para. 73).
It is unfortunate that there was delay in the Student’s receipt of his Course grade. But your
Committee agrees with the GAAB that there is no reason to think that in this respect the Student
“was particularly disadvantaged in any way vis-a-vis other students” (p. 353). The Student
submits that the delay compromised his ability to appeal his grade. The voluminous record and
expensive submissions filed by the Student with respect to every aspect of his grade belie this
submission.
Dissenting decision
As noted above, one member of your Committee would allow the appeal and substitute a
notation of CR for the grade of B+. In this member’s view, the application of the grading scheme
to the Student, and indeed to all the students in RSM1160, was unreasonable. This member finds
that the cumulative effect of several problems in the administration of the grading scheme for the
Course resulted in unfairness to the Student.
The member is particularly concerned with the Student’s grade for class participation. Given the
size of the class (140 students) and the short duration of the Course (8 hours), there was not
enough time for sufficient participation by each student to enable a fair assessment of the quality
and quantity of their participation. Moreover, the highest class participation grade in the
Student’s section was 7/10, which is an inappropriate grade distribution given that 70% is the
requirement to pass the Course and reflects the impossibility of fairly assessing class
participation given the size of the class and the short duration of the Course.
The member, while recognizing that your Committee has no jurisdiction over the grading
practices of University divisions, makes the following two recommendations for the Faculty’s
consideration.
I. It is recommended that the Faculty adopt an upper limit on the percentage of a course grade
that can come from group work where each member of the group receives the same grade. This
should be limited by regulation, not guideline, and the limit should be well below 40%. For
example, in the Faculty of Applied Science and Engineering the limit is 25%
(https://engineering.calendar.utoronto.ca/academic-regulations#eleven).
II. For courses such as the present one, i.e. courses whose number of contact hours and weight
are below a suitable threshold for assigning a grade, it is recommended that the Faculty adopt a
pass/fail approach with no grade assigned.
Conclusion
The appeal is dismissed.

18

