Report 434

   DATE:

   March 26, 2024

   PARTIES:

   J.Z v. The Rotman School of Management

   HEARING DATE:

   November 23, 2023, via Zoom

   COMMITTEE MEMBERS:

   Professor Hamish Stewart, Senior Chair

   Professor David Zingg, Faculty Governor

   Seyedereza Massoum, Student Governor

   HEARING SECRETARY:

   Nadia Bruno, Special Projects Officer, Office of Appeals, Discipline
   and Faculty Grievances

   FOR THE STUDENT APPELLANT:

   The Student

   FOR THE ROTMAN SCHOOL OF MANAGEMENT:

   Lily Harmer, Paliare Roland Rosenberg Rothstein LLP

   Joseph Berger, Paliare Roland Rosenberg Rothstein LLP

   The Student appealed from a decision of the Graduate Academic Appeals
   Board (‚GAAB‚) dismissing an appeal from a decision of the Vice-Dean of
   the Rotman School of Management (the ‚Faculty‚), accepting the
   recommendation of the Faculty‚s Graduate Department Academic Appeals
   Committee (‚GDAAC‚) that the Faculty dismiss the Student‚s grade appeal
   in a Course.

   The Student was enrolled in the Course at the Faculty and received a B+
   in the Course. The Student‚s grade in the Course had three components;
   class participation, a group presentation and a reaction paper, worth
   10%, 45% and 45% respectively. The Student sought a review of the
   grade. The Faculty declined to provide a review of the class
   participation and group presentation components of the grade. An
   anonymous second reader confirmed the grade for the reaction paper. The
   GDAAC recommended that the Student‚s appeal be dismissed. The Faculty
   accepted that recommendation. The Student‚s further appeal to the GAAB
   was dismissed.

   On appeal to the AAC, the Student sought to have the grading basis for
   the Course changed to a pass-fail scale. In the alternative, the
   Student requested to be assessed a grade based solely on the reaction
   paper. In the further alternative, the Student requested a substantive
   re-evaluation of all three components of their grade.

   The Chair alone made several decisions with respect to jurisdictional
   matters in this case. The Chair rejected the Student‚s request for a
   change in the grading basis of the Course, finding such remedy to be
   both inappropriate and outside the jurisdiction of the Committee. The
   Chair noted that a change to the evaluation for a course may only be
   done in accordance with Article 1.3 of the University‚s Assessment and
   Grading Practices Policy (‚AGPP‚). The Chair further noted that since
   other students enrolled in the course were not parties to the appeal it
   would be unfair for the Committee to make an order that affected their
   grades. The Chair further held that the Committee has no jurisdiction
   to allow a student‚s appeal on the basis of that student‚s
   dissatisfaction with a grading scheme for a course or to modify or
   invalidate an academic regulation or requirement, including a grading
   scheme.

   Finally, the Chair noted that, on a grade appeal, the AAC will not
   consider the substantive academic merits of the student‚s work ‚ it
   will only consider whether the division in question reasonably applied
   its own practices and policies. On that basis, the Chair declined to
   give effect to any of the Student‚s submissions that would otherwise
   require a substantive review of any of the components of the Student‚s
   grade. Finaly, the Chair declined to consider the Student‚s submissions
   concerning the conduct of the appeal before the GAAB and noted that if
   the Committee were to accept such submissions, the remedy would be a
   new hearing before the GAAB which the Student had not sought.

   The Student raised three grounds of appeal to the AAC. First, that
   prior decisions to uphold the Student‚s failing class participation
   grade and presentation grade without a substantive re-evaluation were
   not reasonable. Second, that the prior decisions to uphold the
   Student‚s reaction paper grade were unreasonable. And third, that the
   prior decisions were not made in a procedurally fair manner.

   The majority of the Committee (herein ‚the Committee‚) rejected the
   first ground of appeal. The Student indicated that the policy not to
   re-evaluate the Appellant‚s performance was invalid as it was
   inconsistent with the AGPP or SGS Regulations. The Committee indicated
   that the faculty policy was not inconsistent with the AGPP or SGS
   policies. The Committee also found that the process in arriving at the
   participation grade was reasonable and that the grading scheme of the
   course did not violate any policies.

   With respect to the second ground, the Committee found that it was not
   unreasonable for the GDAAC to uphold the Student‚s reaction paper
   grade. In dismissing this ground of appeal, the Committee found that
   the feedback provided by both the professor and second reader was
   sufficient to inform the student of the reasons for the grade.

   The Committee also dismissed the third ground of appeal, indicating
   that the prior decisions were made in a procedurally fair manner. The
   Committee specifically noted that the Student not entitled to be
   consulted regarding the Faculty‚s choice of second reader for
   re-grading, that the Professor did not impermissibly delegate authority
   to teaching assistant for grading of participation, and that the
   Professor did not demonstrate a reasonable apprehension of bias.

   One member of the Committee would have allowed the appeal and
   substituted a notation of CR for the grade of B+. In particular, the
   member noted that the application of the grading scheme to the Student,
   and all students enrolled in the Course, was unreasonable and resulted
   in unfairness to the Student. The dissenting member recommended that
   the Faculty adopt an upper limit on the percentage of a course grade
   that can come from group work (where each group member is assessed the
   same grade), and that the Faculty adopt a pass-fail grading scheme for
   courses where the number of contact hours and weight are below a
   suitable threshold for assigning a grade.

   A majority of the Committee dismissed the appeal. One member of the
   Committee would have allowed the appeal and substituted a notation of
   CR.
   [1]View Report

References

   1. file:///media/31610
