UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
GOVERNING COUNCIL
Report #325 of the Academic Appeals Committee
April 18, 2008

To:

The Academic Board,
University of Toronto

Your committee reports that it held a hearing on Monday February 25, 2008, at which the
following were present:
Ms. Kate Hilton, Chair
Mr. Arya Ghadimi
Professor Glen Jones
Dr. Louise Lemieux-Charles
Professor Michael Marrus
Ms. Nancy Smart, Judicial Affairs Officer
In Attendance:
Mr. F. Z. (the “Student”)
Mr. Steven Frankel (Representative for the Student)
Professor John Scherk, Interim Vice-Dean, UTSC
Ms. Sherylin Biason, Registrar, UTSC
The Appeal
The Student is appealing the decision of the UTSC Sub-Committee on Academic
Appeals, dated April 11, 2007, which denied him permission to write a deferred exam in
the 2006 Fall Session course ECMA04H3F. In his appeal before this Committee, the
Student renewed his original request for permission to write a deferred exam. In his
submissions, he offered two alternative remedies for the Committee’s consideration in the
event that the Committee did not decide to allow him to write a deferred exam: first, that
he be allowed to write a deferred exam with a 15% grade reduction; and second, that he
be allowed to withdraw from ECMA04H3F without academic penalty on the basis of
non-attendance.
Facts
The Student entered Canada in May, 2006 from Beijing, China as a student in the Green
Path Program at UTSC. The Green Path Program provides intensive English language
training to international students entering a four-year undergraduate program. Following
this summer ESL program, the Student enrolled in the Honours Bachelor of Science
Program at UTSC in the 2006 Fall Session. His 2006 Fall course load included
ECMA04H3F.
46986

1

Students in ECMA04H3F were evaluated according to their performance on two term
tests and a final examination. The terms tests were worth 20% and 30% respectively, and
the final exam was worth 50%. However, if a student in the course failed to write either
of the term tests, for any reason, the weight of that term test was automatically added to
the final exam.
The Student stated that he felt he would be able to achieve a higher grade in
ECMA04H3F if he had more time to prepare. He therefore decided not to write either of
the two term tests. Consequently, his final examination was worth 100% of his overall
grade in the course. The examination was scheduled for Saturday December 9, 2006,
from 9:00 a.m. to 12:00 p.m.
The night before the examination, the Student became ill with a fever of 39°C. On the
morning of the examination, the Student still had a fever and determined that he could not
write the examination. The Student took the bus to the UTSC Health and Wellness
Centre in order to see a doctor and to obtain a medical certificate. However, when he
arrived, he discovered that the Health and Wellness Centre was closed for the weekend.
The Student then attempted to seek medical attention off-campus, but discovered that he
could not access free medical care without the University Health Insurance Plan (UHIP)
card issued by the University to international students. The Student did not have a UHIP
card. The Student was convinced that the cost of accessing medical services without a
UHIP card would be prohibitive. The Student therefore returned home and rested. The
following Monday, he returned to the Health and Wellness Centre to obtain a medical
certificate. However, by this time, the Student had recovered and was no longer showing
symptoms of illness. He was therefore unable to obtain a medical certificate to verify his
illness.
On January 4, 2007, the Student petitioned for a deferred examination in ECMA04H3F.
The petition was denied, and he received a grade of zero in the course. On March 26,
2007, the Student filed an appeal with the UTSC Subcommittee on Academic Appeals.
His appeal with respect to ECMA04H3F was denied. The UTSC Subcommittee relied on
the UTSC policy in relation to medical documentation, which states: “Medical
documentation for examinations missed because of illness must be obtained on the day of
the examination whenever possible.” The UTSC Subcommittee did not accept that the
Student had made best efforts to acquire medical evidence in support of his illness. It
stated that the Student ought to have known that he needed a UHIP card, but that he had
neglected to acquire one. Moreover, the UTSC Subcommittee stated that the Student
should have done further investigation into the cost of obtaining medical services without
a UHIP card. Finally, the UTSC Subcommittee noted that, having failed to write either of
the two term tests, the Student was aware that his entire grade rested on the final exam.
In light of this, the UTSC Subcommittee stated: “If, for any reason, the exam could not
be written at that time, it was your responsibility to obtain solid documents to justify the
event.”

46986

2

On July 10, 2007, the Student appealed to the Academic Appeals Committee of
Governing Council.
Decision
This Committee is of the view that the appeal should be allowed, and that the Student
should be permitted to write a deferred examination in ECMA04H3F.
This Committee accepts the evidence of the Student that he made best efforts to obtain
medical documentation on the day of the examination. This Committee finds that the
Student had a reasonable expectation that he would have access to the Health and
Wellness Centre on the day of his examination, although the examination was scheduled
for a Saturday. While this Committee agrees that it was the Student’s responsibility to
obtain medical documentation, this Committee finds that the Student discharged his
responsibility to the extent possible in the circumstances. This Committee also agrees
with the UTSC Subcommittee that it is not desirable for students to concentrate the full
weight of their grade on a final examination. However, since UTSC permits students to
select this option, there is no basis for insisting that a student who misses an examination
worth 100% of his grade has a greater responsibility to provide “solid documents to
justify the event” than a student who misses an examination worth less than 100% of the
final grade.
Having determined that the Student should be permitted to write a deferred examination
in ECMA04H3F, it was not necessary for this Committee to consider either of the
alternative remedies proposed by the Student.
The appeal is allowed.

46986

3

