Report 325

DATE:

   April 18, 2008

PARTIES:

   Mr. F. Z. (the Student) v.Â  UTSC

Hearing Date(s):

   February 25, 2008

Committee Members:

   Ms. Kate Hilton, Chair
   Mr. Arya Ghadimi
   Professor Glen Jones
   Dr. Louise Lemieux-Charles
   Professor Michael Marrus

Judicial Affairs Officer:

   Ms. Nancy Smart

In Attendance:

   Mr. F. Z. (the âStudentâ)
   Mr. Steven Frankel (Representative for the Student)
   Professor John Scherk, Interim Vice-Dean, UTSC
   Ms. Sherylin Biason, Registrar, UTSC

   Request to write a deferred examination, worth 100% of the final mark
   in the course. The Student proposed two alternative remedies for the
   Committeeâs consideration: that he be allowed to write a deferred exam
   with a 15% grade reduction; and that he be allowed to withdraw from the
   course without academic penalty on the basis of nonâattendance. The
   Student claimed that was ill with a fever on the day of the
   examination. The Student attempted to see a doctor at the UTSC Health
   Centre but it was closed. The Student then attempted to seek medical
   attention offâcampus, but as an international student, he could not
   access free medical care without the University Health Insurance Plan
   (UHIP) card issued by the University. The Divisional Appeal Committee
   found that the Student had not made best efforts to acquire medical
   evidence. The Committee found that the Student had a reasonable
   expectation that he would have access to the Health Centre, and that
   the Student discharged his responsibility to obtain medical
   documentation to the extent possible. The Committee found that since
   UTSC permits students to concentrate the full weight of their grade on
   a final examination, there is no basis for insisting that a student who
   misses an examination worth 100% of his grade has a greater
   responsibility to provide âsolid documents to justify the eventâ than a
   student who misses an examination worth less than 100% of the final
   grade. The Committee allowed the appeal and ordered that the Student be
   permitted to write a deferred examination in the course. Having granted
   the original remedy requested, it was not necessary for the Committee
   to consider the alternative remedies.Â  Appeal allowed.
   [1]View Report

References

   1. file:///media/12666
