Case 1282

DATE:

   December 19, 2022

PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v. M.L. ("the Student")

HEARING DATE:

   September 28, 2022, via Zoom

PANEL MEMBERS:

   Dena Varah, Chair
   Professor George Cree, Faculty Panel Member
   Dylan Dingwell, Student Panel Member

APPEARANCES:

   William Webb, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg
   Rothstein LLP
   Joseph Berger, Co-Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg Rothstein LLP

HEARING SECRETARY:

   Nadia Bruno, Special Projects Officer, Office of Appeals, Discipline
   and Faculty Grievances

   The Student was charged with one count of knowingly using or possessing
   an unauthorized aid and/or obtaining and/or providing unauthorized
   assistance in connection with an assignment they submitted in a course,
   contrary to section B.i.1(b) of the Code. They were also charged with
   one count of knowingly representing as their own an idea or expression
   of an idea or work of another in the assignment, contrary to section
   B.i.1(d) of the Code. Alternatively, they were charged with knowingly
   engaging in a form of cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct,
   fraud or misrepresentation not otherwise described in the Code in order
   to obtain academic credit or other academic advantage of any kind in
   connection with the assignment, contrary to section B.i.3(b) of the
   Code.

   The Student did not attend the hearing . The University submitted
   evidence relating to the various attempts made to notify the Student of
   the hearing. The Panel noted that based on the extensive attempted
   correspondence with the Student at the email address and telephone
   number that the Student had provided in ROSI, it was satisfied that the
   Student had received reasonable notice of the hearing date pursuant to
   the Statutory Power and Procedures Act and the University Tribunalâs
   Rules of Practice and Procedure . The hearing proceeded in the absence
   of the Student.

   Regarding the charge under section B.i.1(b) of the Code, the Panel held
   that the evidence established without question that there were highly
   unusual similarities between the assignment submitted by the Student
   and the assignment submitted by another student. The course professor
   had provided evidence that most of the 300 lines of code submitted were
   highly and unusually similar and included matters that were not
   discussed in the course. According to the Panel, these two things in
   combination made it extremely unlikely that the similarities were due
   to chance and that it was far more likely that, in contravention of the
   Code, the students had shared their work and produced similar
   assignments. Regarding the charge under section B.i.1(d) of the Code,
   the Panel accepted the admission by another student that they had
   shared a screenshot of their work with others.Â It was, therefore, more
   likely than not that they had shared the work with the Student who had
   then used it, representing it as their own. According to the Panel, the
   evidence on this point was not perfect, nor was it tested. It noted
   that the question was merely whether on a preponderance of the evidence
   it was satisfied that this was the more likely flow of assistance. As a
   result of the Panelâs findings, the University withdrew the alternative
   charge under B.i.3(b) of the Code.

   The Panel commented that although Appendix C to the Code is not binding
   on the Panel, it provides the expectation for students and consistency
   in penalties sought. It stated that t he nature of the offences and
   their impact on the University required a significant penalty. It also
   indicated that plagiarism and unauthorized assistance undermine the
   very foundation of academic integrity and result in a profound
   unfairness to students who work diligently and independently to earn
   their credits. If left unchecked, these offences can undermine the
   credibility of the institution and the degrees it confers. The Panel
   held that students cannot claim ignorance because the University
   delivered the message of its expectations and the seriousness of the
   offence repeatedly and clearly. Finally, the Panel added that given the
   notice provided by the Code, the Student could not expect a different
   penalty in the circumstances.

   The Panel imposed the following sanctions: a grade of zero in the
   course; a two-year suspension; a notation for two years and eight
   months on the Student's transcript; and a report to the Provost for
   publication .
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/30828
