Report 404

DATE:

   June 20, 2019

PARTIES:

   M.U-S. (the âStudentâ) v. Toronto School of Theology

HEARING DATE:

   June 6, 2019

Committee Members:

   Professor Stephen Waddams, Chair
   Professor Mohan Matthen, Faculty Governor
   Mr. Price Amobi Maka, Student Governor

Appearances:

For the Student Appellant:

   Mr. Alex Severance, Law Student, Downtown Legal Services

For the Toronto School of Theology:

   Mr. Robert A. Centa, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland
   Rosenberg Rothstein LLP

   The Student appealedÂ from a decision of theÂ Toronto School of
   Theology (TST) terminatingÂ herÂ candidacy for the degree of Doctor of
   Theology.

   TST communicated its decision to terminate the Studentâs candidacy for
   the degree of Doctor of Theology by letter dated September 7, 2016.Â
   Thereafter,Â the Student immediately indicated a wish to appeal the
   decision and filed an appeal to the Graduate Studies Council Academic
   Appeals Committee (GSCAAC)Â within the prescribed time limit.Â Â The
   Student was then erroneously informed by letterÂ from the
   RegistrarÂ dated December 15, 2016,Â that she was not eligible to
   appeal to the GSCAAC.

   The Student appealed to the Academic Appeals Committee (AAC) from the
   decision ofÂ TSTÂ terminating her candidacy for the degree of Doctor of
   Theology by filing a Notice of Appeal on February 7, 2019.Â  While TST
   conceded thatÂ itsÂ ownÂ appeal committee erred in refusing
   jurisdictionÂ to hear the Studentâs appeal, TSTÂ argued that the
   Studentâs notice of appeal to theÂ AACÂ was filed out of time.

   Both parties agreed that the only issue before the AAC was the time
   issue.Â SectionÂ 3.1.6 of the AACâsÂ Terms ofÂ Reference stipulates
   that an appeal to the AAC shall,Â except in exceptional
   circumstances,Â be commenced by filing a notice of appeal no later than
   5 pm on the ninetieth day after the date of the decision from which the
   appeal is being taken. Accordingly, theÂ AAC identified the question
   before it as whether the words âexcept in exceptional circumstancesâ
   apply in this case.

   TheÂ partiesÂ referredÂ the AACÂ toÂ the four-part test used in
   previous AAC decisions and judicial statementsÂ to determineÂ whether
   the AAC should exercise its discretion and allow the Student to file
   their appeal beyond theÂ 90-dayÂ time limit.Â Â The AAC noted
   thatÂ whileÂ these factors are relevant in many cases, they are
   notÂ strict pre-requisites in all circumstances.Â The AACÂ noted
   thatÂ theÂ underlying purposeÂ of the exception must be borne in
   mind,Â thatÂ is,Â to prevent the strict general rule from causing an
   inequity.Â In this case, the TST erroneously led the Student to believe
   that there was and would be no decision of the TST appealsÂ committee
   and so no decision from which she could appeal. While the policy of the
   University on Academic Appeals Within Divisions states that any student
   whose appeal has been denied must be advised of the right to appeal to
   the AAC, the Registrarâs letter to the Student in this case did not
   include any indication of a right to appeal. The AAC opined that it
   would be preferable in general for students to be informed individually
   of their right of appeal.Â The AAC concluded that in the exceptional
   circumstances of this case, where the Student was mistakenly advised
   that she was ineligible to appeal, adequate notice was not given to the
   Student of her right to appeal.Â The statement in the Th.D.Â and
   Ph.D.Â Handbook relied on by TST (stating that allÂ Th.D.Â students
   have the right to appealÂ the final resultÂ of a TST appeals process to
   the AAC) was confusing in the particular circumstances of this case, as
   the Registrarâs letter did not give the appearance of being itself a
   decision of the TSTÂ appeals committee.Â The AAC also stated that in
   its opinion, the seeking of legal advice by the Student did not
   displace the exceptional circumstances of this case and could not be
   said,Â inÂ itself, toÂ create a new strict time period.

   The AAC allowed the appeal and remitted the matter to the GSCAAC.
   [1]View Report

References

   1. file:///media/28458
