Case No.: 851
THE UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
IN THE MATTER OF charges of academic dishonesty filed on March 10, 2016,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters, 1995,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Act, 1971, S.O. 1971, c. 56 as amended S.O. 1978,
c. 88

BETWEEN:

UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
- and Y

Y

REASONS FOR DECISION ON PENALTY
Hearing Date: November 30, 2016
Members of the Panel:
Ms. Johanna Braden, Barrister and Solicitor, Chair
Professor Michael Evans, Faculty Panel Member
Ms. Yusra Qazi, Student Panel Member
Appearances:
Ms. Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland, Barristers
Mr. Peter Wuebbolt, Barrister and Solicitor, Counsel for the Student
Ms. Y
Y
, the Student
In Attendance:
Ms. Krista Osborne, Administrative Assistant, Office of Appeals, Discipline and Faculty
Grievances
Mr. Sean Lourim, Technology Assistant, Office of the Governing Council
Ms. W Z
(Mother of the Student)

2

1.

On October 19, 2016, the Trial Division of the University Tribunal released its
reasons for decision in this matter, finding that the University of Toronto (“the
University”) had met the onus on it to prove that on or about August 11, 2015,
Ms. Y

Y

(“the Student”) knowingly obtained unauthorized assistance to

complete the final deferred examination (the “Exam”) for academic credit in
ECO100Y1: Introduction to Economics (the “Course”), contrary to section B.I.1(b)
of the Code.

2.

The essence of the Tribunal’s finding was that during the Exam, the Student had
looked at the test paper of the student sitting next to her (M.W.) and copied
M.W.’s answers. The Tribunal concluded that, while it was possible that the
Student and M.W. had colluded in advance to cheat on the Exam, it was just a
likely that this was a crime of opportunity, and that once the Student realized she
could see M.W.’s exam she decided to copy from it.

The Student was moved

once her copying was noted by the Exam invigilators. In sum, while this was not
an especially sophisticated or carefully planned scheme of dishonesty, it was still
cheating on a final examination.

3.

On November 30, 2016, the Tribunal convened to determine the appropriate
penalty.

3.

No additional evidence was formally led, however, the Tribunal was advised of
the following.

3

(a)

The Student has no previous discipline history.

(b)

She is 22 years old, and came to Canada with her family from China 10

years ago.

She has a younger brother.

She has embraced her arrival in

Canada, including by attending university. The Student has been hampered by
medical issues relating to anxiety, which led to the initial deferral of the Exam.
Although the Student was originally enrolled in courses in the Fall 2016 session,
she dropped those courses and has not been attending the University.
(c)

If the Student can resolve her medical issues, her hope is to return to

classes beginning in the Summer of 2017.
The Submissions of the Parties
4.

The University asked for a sanction that would include a grade of 0 in the
Course, a suspension from the University for two years, a transcript notation for
three years, and a recommendation for publication without the Student’s name.
The University submitted six prior decisions of the Tribunal, showing that the
sanction requested was consistent with how other students at the University have
been treated, and with the principles with respect to sanction more generally.

5.

The Student accepted that the Course grade of 0 was appropriate, as well as
publication with her name withheld. However, the Student submitted that the
suspension should be for a period of one year, backdated to begin when she
stopped attending classes, and that any transcript notation should end once the

4

suspension ended. The Student argued that a harsher sanction would be overly
punitive and prejudicial in the circumstances, and was not required in order to
ensure that the principles of penalty orders were satisfied.
Decision and Reasons for Decision
6.

The Tribunal has considered the principles and factors relevant to sanction set
out by this Tribunal in University of Toronto and Mr. C (November 5, 1976, Case
No. 1976/77-3). While the determination of an appropriate penalty in every case
by the Tribunal will depend on an individual assessment of these principles and
factors, it is important to have general consistency in the Tribunal’s approach to
sanction so that students are treated fairly and equitably.

7.

At this Tribunal, cheating during exams, whether through the giving or receiving
of unauthorized aid, generally results in a suspension of at least two years if it is
a first offence, with a longer suspension often being ordered in subsequent
offences. The exact length of suspension will depend on such factors as the
student’s cooperation, evidence as to mitigating factors, and the precise nature of
the misconduct. See, for example, University of Toronto and R (June 6, 2014,
Case No. 708); University of Toronto and S (February 8, 2012, Case No. 635);
University of Toronto and L (November 3, 2008, Case No. 527); and University of
Toronto and L (April 11, 2005, Case No. 2004/05-04).

8.

Similarly, it is common at this Tribunal for transcript notations to last for a longer
time than the suspension.

This ensures that if the student returns to the

5

University following the suspension, administrators and others are alive to the
student’s history and can monitor the student’s progress as may be appropriate.
Transcript notations also ensure a returning student knows that he or she may be
watched more closely, thereby encouraging the student to abide by the rules.
9.

The Tribunal considered the University’s submissions in light of its findings and
the factors from Mr. C., supra.
(a)

The character of the Student: the Student participated in this hearing at

both stages, demonstrating a willingness to respect the University’s processes.
Although she does not get the mitigating credit that is typically awarded to
students who admit misconduct before the Tribunal, the fact that the Student
defended the charges is not to be held against her. This is her first offence.
However, the circumstances of the offence show that the Student engaged in a
deliberate effort to obtain unauthorized assistance during the Exam.
(b)

The likelihood of a repetition of the offence: the Student’s counsel urged

that there was no reason to think that this offence would ever be repeated, and
submitted the Tribunal should feel confident that the Student had been
specifically deterred. This submission is somewhat at odds with the submission
that the Student’s medical condition played a role in the offence, and that her
medical issue remains unresolved.

While the Tribunal sincerely hopes the

Student will not err in this fashion again, a significant period of suspension is
required to bring the message home to her. A transcript notation that lasts for a

6

year beyond the suspension will ensure that the Student is monitored should she
return to the University, and will assist in the prevention of any recurrence.
(c)

The nature of the offence committed: the integrity of examinations is a

cornerstone of academic life.

Copying another’s answers during an exam is

profoundly unfair to other students, and poisons the entire premise of academic
achievement and grading.

The University spends considerable resources to

ensure that examinations are fair.

The Student’s cheating in this case was

perceived as obvious to the two invigilators who caught her.
(d)

Any extenuating circumstances surrounding the commission of the

offence: the Student’s submissions at the penalty hearing included the
submission that the Student has experienced medical issues, including anxiety.
This is clear from the Student’s ROSI record, which shows that the Student had
successfully petitioned extensively for deferred examinations due to various
acute health illnesses. The Tribunal recognizes that medical conditions can be a
factor in academic misconduct.

However, without clear and specific medical

evidence at this hearing explaining the Student’s illness and what role, if any, it
might have played, the Tribunal does not perceive this as a mitigating factor so
significant as to warrant a serious deviation from other, similar cases.
(e)

The detriment to the University occasioned by the offence: fortunately, the

Student’s misconduct was detected quickly, thanks to the work of the Exam
invigilators. However, any time the rules of an examination are breached, the
reputation of the University is threatened.

7

(f)

The need to deter others from committing a similar offence: this is a key

factor in any cheating case.

It is important to send a clear message that

surreptitious attempts to undermine the academic integrity of examinations will
be taken very seriously. The Student’s submissions did not adequately account
for the need to impose a sanction that would deter cheating in others, especially
others who may not have planned to cheat but find themselves succumbing to
temptation.
10.

The Tribunal recognized, as did the University, that this hearing began in July of
2016 and, through no fault of the Student, the imposition of the penalty was
delayed for almost five months. Accordingly, the Tribunal determined that the
suspension should be for a period of two years, but that timing of it should be
deemed to have commenced when this hearing began on its merits.

11.

In all of the circumstances, and with regard to the factors identified in the C.
case, the Tribunal was satisfied that the appropriate sanction was as follows:
(a)

that the Student receive a final grade of zero in ECO100Y in Fall 2014-

Winter 2015;
(b)

that the Student be suspended from the University from the first day of the

hearing, July 8, 2016, to the day immediately prior to the start date of the
Summer 2018 S Section;



F

WKDW WKH VDQFWLRQ EH UHFRUGHG RQ WKH 6WXGHQWಬV DFDGHPLF UHFRUG DQG

WUDQVFULSWXQWLO-XQHWRWKHHIIHFWWKDWVKHZDVVDQFWLRQHGIRUDFDGHPLF
PLVFRQGXFWDQG
G

WKDWWKLVFDVHVKDOOEH UHSRUWHGWRWKH3URYRVWIRUSXEOLFDWLRQRIDQRWLFHRI

WKH GHFLVLRQ RI WKH 7ULEXQDO DQG WKH VDQFWLRQ RU VDQFWLRQV LPSRVHG ZLWK WKH
QDPHRIWKH6WXGHQWZLWKKHOG


'DWHGDW7RURQWRWKLVVWGD\RI0DUFK














BBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBB
BBBBBBBBBBBBBBB













-RKDQQD%UDGHQ



