Case 851 - Sanction

   [1]Case 851 - Finding

DATE:

   March 1, 2017

PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v. Y.Y. (âthe Studentâ)

Hearing Date(s):

   November 30, 2016

Panel Members:

   Ms. Johanna Braden, Barrister and Solicitor, Chair
   Professor Michael Evans, Faculty Panel Member
   Ms. Yusra Qazi, Student Panel Member

Apearances:

   Ms. Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland,
   Barristers
   Mr. Peter Wuebbolt, Barrister and Solicitor, Counsel for the Student
   The Student

In Attendance:

   Ms. Krista Osborne, Administrative Assistant, Office of Appeals,
   Discipline and Faculty GrievancesÂ  Mr. Sean Lourim, Technology
   Assistant, Office of the Governing Council
   Ms. W.Z. (Mother of the Student)

   The Student had been found guilty of using an unauthorized aid during
   an exam contrary to s. B.i.1(b) of the Code for copying answers off of
   the person sitting next to her in the exam room during her final exam.
   The Panel convened this hearing to determine the appropriate penalty.

   The Panel reviewed prior decisions that set out that cheating during
   exams, whether through the giving or receiving of unauthorized aid,
   generally results in a suspension of at least two years if it is a
   first offence, with a longer suspension often being ordered in
   subsequent offences.Â  The exact length of suspension depends on
   factors such as the studentâs cooperation, evidence as to mitigating
   factors, and the precise nature of the misconduct.Â  Further, the cases
   suggested that it is common for transcript notations to last for a
   longer time than a suspension.Â  This ensures that if the Student
   returns to the University following the suspension, administrators and
   others are alive to the studentâs history and can monitor the studentâs
   progress as may be appropriate.Â  Transcript notations also ensure a
   returning student knows that he or she may be watched more closely,
   thereby encouraging the student to abide by the rules (e.g. University
   of Toronto v R (June 6, 2014, Case No. 708); University of Toronto v S
   (February 8, 2012, Case No. 635); University of Toronto v L (November
   3, 2008, Case No. 527); and University of Toronto v L (April 11, 2005,
   Case No. 2004/05-04)).

   Applying these principles along with the Mr. C. factors to the present
   case, aggravating factors were the serious nature of the offence, the
   detriment to the Universityâs reputation occasioned by those who cheat
   on examinations, and the need to deter others.Â  Mitigating factors
   were that it was the Studentâs first offence and that she had
   participated in the discipline process. That she had defended herself
   against the allegations was not to be held against her. The Studentâs
   claim that an unresolved medical condition played a role in the offence
   was at odds with the submission that she would not repeat the
   offence.Â  Without clear and specific medical evidence explaining the
   role of the Studentâs illness in her commission of the offence, the
   Panel did not treat the Studentâs medical condition as a mitigating
   factor.

   The Panel determined that the penalty should be deemed to have started
   when the hearing began on its merits (five months prior to the current
   proceeding) because the delay in convening the penalty hearing was not
   within the Studentâs control. The Panel accepted the Universityâs
   submission on penalty of a grade of zero in the course; a two-year
   suspension; a notation on the Studentâs academic record and transcript
   for three years; and a report to the Provost.
   [2]View Case

References

   1. http://live-the-office-of-the-governing-council.pantheonsite.io/media/12922
   2. file:///media/13073
