Case #496

   DATE: April 30, 2009
   PARTIES: University of Toronto v. The Student
   Hearing Date(s): February 18, 2009
   Panel Members:
   Mr. Clifford Lax, Chair
   Professor Carolyn Pitchik, Faculty Panel Member
   Mr. Sybil Derrible, Student Panel Member
   Appearances:
   Ms. Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel
   Professor Susan Pfeiffer, Dean, School of Graduate Studies
   Trial Division â s. B.i.3(a) of Code â forged academic records â
   transcript, diploma and verification letter submitted with falsified
   admission application â hearing not attended â reasonable notice of
   hearing â see Statutory Powers Procedure Act â Agreed Statement of Fact
   â degree completed â guilty plea â Joint Submission on Penalty â
   admittance under false pretences â no alternative but recommendation of
   expulsion â Joint Submission on Penalty acceptedÂ  â recommendation
   that the Student be expelled as per s. C.ii.(b)(i) of Code; five-year
   suspension pending expulsion decision; and report to Provost
   Student charged with four offences under s. B.i.3(a), and
   alternatively, four offences under s. B.i.1(a)Â  and s. B.i.3(b) of the
   Code. The charges related to allegations that the Student submitted a
   falsified admission application to the Masters of Engineering Program
   and that he submitted a forged Transcript of Academic Records, a
   Diploma conferring a Bachelor of Engineering Degree and a verification
   letter, all from a foreign university. The Student did not attend the
   hearing. The Panel considered s. 7.1 of the Statutory Powers Procedure
   Act, the content of the Notice of Hearing, and the emails from the
   Student confirming that he would not be in attendance, and found that
   the hearing could proceed in the Student's absence. The Student had
   emailed signed copies of an Agreed Statement of Fact and Joint
   Submission on Penalty to the University, both of which were submitted
   at the hearing. The Student was accepted into the program, successfully
   completed his degree and was eligible to graduate.Â  After discovering
   that the Transcript and the Diploma were forged the University received
   a letter purportedly from the foreign university confirming the
   authenticity of the Student's degree. The foreign university indicated
   that the letter was a fake. The Student pleaded guilty to the charges
   under B.i.3.(a) of the Code. Based on the evidence and the Student's
   admission of guilt, the Panel registered a conviction on the charges.
   The parties submitted a Joint Submission on Penalty. The Panel found
   that the Studentâs admittance was under false pretences and that it had
   negative consequence for the next best legitimate applicant who was
   rejected. The Panel found that the Studentâs admittance to the
   University was illegitimate and that there was no alternative but to
   recommend expulsion for a student admitted under false pretences. The
   Panel accepted the Joint Submission on Penalty and imposed a
   recommendation to the President, further to s. C.ii.(b)(i) of the Code,
   that the Student be expelled from the University; a five-year
   suspension pending the expulsion decision; and that a report be issued
   to the Provost.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12707
