Case 496

THE UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO

IN THE MATTER OF charges of academic dishonesty made on April 3, 2008;
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic
Matters, 1995;
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Act, 1971, S.O. 1971, c. 56 as amended
S.O. 1978, C. 88

BETWEEN:
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
- and-

--

Mr.

Members of the Panel:
• Mr. Clifford Lax, Chair
• Professor Carolyn Pitchik, Faculty Panel Member
• Mr. Sybil Derrible, Student Panel Member
Appearances:
• Ms. Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel
• Professor Susan Pfeiffer, Dean, School of Graduate Studies

Preliminary
[l]

The Trial Division of the University Tribunal was convened on February 18, 2009 to
consider charges under the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic
Matters, 1995 (the "Code") laid against the Student by letter dated April 3, 2008 from
Professor Edith Hillan, Vice-Provost, Academic.

[2]

Assistant discipline counsel, Ms. Harmer, introduced two emails from the Student, dated
February 17, 2009 at 7:13 p.m. and 7:19 p.m. (Exhibits 2 and 3 respectively). To the first
email the Student attached the signed signature pages to the Agreed Statement of Fact
(ASF) and the Joint Submission on Penalty (JSP); the second email confirmed that he
would not be in attendance at the hearing scheduled for the evening of February 18, 2009.
- 1-

Case 496

[3]

Ms. Hanner reviewed the Notice of Hearing (Exhibit 1), which informed the Student that:
"You may choose to attend the hearing with or without representation, or not to
attend at all. If you do not attend, the hearing may take place without you and
you will not be entitled to further notice in the proceeding. If you do not attend
you will be notified in writing of the outcome.
The panel was then reminded of the provisions of the Statutory Powers Procedure Act
(SPPA), Section 7 .1, which permits administrative tribunals to proceed in the absence
of a party, provided proper Notice of Hearing has been given.

[4]

In light of the provisions of the SPPA, the content of the Notice of Hearing, and the
emails from the Student, the panel permitted the hearing to proceed in the Student's
absence.

Hearing on the Facts
[5]

The charges are as follows:
1.

In or about March, 2006, you knowingly forged or in any other way altered or
falsified an academic record, and/or uttered, circulated or made use of any such
forged, altered or falsified academic record, namely, an application for
admission to the School of Graduate Studies, University of Toronto dated
March 21, 2006 (the "Application"), contrary to section B.I.3.(a) of the Code.

2.

In or about March, 2006, you knowingly forged or in any other way altered or
falsified an academic record, and/or uttered, circulated or made use of any such
forged, altered or falsified academic record, namely a NED University of
Engineering & Technology Transcript of Academic Records ("Transcript"),
submitted in support of the Application, contrary to section B.I.3.(a) of the
Code.

3.

In or about March, 2006, you knowingly forged or in any other way altered or
falsified an academic record, and/or uttered, circulated or made use of any such
forged, altered or falsified academic record, namely a Diploma conferring a
Bachelor of Engineering degree from NED University of Engineering &
Technology ("Diploma"), submitted in support of the Application, contrary to
section B.I.3.(a) of the Code.

4.

On or about January 24, 2008, you knowingly forged or in any other way
altered or falsified a document or evidence required by the University, and/or
uttered, circulated or made use of any such forged, altered or falsified academic
record, namely a letter to the University of Toronto dated January 24, 2008,
from NED University of Engineering & Technology ("January 24, 2008
Letter"), contrary to section B.I.3.(a) of the Code.

5.

In the alternative, in or about March 2006, you knowingly forged or in any
other way altered or falsified a document or evidence required by the
-2-

Case 496

University, and/or uttered, circulated or made use of any such forged, altered or
falsified document, namely an application for admission to the School of
Graduate Studies, University of Toronto dated March 21, 2006, contrary to
section B.1.1.(a) of the Code.
6.

In the alternative, in or about March 2006, you knowingly forged or in any
other way altered or falsified a document or evidence required by the
University, and/or uttered, circulated or made use of any such forged, altered or
falsified document, namely a NED University of Engineering & Technology
Transcript of Academic Records, submitted in support of the Application,
contrary to section B.1.1.(a) of the Code.

7.

In the alternative, in or about March, 2006, you knowingly forged or in any
other way altered or falsified a document or evidence required by the
University, and/or uttered, circulated or made use of any such forged, altered or
falsified document, namely a Diploma conferring a Bachelor of Engineering
degree from NED University of Engineering & Technology, submitted in
support of the Application, contrary to section B.L 1.(a) of the Code.

8.

In the further alternative, contrary to section B.I.3(b) of the Code, you did
knowingly engage in a form of cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct,
fraud or misrepresentation not otherwise described in the Code in order to
obtain academic credit or other academic advantage of any kind, by:

9.

[6]

a.

submitting a forged, altered or falsified Application in or about
March, 2006; and/or

b.

submitting a forged, altered or falsified NED University of
Engineering & Technology Transcript of Academic Records in or
about March, 2006, in support of the Application; and/or

c.

submitting a forged, altered or falsified Diploma confening a
Bachelor of Engineering degree from NED University of Engineering
& Technology in or about March, 2006, in support of the Application;
and/or

d.

submitting a forged, altered or falsified letter to the University of
Toronto dated January 24, 2008, from NED University of
Engineering & Technology.

Particulars of the charges are as follows:

1.

In or about March, 2006 you submitted an application for admission to the
School of Graduate Studies, Masters of Engineering, at the University of
Toronto.

2.

On the application form you indicated that you had obtained a Bachelor of
Engineering from NED University of Engineering & Technology in Karachi,
Pakistan.

-3-

Case 496

3.

[7]

As part of your application documents you submitted the following documents
purporting to be from NED University:
a.

a diploma conferring on you a Bachelor of Engineering degree; and

b.

a Transcript of Academic Records in your name.

4.

On or about January 24, 2008 you submitted or caused to be submitted to
the University a letter dated January 24, 2008 from NED University
confirming the authenticity of the Diploma and the Transcript, and that you
had been a student at NED University.

5.

The information contained in the Application, the Diploma, the Transcript,
and the January 24, 2008 letter, was forged or in any other way altered or
falsified to make it appear that you had been a student at NED University,
that you had received a Bachelor of Engineering Degree from that
institution, and that you had achieved a successful academic record there.
The Application, Diploma and Transcript were forged, falsified and/or
altered to support your application for admission to the University of
Toronto. The January 24, 2008 Letter was forged, falsified and/or altered to
cover up your other forgeries.

The parties submitted an Agreed Statement of Fact, the details of which are summarized
here:
1.

In March 2006, the Student applied to the Masters of Engineering Program at the
University of Toronto. As part of his signed application, the Student certified that he
had attended NED University of Engineering & Technology in Karachi, Pakistan
from January 1999 to February 2003. The Student further certified that he had earned
a Bachelor of Engineering Computer Infotmation Systems Degree, achieving a final
grade of76%.

11.

In support of the admission application, a number of documents were submitted to the
University by or on behalf of the Student, including a NED University Transcript of
Academic Records and a Diploma conferring a Bachelor of Engineering Degree from
NED University.

iii. In correspondence dated April 13, 2006, the Director of the University's MET
(Master of Engineering in Telecommunications) Program advised the Student that the
MET Admissions Committee would be recommending to the School of Graduate
Studies that the Student be accepted for admission.
1v. In correspondence dated April 28, 2006, the Dean of the School of Graduate Studies
confirmed the University's offer of admission. In correspondence dated April 28,
2006, the Director of Student Services, School of Graduate Studies, advised the
Student that if he accepted the offer, he must present his original bachelor's diploma
as a condition of admission.
-4-

Case 496

v. The Student accepted the offer of admission in a Confirmation Form which he signed
on June 6, 2006. The Student was admitted to the University's one-year Masters of
Engineering Program in the Fall of 2006. He successfully completed his Masters
degree in the Winter of 2007 and was eligible to graduate.
v1. In or about June 2007, the Electrical and Computer Engineering Graduate Office
received a telephone call from an individual who stated that the Student did not hold a
Bachelor of Engineering degree from NED.
vii. The University reviewed the documents submitted by the Student in support of his
application for admission.
A comparison of the Student's transcript with
representative samples of NED transcripts that had been submitted by other
applicants revealed anomalies that raised concerns about the authenticity of the
Student's transcript.
vm. The University contacted NED by email to request verification of the Student's
academic credentials and provided copies of the Transcript and Diploma for
authentication. In an email dated October 4, 2007, NED's Deputy Controller of
Examinations advised the University "there is no education records of the said
candidate found in the Examinations Department and the copies of Degree and
Transcript sent to us are found to be fake and forged".
ix. The University held a Dean's meeting with the Student on December 5, 2007 and
December 15, 2007, in accordance with section C.i.(a).6 of the Code. The Student
acknowledged the inconsistencies in the Transcript and the Diploma but he was
unable to offer an explanation for the anomalies. The Student denied having engaged
in academic misconduct.
x. On or about January 24, 2008, the Electrical and Computer Engineering Graduate
Office received a letter from NED, confirming the authenticity of the Student's
degree. This verification letter was unsolicited and it contradicted the information
contained in NED's previous correspondence of October 4, 2007.
x1.

On March 12, 2008, Assistant Discipline Counsel for the University wrote to NED
for clarification regarding the conflicting information about the Student's academic
standing and credentials.

xu.

NED delivered the following response in a letter dated March 25, 2008:
"We have no doubt to say that there is no educational record of the Student found
in the Examinations Department of NED University and the copies of Degree and
Transcript of Academic Records sent to us are found to be fake and forged.
Please note that the Student has never enrolled at NED University and the
Enrolment number NED-03 8711/99 2000 does not exist and never issued to any
student of this University. Moreover, the letter regarding "Verification of
Educational Document" annexed with your letter is fake and bogus."
-5-

Case 496

xiii.

On April 3, 2008 the University of Toronto filed charges against the Student under
the Code.

xiv.

The Student admits that he knowingly forged or in any other way altered or falsified
an academic record, and/or uttered, circulated or made use of any such forged, altered
or falsified academic record, contrary to section B.I.3.(a) of the Code. In particular,
he admits that:
a. in or about March 2006, he submitted the signed Application in which he certified
that he had obtained a Bachelor of Engineering Degree from NED when, in fact,
he had never enrolled at NED;
b. in or about March 2006, he submitted the Transcript purportedly issued by NED
which was, in fact, a forgery;
c. in or about March 2006, he submitted the Diploma purportedly issued by NED
which was, in fact, a forgery.

xv.

The Student further admits that he knowingly forged or in any other way altered or
falsified a document or evidence required by the University, and/or uttered, circulated
or made use of any such forged, altered or falsified document, contrary to section
B.I.1.(a) of the Code. In particular he admits that:
a. On or about January 24, 2008, he submitted or caused to be submitted to the
University the Verification Letter purportedly written by an NED official
confirming the authenticity of the Transcript and Diploma when, in fact, the
Verification Letter was a forgery that had not been authored by a representative of
NED; and
b. He did so for the purpose of concealing his academic misconduct associated with
the forged and/or falsified Application, Transcript and Diploma.

[8]

The Student was given the opportunity to obtain independent legal advice prior to signing
the Agreed Statement of Facts.

Decision of the Tribunal

[9]

The Tribunal was satisfied on the basis of evidence and the Student's admission of guilt,
and, therefore, registered a conviction on charges 1, 2, 3 and 4. The University withdrew
the remaining charges.

Penalty Phase

[10]

The parties submitted a Joint Submission on Penalty, in which they jointly recommended
that:

-6-

Case 496

a. The Tribunal recommend to the President that he recommend to Governing
Council that the Student be expelled from the University;
b. Pending the decision of the Governing Council, the Student be suspended from
the University for a period of five years.
[11]

In addition, the University requested that a report of the decision be made to the Provost
for publication in the University's newspaper with the Student's name withheld.

[12]

The panel asked for clarification on the difference between a suspension and an
expulsion, to which discipline counsel responded that expulsion does not permit the
student to automatically retum to the University after a set period time.

[ 13]

The panel noted that the Student was admitted under false pretences since his admittance
was based on forged documents. His admittance had negative consequences for the next
best legitimate applicant who was rejected. In short, the Student's admittance to the
University of Toronto is illegitimate and, therefore, the Tribunal sees no altemative but to
recommend expulsion for one who was admitted under false pretences.

(14]

The Joint Submission on Penalty was accepted and the panel recommends the following
sanctions:
1. that the President recommend to Goveming Council that the Student be expelled from
the University of Toronto;
2. that pending the decision of the Governing Council, the Student be suspended from
the University for a period of five years; and
3. that the decision in this case be reported to the Provost for publication in the
University's newspaper with the Student's name withheld.
'

th

Dated at Toronto this 30 day of April, 2009

-7-

