Direct Phone: 416-946-7663
Facsimile: 416-978-8182
E-mail: tony.gray@utoronto.ca

PERSONAL & CONFIDENTIAL
Via E-mail and Canada Post
May 31, 2005

Mr. Jeremy Glick
Law Student, Downtown Legal Services
655 Spadina Avenue
TORONTO, ON
M5S 2H9
Dear Mr. Glick:
Re:

University Tribunal – Hearing in the Matter of Ms. Y. W. (The Student)

A hearing was held on May 16, 2004 by the Trial Division of the University Tribunal to
consider four charges under the Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters, 1995 laid
against Ms. W. by letter dated August 13, 2003 from Professor Vivek Goel, Acting
Provost.
Background
At the commencement of the hearing, counsel for the University, Mr. Centa, advised that
the University was not proceeding on charge 1(b), 2, 3 and 4 leaving the following charge
to be heard by the Tribunal:
1.

Contrary to sections B.I.1 (b) and B.II of the Code, on or about December 5,
2002, you knowingly:
(a)

used or possessed an unauthorized aid or aids or obtained unauthorized
assistance in an academic examination or term test in Test #2 in
ECO200Y5Y

The particulars pertaining to the charge 1(a) were as follows:
1.

#34106 v2

You were enrolled in ECO200Y5Y during the academic year 2002-2003.

2.

On or about December 5, 2002, you attended Test #2 of ECO200Y5Y. During
this test you sat beside D. L..

3.

You and D. L. collaborated and or used unauthorized aids during the examination
to produce these examination papers.

I am writing to confirm the outcome of the hearing.
The Panel was provided with an Agreed Statement of Facts dated May 13, 2005 and
signed by Ms. W. and Mr. Centa which was entered into evidence. The Agreed
Statement of Facts provided the following details:
1.

Y. W. enrolled at the University of Toronto at Erindale College in the fall of
2002. Ms. W. has remained enrolled since that time. It is anticipated that as of
May 30, 2005, Ms. W. will have completed sufficient credits to graduate with a
B.A. in Economics.

2.

Ms. W. enrolled in the full-year Micro-economic Theory ECO200Y5
(“ECO200”) in academic year 2002-2003. Professor Carolyn Pitchik taught the
course.

3.

Professor Pitchik administered term test #2 to ECO200 on December 5, 2002
(“Test #2”). Test #2 consisted of graphing, and short and long answer questions.
During Test #2, Ms. W. sat beside another student named D. L..

4.

Test #2 was marked by teaching assistant Melanie O’Gorman. She identified that
the tests submitted by D. L. and Y. W. were virtually identical. Both students
received marks of 100. A copy of Test #2 submitted by Y. W. is attached as
Exhibit 1 to this Agreed Statement of Facts (“L. Exam”). A copy of Test #2
submitted by D. L. is attached to this Agreed Statement of Facts as Exhibit 2 (“W.
Exam”).

5.

The L. Exam and the W. Exam are virtually identical including verbatim long
narrative answers containing identical grammatical errors and errors in the usage
of particular words.

6.

Mr. L. admits that he provided unauthorized assistance to Ms. W. during Test #2
by permitting her to copy his answers into her examination booklet.

7.

Ms. W. met with Gary Crawford, Associate Dean, Social Sciences Division,
pursuant to Section C(1)(a)(5) of the Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters
(“Code”). Before the meeting started, Associate Dean Crawford warned Ms. W.
as required by Section C(1)(a)(6) of the Code. During this meeting Ms. W. did
not admit that she had committed an academic offense under the Code.

8.

Ms. W. hereby acknowledges that his conduct during Test #2 on December 5,
2002, in ECO200 violated the Code. Specifically, Ms. W. acknowledges that she
is guilty of charge 1 in Exhibit 3 to this Agreed Statement of Facts.

#34106 v2

Ms. W. pled guilty to the charge. After consideration, the Panel accepted her guilty plea.
A Joint Submission with respect to sanction dated May 13, 2005 and signed by Ms. W.
and Mr. Centa was presented to the Panel for consideration. The Joint Submission
recommended the following:
1.

That Y. W. receive a grade of zero in ECO200Y5Y;

2.

That Ms. W. be suspended from attendance at the University for a period of two
years, effective June 1, 2005;

3.

That the above sanction be recorded on her academic record for a period of two
years commencing June 1, 2005; and

4.

The facts and sanctions associated with the penalty be published by the University
with Ms. W.’s name withheld.

The Panel heard submissions from counsel for the University and for the student. During
the course of the submissions the Panel received further information. Mr. L. and Ms. W.
are both from China. They came to Canada to pursue their education here. They are in a
personal relationship. Ms. W. felt ill and felt she could not study for this test. She did
not seek medical attention. She advised Mr. L. of how she was feeling and he offered to
help her.
Reasons for Decision
The Panel emphasized that the offence in question is very serious. In this connection, the
Panel quoted the first paragraph of University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on
Academic Matters:
The concern of the Code of Behaviour on Academic
Matters is with the responsibilities of all parties to the
integrity of the teaching and learning relationship. Honesty
and fairness must inform this relationship, whose basis
remains one of mutual respect for the aims of education and
for those ethical principles which must characterize the
pursuit and transmission of knowledge in the University.
It is the responsibility on the part of students to act with honesty as they pursue their
academic studies. In this case, the Panel was concerned that this had not happened. The
Panel noted that students who do not act with honesty undermine the reputation of the
University and the hard work of other students who do act with honesty in their studies.
The Panel also noted the first paragraph of Section B of the University of Toronto Code
of Behaviour on Academic Matters under the heading “Offences” and pertaining to
cheating:

#34106 v2

The University and its members have a responsibility to
ensure that a climate which might encourage, or conditions
which might enable, cheating, misrepresentation or
unfairness not to be tolerated. To this end, all must
acknowledge that seeking credit or other advantages by
fraud or misrepresentation, or seeking to disadvantage other
by disruptive behaviour is unacceptable, as is any
dishonesty or unfairness in dealing with the work or record
of a student.
The Panel points out that this student’s actions in this case strike at the heart of academic
integrity and fly in the face of other students who work very hard and study appropriately
for their examinations.
In light of the offence to which Ms. W. pled guilty and in light of the importance of
maintaining honesty and integrity in the University community, the Panel considered the
Joint Submission with respect to sanction and measured the proposed penalty against the
factors relevant to sanction outlined by John Sopinka, as he then was, in Case 1976/77-3.
In this case, the Panel was concerned about the elements of premeditation and deceit, the
nature of the offence and the way it was committed. The Committee was aware that there
were clear alternatives for a student to follow when he or she was ill and could not write
an examination. These alternatives included seeking a deferral of the exam on medical
reasons after providing proper medical evidence of the illness. In addition, the Panel
found the extenuating circumstances of Ms. W.’s health not that helpful given that there
were other ways that this situation could have been dealt with in an honest fashion.
In arriving at its decision, the Panel identified the following mitigating factors:
1.

Ms. W. entered a guilty plea.

2.

Ms. W. now acknowledges that her actions were wrong and expresses remorse.

3.

Ms. W. was in a personal relationship with the co-defendant, D. L., who had
expressed concern over Ms. W.’s health and her ability to prepare for her test
while ill. He had offered to help her out of concern.

4.

Ms. W. accepted that significant sanctions were appropriate in these
circumstances.

However, several issues greatly concerned the panel:
1.

Mr. L. apparently did not suggest that Ms. W. obtain a doctor’s letter about her
condition and seek to defer the writing of her test because of her illness.

2.

Ms. W. did not seek a deferral of her writing of her test from her professor
because of illness.

#34106 v2

3.

Ms. W. did not seek medical attention for her illness.

4.

Ms. W. did not admit her guilt at the earliest opportunity.

5.

Due to circumstances beyond the control of Ms. W. and the University, the
offence, although committed in 2002, was not heard until the spring of 2005.
Consequently, Ms. W. has been able to complete two more years of study and
obtain sufficient credits to graduate this academic year.

For these reasons, having taken into account all the factors in Case 1976/77-3, having
taken into account the Joint Submission with respect to Sanction and having considered
other cases involving similar situations, the Panel imposed the following sanctions:
1.

That Y. W. receive a grade of zero in ECO200Y5Y;

2.

That Ms. W. be suspended from attendance at the University for a period of two
years, effective June 1, 2005;

3.

That the above sanction be recorded on her academic record for a period of three
years commencing June 1, 2005; and

4.

The facts and sanction associated with the penalty be published by the University
with Ms. W.’s name withheld.

Information concerning rights of appeal may be found in Section E of the Code of
Behaviour on Academic Matters, which can be viewed on-line at:
http://www.utoronto.ca/govcncl/pap/poL.cies/behaveac.html. The deadline for filing an
appeal in this matter is 5:00 p.m., June 22, 2005.
Yours sincerely,

Anthony Gray Ph.D
Secretary, University Tribunal
cc:

#34106 v2

Kirby Chown, Chair, Tribunal Panel
Edith Hillan
Nora Gillespie
Robert Centa

