Case #04-05-09

   D ecision written in letter format (LF), companion case to Case
   #04-05-08

   DATE: May 31, 2005
   PARTIES: University of Toronto v. Ms. Y. W.
   Hearing Date(s): May 16, 2004 [sic]
   Panel Members:
   information not available
   Appearances:
   Mr. Jeremy Glick, DLS, for Student
   Mr. Robert Centa, for University
   Trial Division - s. B.i.1(b) and s. B.ii of Code â unauthorized aid â
   collaboration with another student during an exam â Agreed Statement of
   Facts â guilty plea â identical answers â other student admitted to
   providing assistance â extenuating fact of illness not helpful given
   honest options available â mitigating facts of guilty plea, expression
   of remorse, personal relationship with co-defendant, acceptance of
   appropriateness of sanctions â medical attention or deferral not sought
   â guilt not admitted at earliest opportunity â hearing three years
   after commission of offence - sufficient credits to graduate â Joint
   Submission on Penalty accepted â grade assignment of zero for course;
   two-year suspension; three-year notation; and report to Provost
   Student charged under s. B.i.1(b) and s. B.ii of the Code. The charges
   related to allegations that the Student collaborated with another
   student, and or used unauthorized aids during a term test. The parties
   submitted an Agreed Statement of Facts. The Studentâs test answers were
   virtually identical to the other studentâs. The other Student admitted
   that he provided unauthorized assistance to the Student by permitting
   her to copy his answers into her examination booklet. The Student
   pleaded guilty to the charges. The Panel accepted her guilty plea. The
   parties submitted a Joint Submission with respect to sanction. The
   Student felt too ill to study for the test and when she advised the
   other student of her illness he offered to help her. The Panel noted
   the first paragraph of the Code and the first paragraph of Section B of
   the Code and found that the Studentâs actions struck at the heart of
   academic integrity and flew in the face of other students who had
   worked hard and studied appropriately for their examinations. The Panel
   considered the elements of premeditation and deceit, the nature of the
   offence and the way it was committed, and the options available to a
   student when too ill to write an examination. The Panel found that the
   extenuating circumstances of the Studentâs health were not that helpful
   given the other, honest options available. The Panel found that the
   mitigating facts were that the Student pleaded guilty; that she
   acknowledged that her actions were wrong and expressed remorse; that
   she was in a personal relationship with the co-defendant and that he
   had offered to help her out of concern; and that she accepted that
   significant sanctions were appropriate. The Panel expressed concern
   regarding the following factors: the co-defendant did not suggest that
   the Student obtain a doctorâs letter or seek to defer the writing of
   her test because of her illness; that the Student did not seek medical
   attention for her illness; that the Student did not admit her guilt at
   the earliest opportunity; and that due to circumstances beyond the
   control of the Student and the University, the offence was not heard
   until three years after having been committed and after the Student had
   obtained sufficient credits to graduate. The Panel considered the
   factors in the case of Mr C., and previous similar Tribunal cases, and
   accepted the Joint Submission with respect to Sanction. The Panel
   imposed a grade of zero in the course; a two-year suspension; a
   three-year notation; and that a report be issued to the Provost.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12724
