Report 420

DATE:

   June 23, 2022

PARTIES:

   O.R. ("the Student"). v. the Faculty of Medicine

HEARING DATE(S):

   March 17, 2022 via Zoom

COMMITTEE MEMBERS:

   Professor Hamish Stewart, Senior Chair
   Professor Mark Lautens, Faculty Governor
   Amin Kamaleddin, Student Governor

SECRETARY:

   Nadia Bruno, Special Projects Officer, Office of Appeals, Discipline
   and Faculty Grievances

APPEARANCES:

FOR THE STUDENT APPELLANT:

   The Student

FOR THE FACULTY of Medicine

   Robert Centa, Paliare Roland Rothstein Rosenberg LLP

   Glynnis Hawe, Paliare Roland Rothstein Rosenberg LLP

   The Student appeals the decision of the Faculty of Medicine‚s Board of
   Examiners‚ ‚ Postgraduate (BOE-PG) decision to affirm its earlier
   decision of requiring the Student to engage in formal remediation.

   In the fall of 2016, the Student entered the Pediactric Neurology
   Residency and Fellowship Program at SickKids. The program director was
   Dr. Cecil Hahn of SickKids. Each of the five years of the program
   consisted of several training blocks. A student‚s performance in each
   block was evaluated on a scale of 1-5, with 3 (‚meeting the
   expectations‚) being the passing grade. Up until the tenth block of the
   Student‚s third year, the Student received an evaluation of 3 or
   higher, though there were concerns expressed about the Student‚s
   performance, including with respect to his professionalism.

   In March 2019, Dr. Hahn had discussions with faculty members who had
   supervised the Student about the Student‚s performance. Dr. Hahn
   concluded that the Student was in academic distress, and, in accordance
   with the relevant policy, presented the Promotions and Competence
   Committee (‚PCC‚) with options for remediation. In April 2019, the PCC
   recommended six months of formal remediation, which the Student
   objected to on various grounds. The PCC responded to the objections by
   recommending three months of informal remediation instead. The
   remediation was conducted in accordance with an academic support plan
   with certain criteria for success. The Student agreed to the support
   plan. From May to July 2019, the Student engaged in three blocks of
   informal remediation and failed to meet the criteria of the academic
   support plan. Because the informal remediation was not successful, the
   PCC recommended the Student be presented to the BOE-PG again for formal
   remediation. The Student appealed this recommendation, but the appeal
   was dismissed. The BOE-PG accepted the PCC‚s recommendation and
   directed the Student to enter into a six-block period of formal
   remediation, lasting roughly six months. In January 2020 the Student
   appealed the BOE-PG‚s decision to the Faculty of Medicine‚s appeal
   Committee (FMAC), which directed the BOE-PG to reconsider its decision.
   The FMAC was concerned the Student had not received the feedback used
   internally to justify the remediation. In March 2020, the BOE-PG
   affirmed its earlier decision. The Student successfully completed
   formal remediation in May 2020 and effective from June 2020, resigned
   from the residency program. The Student appealed the BOE-PG‚s March
   2020 decision to the FMAC and the FMAC dismissed the Student‚s appeal
   in July 2020.

   In November 2019, the Student filed two complaints with the Faculty‚s
   Department of Pediatrics. The first complaint alleged that Dr. Hahn had
   harassed the Student at a meeting in March 2019 and that the decision
   to refer the Student to the PCC was retaliation or reprisal for a
   negative performance review the Student made of Dr. Hahn in March 2019.
   The second complaint alleged that the late filing of Dr. Dlamini‚s
   evaluation of the Student was a form of intimidation and harassment.

   The Committee found that with respect to the Dr. Hahn allegation, Dr.
   Hahn was not aware of the evaluation until December 2019, and it thus
   could not have affected his decision-making in March 2019. The
   Committee also found that the removing the late evaluation from the
   Student‚s file at an earlier point would have made no difference to the
   BOE-PG‚s decision given that the evaluation was only one of many pieces
   of information assessed.

   The Student raised the following grounds of appeal: A. Lack of
   transparency (that concerns about the Student‚s performance were not
   brought to his attention); B. Lack of consistency; C. Lack of
   confidentiality; D. Lack of fairness and equity; E. Lack of credibility
   in evaluations; F. Lack of adhering to official University policy and
   procedure.

   The Committee found as follows: A. While the Student alleged that
   concerns about his performance were not brought to his attention, the
   Committee found that this complaint was contradicted by material filed
   by both parties with the Committee. B. The Student complained about
   inconsistent responses to his requests to do outside rotations, but the
   Committee found no inconsistency in the Faculty‚s dealing with the
   Student‚s requests. C. The Committee found that the Student never
   provided evidence as to which three people Dr. Hahn and Dr. Yeh
   disclosed their concerns to nor made any submissions explaining how
   this incident might have affected the reasonableness of the BOE-PG‚s
   decision. D. The Student alleged that he passed the first block of his
   informal remediation but that the rotation was not accounted for. The
   Committee found no basis for this submission as the materials filed
   indicated that the Student successfully completed his rotation. E. The
   Student challenged some of the evaluations received during his third
   program year and during the informal remediation but there was no
   indication in the materials that the Student appealed any of the
   grades, which would have been the proper venue for the allegation. The
   Student also alleged that given his previous academic success, he
   should have continued to succeed, suggesting that he was not fairly
   assessed during the third year of his program. The Committee declined
   to infer that the Student‚s previous academic success meant his
   performance during the third year and informal remediation was not
   properly assessed. F. The Student raised objections to the supervisors
   who were assigned to his formal remediation, but the Committee found
   that the objections were irrelevant as the Student successfully
   completed the formal remediation. The Student also argued that the
   three months he spent at McGill University should have counted toward
   his formal remediation but the BOE-PG accepted the Student‚s proposed
   remediation program which did not suggest that the McGill period would
   count towards his formal remediation. The Student also submitted that
   when reconsidering his case the BOE-PG did not comply with the FMAC‚s
   direction but there was nothing before the Committee to cast doubt on
   this statement.

   The Committee found that none of the grounds of appeal the Student
   raised cast any doubt on the reasonableness of the BOE-PG‚s decision to
   affirm requiring the Student to engage in formal remediation or on the
   reasonableness of the FMAC‚s dismissal of the Student‚s appeal of that
   decision.

   The appeal was dismissed.
   [1]View Report

References

   1. file:///media/30608
