Case #758

   [1]Case 758 - Sanction

   DATE: June 22, 2015 and December 4, 2015
   PARTIES: University of Toronto v Z.T.
   Hearing Date(s): December 3, 2014; March 16, 2014; April 6, 2015; and
   November 6, 2015
   Panel Members:
   Paul Schabas, Chair
   Markus Bussmann, Faculty Member
   Sean McGowan, Student Member
   Appearances:
   Tina Lie, Assistant Discipline Counsel for the University
   Patrick Hartford, Lawyer for the Student (Finding)
   Samuel Greene, Counsel for the Student, DLS (Sanction)
   Rubing Wang, Mandarin Interpreter
   Kate Abulizi, Mandarin Interpreter
   Kasha Visutskie, Academic Integrity Office, Faculty of Arts and Science
   Kristy Gourlay, Manager, Office of Academic Integrity, Faculty of Arts
   and Science
   Z.T., the Student
   Nancy Prior, Academic Advisor, New College
   Denise Gray, Associate Registrar, Innis College
   Albert Tang, Intelligence Officer
   In Attendance:
   Natalie Ramtahal, Coordinator, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty
   Grievances
   Yumei Lui, Observer
   Xu Dong Chang, Observer
   Trial Division â s. B.i.1(c) , s. B.i.3(b) , s. B.i.3(a) of the Code â
   impersonation, academic dishonesty, and forged academic records â had
   another personate them at final exam Â - Â forged T-Card - Â finding of
   guilt â phrase âought to have knownâ is established on an objective
   test â a plea of not guilty and contesting an offence not an
   aggravating factor, but is not an indication of remorse which can be a
   mitigating factor â sanction- grade of zero in the course; 5 year
   suspension; Â recommendation for expulsion; case reported to Provost
   for Publication
   The Student was charged under s. B.i.1.(c) , s. B.i.3.(a) and, in the
   alternative, s. B.i.3(b) of the Code . Â The charges related to
   allegations that the Student hired an individual to impersonate her and
   write a final exam using a forged and falsified T-Card to carry out the
   personation.
   The Panel found the Student guilty of one count under s. B.i.1(c) and
   one count under s. B.i.3(a) of the Code . The University withdrew the
   alternative charge, s. B.i.3(b) . The Student claimed that while she
   asked an individual to help her defer her exam, she did not know that
   individual would arrange to have someone attend and write her exam in
   her place. Â The Panel stated that knowledge does not have to be
   subjective, or actual knowledge, but is established on an objective
   test of whether the student know or ought to have known.
   The sanction phase of the hearing occurred on a separate day.
   In considering sanction, the Panel had regard to the factors set out in
   the Mr. C. case and noted the following: Â the anonymous email received
   by the University indicating that the Student would be hiring someone
   to write her exams, suggests planning and speaks to the deliberate and
   calculated dishonesty; the Studentâs previous interactions with the
   University indicate the Student was well aware of how to seek
   assistance with academic problems; Â personation is a very serious
   offence, striking at the heart of academic integrity by threatening the
   evaluation process and fairness to other students; it is difficult to
   catch, and but for the anonymous email in this case, the Studentâs
   actions might never have been exposed; there was no indication that the
   Student appreciated her wrongful conduct, and therefore no comfort that
   she would not reoffend; while prospects of rehabilitation should be
   considered, no evidence was put forth on which to conclude there was
   some prospect of rehabilitation, especially in light that the Student
   showed no remorse, no insight into her conduct, and no evidence that
   this was an isolated uncharacteristic act caused by extenuating or
   mitigating facts that might have explained or diminished culpability;
   cases involving impersonation, even for first time offenders, generally
   attract a recommendation of expulsion and is consistent with the
   Provostâs Guidance on Sanctions set out in the Code .
   Counsel for the Student submitted that the failure to plead guilty
   should not be an aggravating factor. Â The Panel agreed but stated that
   a plea of not guilty and contesting an offence, however, is not an
   indication of remorse, which can be a mitigating factor.
   The Panel imposed a grade of zero in the Course; a 5-year suspension; a
   recommendation that the Student be expelled; and that the case be
   reported to the Provost for publication.
   [2]View Case

References

   1. http://live-the-office-of-the-governing-council.pantheonsite.io/media/12886
   2. file:///media/12876
