GOVERNING COUNCIL JUDICIAL BOARD
UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO

IN THE MATTER OF the revised charges filed on July 26,2023,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the (Jniversity of Toronto Act, 1947,5.O.1947,c.112,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Act, 1971, S.O. 1971, c. 56 as am
S.O. 1978, c. 88

BETWEEN:
UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO

-andL

Y

REASONS FOR DECISION

Hearing Date: June 17, 2024,viaZoom
Members of the Judicial Board:
Paul Michell, Associate Chair
Dr. Sonu Gaind, Faculty Member
Firdaus Sadid, Student Member
Appearances:
Tina Lie, Counsel for the University, Paliare Roland Rosenberg Rothstein LLP
Ryan Shah, Co-Counsel for the University, Paliare Roland Rosenberg Rothstein LLP
Julia Wilkes, Counsel for the Former Student, Adair Goldblatt Bieber LLP
Emma Parry, Counsel for the Former student, Adair Goldblatt Bieber LLP

Hearing Secretary:
ChristopherLang,Director, Office of Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances

In Attendance:
Y

L

2

A.

Introduction

1.

The Governing Council of the University of Toronto (the "University") created this

Judicial Board to consider charges brought against L

Y

, a Bachelor of Science (B.Sc')

graduate of the University (the "Former Student"). The charges against the Former Student
concerned her involvement in a scheme in which a consultant she retained provided a forged

transcript of her University academic record to other universities in an effort to gain admission
based on inflated results.

2.

The hearing of this matter proceeded by Zoom on June 17,2024. The Former Student

attended and was represented by counsel. At the liability stage, the parties submitted an Agreed
Statement of Facts ("ASF"), which we accepted. The members of the panel deliberated and

unanimously concluded that the Former Student was guilty of the offences with which she had
been charged. At the penalty phase, the parties made a Joint Submission on Penalty ("JSP")' The

panel deliberated and unanimously concluded that we should accept the joint submission.Latet
on June 17,2024,we signed an order. These are our reasons for doing so.

B.

Origin of this Judicial Board

3.

As this case concerns the conduct of a graduate of the University rather thana current

student, the University established a Judicial Board to hear the charges. Disciplinary proceedings

against graduates find their jurisdiction in the University of Toronto Act, 1947 (the"7947 Act").

Under s. 2(1aXe) of the University of Toronto Act, l97I (the"l97l Act"), the Governing
Council may appoint committees and delegate power and authority to them to act on its behalf
where the majority of the members of the committee are members of the Governing Council.

4.

On May 9,2023,the Executive Committee of the Goveming Council resolved to create a

Judicial Board to hear this case and render final judgement with respect to it, and appointed the

a

J

chair of this board. On Decemb er 5,2023, the Executive Committee appointed the faculty and
student members of this board. On March 26,2024,the Executive Committee appointed a
substitute student member of the board.

C.

The Charges Against the Former Student

5.

On July 26,2023,the Provost charged the Former Student under the 1947 Act as follows:
1

.

On or before April 18,2022, you were guilty of infamous conduct in that you forged or in

any other way altered or falsified an academic record, and/or uttered, circulated or made use of any
such forged, altered or falsified record, and/or attempted to utter, circulate or make use of such

forged, altered or falsified record, namely a document that purported to be a Transcript of
Consolidated Academic Record from the University of Toronto as of 2020-04'22bearingdocument
number 0840890 (the "Purported Transcript").

Z.

On or before April 1 8,2022, you were guilty of disgraceful conduct in that you forged or

in any other way altered or falsified an academic record, and/or uttered, circulated or made use of
any such forged, altered or falsified record, and/or attempted to utter, circulate or make use of such
forged, altered or falsified record, namely the Purported Transcript'

On or before April 18, 2022,you were guilty of conduct unbecoming a graduate of the
University in that you forged or in any other way altered or falsified an academic record, andlot

3.

uttered, circulated or made use of any such forged, altered or falsified record, and/or attempted to

utter, circulate or make use of such forged, altered or falsified record, namely the Purported
Transcript.

Particulars:

a)

You were a student at the University of Toronto from 2016 to 2020

b)

You received a Bachelor of Science degree from the University in June 2020

c)

On or before April 18,2022, you knowingly circulated the Purported Transcript to World

Education Services, a non-profit enterprise that provides credential evaluations.

4

d)

The transcript you submitted did not accurately reflect the information contained on your

official University of Toronto transcript and academic record.
e)

Rather, the document that you created andlor submitted to World Education Services
altered and falsified the information contained on your official University of Toronto
transcript and academic record.

0

you submitted the altered and falsified information about your academic record to World
Education Services for the purpose of enhancing your academic record to obtain an
academic and/or employment advantage.

D.

The 1947 Act

6.

Because this case concerns a former student, its jurisdictional basis differs from that

applicable to current students. The references in the Provost's charges to the Former Student

being guilty of "infamous conduct", "disgraceful conduct", and "conduct unbecoming a graduate
of the University,' stem from s. 48(c) of the 1947 Act. That subsection endowed the Senate of the

University with the power and duty to:
(c) provide for the cancellation, recall or suspension ofand cancel, recall or suspend the degree,
whither heretofore or hereafter granted or conferred, of any graduate of the University heretofore
or hereafter convicted in Ontario or elsewhere of an offence which, if committed in Canada,
would be an indictable offence, or heretofore or hereafter guilty of any infamous or disgraceful
conduct or of conduct unbecomi ng a graduate of the University, and for erasing the name of such
graduate from the roll or register ofgraduates and for requiring the surrender for cancellation of
ih" diplo1nu, certificate o. oth"r instrument evidencing the right of such graduate to the degree of
which he shall have been deprived, and for providing the mode of inquiring into and determining
as to the guilt of such graduate, and the procedure generally in respect of any such matter, and for
the purpo-se of making such inquiry, the Senate and the committees thereof shall have all the
powers whi chby Thi Public Inquiries Act,may be conferred upon commissioners appointed
under the provisions of that Act;

7.

This authority, along with the other powers and duties of the former Senate, was vested in

the Governing Council by s. 2(14) of the 1971 Act.

5

E.

The Offences

1. The Former Student

8.

In Fall 20l6,the Former Student first registered in the Faculty of Arts and Science at the

University. In June 2020, she graduated with a B.Sc. with majors in mathematics and statistics.

2. The Former Student retains Ms. Zhihui

g.

In early 2020, at a friend's suggestion, the Former Student retained an agent named Xu

Zhihuito assist her in navigating the application process for graduate schools. This included
communication with admissions departments and completing document submissions to apply for
a master's program at Johns Hopkins University in Baltimore, Maryland. The Former Student

paid Ms. Zhihui US$5,000.

10.

Ms. Zhihui was affiliated with an organization called A&L International Education

Center. The Former Student was aware of this, but when she retained Ms. Zhihui she did not

know anything else about A&L or its activities.

11.

In Spring 2020,the Former Student gave Ms. Zhihui documents regarding her education

history, including a true copy of her University transcript. The Former Student understood that
Ms. Zhihui would prepare and send an application to Johns Hopkins on her behalf. However, the
Former Student admits that she never reviewed any materials Ms. Zhihui prepared on her behalf
for her application to Johns Hopkins, which the Former Student agrees is a prestigious university
where admission is comPetitive.

12. The Former Student's cumulative grade point average ("CGPA") at the University was
2.0g. This was a weak academic record, and the Former Student admits that it would be unlikely
that she could be admitted to Johns Hopkins on the basis of it.

6

13.

On a Chinese-language website, A&L held itself out as providing consultancy services

for studying in the United States, with services including "guaranteed admission to the Ily
League universities". The Former Student was unaware of these webpages until they were
brought to her attention in the course of this proceeding.

3. Circulation of the falsified transcript

14. In April 2020,Ms. Zhihui sent a purported version of the Former Student's University
transcript to World Education Services ('.WES"), a credential evaluation service, along with
some of the Former Student's personal details. As we set out below, the transcript that Ms.

Zhihuisent to WES was falsified. The Former Student was not specifically aware that Ms.
Zhihuiwas using WES's services or that she had created the falsified transcript' Nevertheless,
she accepts and agrees that she is responsible for the circulation of the falsified transcript to WES

on her behalf.

1

5.

The falsified transcript was not a true copy of the Former Student's University transcript.

It did not accurately reflect her academic record at the University. Instead, it had been forged,
altered and falsified, including by changing the Former Student's courses and years of study,
student number, Ontario Education Number, and year of graduation. It also inflated her grades

significantly, such that her QGPA was represented as being 3.74,not2.08.

16.

The falsified transcript accurately recorded the Former Student's name, birthday and

month, and the title of her degree.

4. Falsified transcript is discovered

17. In April 2022,WES sent an email to Sana Kawar, then the Manager of the University's
Transcript Centre, attaching a copy of the falsified transcript and asking her to veriff its

7

authenticity. Ms. Kawar advised that the falsified transcript was inaccurate and did not reflect the
Former Student's academic record at the University.

5. The Former Student's admissions

18.

The Former Student made a series of admissions in connection with this proceeding,

which were recorded in the ASF. These included that she had recklessly created the
circumstances for the circulation of the falsified transcript by: paying her agent US$5,000 to
apply to Johns Hopkins on her behalf; failing to investigate A&L and the services it offered; and

failing to supervise Ms. Zhihui or to review the materials that Ms. Zhihui had sent to WES on her
behalf to ensure their accuracy and authenticity.

19.

While she did not consider it at the time, the Former Student also admitted that the

circulation of the falsified transcript occurred as a result of her failure to supervise Ms. Zhihui
The Former Student thus admitted that she was responsible for Ms. Zhihui's circulation of the

falsified transcript to WES. Finally, the Former Student admitted that her conduct was infamous,
disgraceful, and conduct unbecoming a graduate, contrary to s. 48(c) of the 1947 Act.

F.

Decision on Liability

20.

We reviewed the ASF, and heard submissions from Mr. Shah for the Provost regarding

liability. Ms. Parry for the Former Student indicated that she had nothing to add. No other
evidence was tendered before us. The Former Student did not speak or offer funher evidence.
We then retired to consider the matter.

2I.

As noted in lJniversity of Toronto v. Y.X (Nov. 22,2022) at paras. 15 and 19, subsection

48(c) of the 1941Act is broad, referring in relevant part to "infamous conduct, disgraceful
conduct, and conduct unbecoming a graduate of the University". This contrasts with the detailed
language of the Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters ("Code") that applies to current

8

students at the University. The Code lists specific offences in section B, which range in degrees

of seriousness. The relationship between the offences listed in subsection 48(c) of the 1947 Act
and those listed in the Code is an open question. The question arises from the wording of the
charges in this case, which trace the offence under paragraph B.L1(a) of the Code and equate it

with offences under subsection 48(c) of the 1947 Act. If a former student commits anactwhich,

if the former student had committed the act while a current student at the University, would have
been an offence under the Code, is that act an offence under subsection 48(c) of the 1947 Act?

22.

This case does not require us to give a blanket answer to that question. It seems to us, for

example, that some acts which would constitute an offence under the Code had they been

committed by a current student might not rise to the level of seriousness required to amount to an
offence under subsection 48(c) of the 1947 Act.l We also note that some conduct which, had it
been committed by a current student, would constitute an offence under the Code could not

realistically be committed by a former student. We would not want to suggest, of course, that the
broad language of section 48(c) is limited to conduct which would be captured by the Code had
that conduct been engaged in by a current student. We need not address those questions.

23.

Rather, in this case we need address only a narrower question: whether the knowing (with

"knowing" defined to include negligence or wilful blindness) circulation of a falsified transcript
prepared for the pu{pose of having it verified by a credential verification agency and confirmed
as accurate by the University so that it could be submitted as part of an admission application to

I We note, for example, that section B.L4 of the Code permits the Provost to charge a graduate of the
University with offences under the Code alleged to have been committed knowingly while the graduate
was an aCtive student when, in the Provost's opinion, the offence, if detected, would have resulted in a
sanction sufficiently severe that the degree would not have been granted at the time that it was. This
provision addresses offences alleged to have been committed before a student graduates but are charged
only after the student has graduated. It is consistent with our suggestion that only cases involving serious
offences may be pursued against former students.

9

a graduate program at another university is serious misconduct that is an offence under

subsection 48(c) of th e 1947 Act. In our view, on the evidence before us, the answer is "yes".

24.

Our unanimous conclusion was that the Former Student was guilty of "infamous conduct,

disgraceful conduct, and conduct unbecoming a graduate of the University" under s. 48(c) of the
1947 Act. We reached this conclusion for the following reasons.

25.

First, the ASF indicates that the Former Student had circulated, through her agent, a

falsified transcript supposedly reflecting her academic record at the University with the pu{pose
of having its supposed authenticity confirmed so that she could use it to seek admission to a
graduate program at another University. The Former Student had retained Ms. Zhihui to apply to

other universities for admission on her behalf, and was negligent or wilfully blind about Ms.

Zhihui's use of a falsified transcript for this purpose.

26.

There is no evidence that the Former Student had any direct role in producing the

falsified transcript, or that she had actual knowledge that Ms. Zhihui had produced it and
circulated it to WES. However, the Former Student could not have had a reasonable expectation
that there was a real prospect that she could be admified to a graduate program at a leading
research university such as Johns Hopkins on the basis of her weak academic record at the

University, justas in(Jniversityof Torontov. Y.L. (September70,202l)atpara-29.TheFormer
Student paid Ms. Zhihuius$s,0OO for services which, on their face, would appear to be worth

only a fraction of that amount. The logical inference, and we so find, is that the Former Student
did so for the purpose of Ms. Zhihuitaking steps to obtain graduate admission for her at a
leading American university using whatever means she deemed necessary, including massaging
her transcript into a falsified form that would appear more congenial to an admissions

committee.

l0

27.

Second, there was a direct connection between the Former Student's conduct and the

University. Her agent prepared a falsified University transcript to seek admission to other
universities for the Former Student, and sought WES's seal of approval as a preliminary step,
which involved asking the University to verif' a falsified transcript'

28.

Third, the scheme in which the Former Student was involved had a commercial element'

She paid Ms. Zhihui to prepare applications for other universities on her behalf. A reasonable

inference is that she believed that she was being provided with a valuable service in return for
her payment, and that Ms. Zhihui believed the same. In sum, the Former Student paid to have

Ms. Zhihui cheat for her. As in (Jniversity of Toronto v. Y.Y., supra at paras. 57,65,67, this
commercial element negatively colours our view of the Former Student's conduct, and makes
that conduct more serious.

29.

Having reached this conclusion, we found the Former Student guilty of the offences

charged under s. 48(c) ofthe 1947 AcL

G.

Penalty

30.

Following our decision on liability, we received a JSP from the parties, and heard

submissions from counsel about it. The parties sought a five year suspension of the Former
Student's degree, and related relief. We retired to consider the JSP and the parties' submissions.
We unanimously agreed to accept the JSP, and ordered accordingly.

31

.

As I noted in lJniversity of Toronto v. Y.Y., supra at para. 66, in considering the

appropriate penalty, Judicial Boards have found it useful to consider the University of Toronto
and Mr. C. (Case No. 1916177-3, November 5, 1976) factors that the University Tribunal relies

on in making decisions on penalty (e.g., (Jniversity of Toronto v. A.K.G. (October 14,2008) at

11

para. 17; University of Toronto v. T.C.H. (October 29,2019) atpara.42; University of Toronto

and C.)'. (August 14,2023) atpata.36)' We apply those factors below.

32.

Character of the Former Student. The Former Student co-operated in the discipline

process by entering into an ASF and a JSP. We view her cooperation as a positive development.

However, we note that she did not apologize for her conduct or express remorse, unlike in
University of Toronto v. X.C. (March 3,2023). On balance, we view this as a slightly positive
factor.

33. Likelihood of Repetition of the Offence. This factor is challenging to apply with respect
to the Former Student. We lack evidence as to whether there is a realistic prospect that she might
seek admission to another university and be tempted to reoffend by using a falsified version of

her transcript to do so. We consider this to be a neutral factor and give it little weight in our
analysis.

34. Nature of the Offence. The offence here-which is premised on the use of a falsified
transcript-is extremely serious. Judicial Boards and the University Tribunal have emphasized
its significance: see University of Toronto v. A.K.G., supro atpara.lS; University of Toronto v.
T.C.H., supra atpara.44. Andas noted above, the commercial nature of the offence is an
aggravating factor in determining penalty. This factor weighs in favour of a significant penalty'

35.

Extenuating Circumstances. Neither the ASF nor the JSP contained any facts which

could be considered extenuating circumstances, and there was no other evidence before us of
such circumstances. There is no evidence with regard to this factor.

t2

36. Detriment to the Ilniversity. The detriment to the University that results from the
circulated of falsified University transcripts is considerable. It is essential to the academic
reputation of the University that third parties (such as other universities and potential employers)
have confidence in the integrity of University transcripts. Former students who falsift their

transcripts, or circulate (either directly or indirectly) falsified transcripts, cheat at the expense of
the University itself and other graduates and current students of the University. Wilful blindness
regarding cosmetic surgery on transcripts for profit is deeply harmful to the University's
academic mission and cannot be tolerated.

37.

In our view, this factor weighs in favour of a significant penalty.

38.

Deteryence. In our view, deterrence is a significant consideration for circulation of

falsified transcripts by graduates of the University. Graduates must appreciate that such conduct

will be severely punished as a deterrence.

39.

In our view, this factor weighs in favour of a significant penalty.

40. Takentogether, theMr. C. factorsweighinfavourof asignificantpenaltyconsistentwith
that provided for in the JSP. We note that the five year suspension agreed to here is the most
serious penalty imposed on former students short of a recommendation that their degree be

revoked.

4l .

As indicate d in (Jniversity of Toronto v. Y.Y., supra at paras. 77 -79, the case law in this

area suggests the following conclusions.

42. First, the offences listed in s. 48(c) of the 1947 Act are serious, and presumptively, a
serious penalty is warranted for them. As a Judicial Board made plain in University of Toronto v.

13

Y.L., supra, atpara.35, "students who seek to retain such agents to apply to post-graduate

programs on their behalf will be subject to serious sanctions where they turn a blind eye to the

obvious dishonest misconduct which is being undertaken by these agencies for commercial

gain." [emphasis in original]. This was recently reconfirmedin University of Toronto v. C.Y.,

supra, atpara.25.

43.

Second, Judicial Boards have repeatedly confirmed that where a former student has been

found guilty under s. 48(c) of the 7947 Actof an offence relating to a falsified transcript, the
normal penalty is recall and cancellation of the former student's degree (as in University of
Toronto v. C.Y., supra; University of Toronto v. Mr. H, supra), unless there is an agreed
statement of facts or joint submission on penalty (e.g., (Jniversity of Toronto v. Y.L., supra

(fle

year suspension), the Provost seeks a lesser penalty (e.g., University of Toronto v. A.K.G., supra

(five year suspension)), or at least the former student attends (or is represented at) the hearing (as
in the lJniversity of Toronto v. T.C.H., supra (five year suspension)). This was recently
confirmed in lJniversity of Toronto v. C.C.T. (April23,2024) at paras. 26-29

44.

We also note that the distinction (e.g., in University of Toronto v. T.C.H., sttpra at paras.

45-41 ,50) in cases of forgery or falsification of transcripts of other documents between a former

student's recklessness in failing to supervise an agent acting on his or her behalf, and the former
student's active participation in the forgery or falsification. Both must be condemned, but in

principle the latter is more serious. The parties here agree that the Former Student's conduct falls
into the former category. We share that view.

14
45.

The JSP is, in our view, consistent with these conclusions. We accept, as noted in

University of Toronto v. C.C.T., supra at paras. 16-17, that we should uphold joint submissions
on penalty absent exceptional circumstances. We find no such exceptional circumstances here.
46.

For these reasons, the panel found the Former Student guilty of infamous conduct,

disgraceful conduct, and conduct unbecoming a graduate of the University under s. 48(c) of the
1947 Act in connection with the circulation of a falsified University transcript dated April 22,
2020, and ordered that:
(a)

the Bachelor of Science degree conferred by the University on the Former Student
be suspended for five years from the date of this Order;

(b)

in the event that the Former Student locates her degree certificate evidencing the
Bachelor of Science degree conferred on her by the University during the period
of suspension, the Former Student be required and directed to surrender the
degree certificate to the University;

(c )

the fact that the University has suspended for five years the Bachelor of Science
degree it conferred on the Former Student be recorded for a period of five years
from the date of this Order on her academic record and transcript; and

(d)

this case shall be reported to the Provost for publication of a notice of the decision
of the Tribunal and the sanctions imposed, with the name of the student withheld.

Dated at Toronto, this 16th day of August, 2024.
Original signed by:
Paul Michell, Associate Chair
On behalf of the Panel

