Case #910

   DATE: June 8, 2017
   PARTIES: University of Toronto v. S.S. (âthe Studentâ)

   Hearing Date(s): March 8, 2017

   Panel Members:
   Mr. William C. McDowell, Lawyer, Chair
   Professor Pascal Riendeau, Faculty Panel Member
   Mr. Harvey Lim, Student Panel Member

   Appearances:
   Ms. Tina Lie, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Barristers
   The Student

   In Attendance:
   Ms. Lucy Gaspini, Manager Academic Integrity, University of Toronto â
   Mississauga (âUTMâ)
   Ms. Tracey Gameiro, Associate Director, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty
   Grievances
   Mr. Sean Lourim, Technology Assistant, Office of the Governing Council

   Trial Division â s. B.i.1(d) ofÂ  the Code â plagiarism â copied
   information from unattributed sources and submitted them for course
   credit â Student cooperated with the discipline process â Agreed
   Statement of Facts â Joint Submission on Penalty â final grade of zero
   in the two affected courses, a suspension from the University for three
   years, notation on transcript and record until graduation, and a report
   to the Provost for publication

   The Student pled guilty to two charges of plagiarism contrary to
   section B.i.1(d) of the Code .Â  The charges related to assignments
   that were handed in for course credit in two different courses that
   contained materials that had been copied from unattributed sources on
   the internet.Â  The Student submitted that he had been diagnosed with
   post traumatic stress disorder and dysthymia, however without medical
   documentation to support this claim the Panel was unable to consider
   these illnesses as mitigating factors.Â  The Student had been very keen
   to enter his plea of guilty at the earliest opportunity and admitted to
   each offence with the Deanâs Designate, which the Panel considered to
   be significant mitigating factors.Â  The Panel accepted the partiesâ
   Joint Submission on Penalty and imposed a sanction of a final grade of
   zero in the two affected courses, a suspension from the University for
   three years, a notation on the Studentâs academic record and transcript
   until graduation, and a report to the Provost.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/13039
