UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
TRIAL DIVISION

IN THE MATTER OF charges of academic dishonesty filed on November 13,
2014;
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on
Academic Matters, 1995;
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Act, 1971, S.O. 1971, c. 56
as amended S.O. 1978, c. 88.

BETWEEN:
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO

....
-AND-

REASONS FOR DECISION

Hearing Date: February 20, 2015
Members of the Panel:
Mr. Andrew Pinto, Lawyer, Chair
Professor Louis Florence, Department of Management, Faculty Panel Member
Ms. Yusra Qazi, Student Panel Member

Appearances:
Ms. Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Barristers
Professor Wayne Dowler, Dean's Designate, University of Toronto Scarborough
Dr. Andre Sorensen, Instructor: GGRA03H3F: Cities and Environments,
University of Toronto Scarborough

In Attendance:
Ms. Sinead Cutt, Administrative Assistant, Office of Appeals, Discipline and
Faculty Grievances

Preliminary

[1]

The Trial Division of the University Tribunal was convened on February
20, 2015 to consider charges under the University of Toronto Code of
Behaviour on Academic Matters, 1995 (the "Code") laid against the
Student by letter dated November 13, 2014 from Professor Sioban
Nelson, Interim Vice-Provost, Faculty and Academic Life.

[2]

The Student did not attend the hearing; nor did a representative acting on
the Student's behalf. The Tribunal waited several minutes after the official
start time of the hearing in case the Student and/or his representative
arrived late, but no one appeared. The Tribunal questioned Discipline
Counsel concerning the University's efforts to bring the charges and the
hearing to the Student's attention. The University provided two Affidavits
of Service which confirmed that the Student had been initially served by
email on November 13, 2014 with the charges; and then served by email
on January 16, 2015 with the Notice of Hearing which appended the
charges, as well as relevant supplementary documentation. Discipline
Counsel advised that, earlier in the week, she had spoken personally with
the Student who indicated that he did not plan on attending the hearing.

[3]

The Tribunal reviewed Part 3 of the Tribunal's Rules of Practice and
Procedure concerning Service of Documents, in particular, Rule 9(c)
which permits service of charges and other material by email to the
student's e-mail address contained in ROSI. The Tribunal was satisfied
that the Student had been properly notified and determined that it would
be appropriate for the hearing to proceed in the Student's absence.

Hearing on the Facts

[4]

The charges against the Student were as follows:
1.
On or about March 25, 2014, you knowingly represented the
ideas of another, or the expressions of the ideas of another as your
own work in Assignment 2 (the "Essay") that you submitted in
partial completion of the course requirements in GGRA03H3F (the
"Course"), contrary to section B.1.1 (d) of the Code.
2.
In the alternative, on or about March 25, 2014, by submitting
the Essay, you knowingly engaged in a form of cheating, academic
dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or misrepresentation not otherwise
described in the Code to obtain academic credit or other academic
advantage of any kind, contrary to section B.l.3(b) of the Code.

2

[5]

The University indicated that if the Student was convicted with respect to
the first charge, the second charge would be withdrawn.

[6]

Discipline Counsel alleged that the Student had committed academic
misconduct by using the work of another author without attribution in an
essay submitted in partial completion of the course requirements in
GGRA03H3F (Geography: Cities and Environments).

[7]

Two witnesses provided evidence on behalf of the University: Dr. Andre
Sorensen, the Instructor of the Course and Professor Dowler, the Dean's
Designate.

[8]

Dr. Sorenson testified that the concern about the Student's alleged
academic misconduct arose with respect to the second assignment in the
course which was a major essay, worth 20% of the overall grade. When
the Student submitted his essay, it was analyzed using turnitin software
which compares submitted work with millions of other documents and
sources in an academic database. The software analysis revealed a
substantial similarity between parts of the Student's essay and previously
published work. Significant sections of the Student's essay were identical
to the work of other authors whose work was not cited. Additionally, the
Student cited articles in this bibliography but did not place any
corresponding quotation marks around text in his essay.
Had the
professor or the software analysis not picked up on the similarities, the
Student would have succeeded in passing off the work of other authors as
his own and received credit for such work.

[9]

Dr. Sorenson also testified that he strongly admonished his students
against engaging in any form of plagiarism and specifically discussed
academic integrity issues in the first two lectures of the Course as well as
in tutorials.

[1 OJ

The University, through Dr. Sorenson, produced email correspondence
between Dr. Sorenson and the Student where, upon being notified of the
plagiarism concern and being invited to attend a meeting, the Student's
tone with the professor became accusatory, demeaning and personal.
The Student accused the professor of harassment and ultimately refused
to meet with the professor.

[11]

Professor Wayne Dowler, the Dean's Designate, was the University's
second witness. He noted that the student had some transfer credits from
another university and another community college. He concluded that the
Student had some experience dealing with other academic institutions.
Once again, despite the University's attempts, the Student refused to meet
with Professor Dowler or his designate.

3

[12]

Discipline Counsel submitted that the Student had been given ample
opportunity to explain his conduct but did not offer any explanation. The
extensive nature of the material cited without attribution suggested that the
impugned text could not have been placed accidentally by the Student.
Overall, the Student's conduct represented a clear cut case of plagiarism
and the Student showed a strong resistance to providing an explanation,
let alone any mitigating circumstances for his misconduct.

Decision of the Tribunal on Charges

[13]

Following deliberation, based on the evidence presented by the two
witnesses, the available documentation and submissions of Discipline
Counsel, the Tribunal concluded at the Student was guilty and the Student
stood convicted on charge 1. Accordingly, the second charge against the
Student was withdrawn.

Penalty

[14]

The matter then continued with a hearing into the appropriate sanction.

[15]

The Student did not have any prior discipline history.
sought a penalty that included:

The University

a) a mark of zero in the course;
b) a suspension of two years from the University;
c) a notation of academic misconduct on the Student's transcript for 3
years; and
d) publication of the Student's misconduct on an anonymized basis.
[16]

The panel reviewed a number of Tribunal decisions presented by the
University. In the B.S. penalty decision (Case No. 697; August 8, 2013),
the Tribunal noted that "many students who are convicted of a first offence
of plagiarism receive a suspension of two years." The Tribunal went on,
however, to impose a 3 year suspension on the student who had
committed plagiarism, with no prior offence, where the Student attended
the hearing and attempted to deny the plagiarism. The Tribunal also
ordered that the notation of misconduct on the Student's transcript remain
for three and a half years, or until the student graduated, whichever
occurred first.

[17]

In the J.C. decision (Case No. 741; March 20, 2014), the Student did not
participate in the hearing regarding plagiarism charges, and received a
two year suspension and a notation on his transcript until graduation. In
the R. M. decision (Case No. 659; February 6, 2012), the matter
4

proceeded via an Agreed Statement of Facts and a Joint Submission on
Penalty. The charges concerned the student's plagiarism with respect to
an essay that was worth 15% of the final grade in the course. The
Tribunal imposed a two year suspension and an accompanying
notification of misconduct on the student's transcript for the same two-year
period.
[18]

The Tribunal deliberated and concluded that the University's requested
sanction was appropriate but that the period for noting the misconduct on
the Student's transcript should be extended until the Student's graduation.

[19]

The Tribunal reasoned that the Student had engaged in a deliberate case
of plagiarism. The Student was not a new post-secondary student and the
importance of academic integrity had clearly been brought to the Student's
attention. Significant portions of the Student's essay were lifted from other
sources and included without attribution . This was the Student's first
offence and it occurred in respect of an assignment that was worth 20% of
his course grade. The Student had not only failed to cooperate with the
University - by refusing to meet with his professor and the Dean's
Designate and not attending the hearing - but the Student had also
unhelpfully taken an aggressive personal tone in email communications
with his professor and accused him of harassment. There was no
evidence of the Student's remorse or other mitigating circumstances .

[20]

In light of the facts of this case, the Tribunal imposes the following
sanction:
a. The Student shall receive a final grade of zero (0) in the course
GGRA03H3F: Cities and Environments;
b. The Student shall be suspended from the University of Toronto
from the date of this order until February 19, 2017;
c. A notation shall be placed on the Student's academic record and
transcript from the date of this order until graduation; and,
d. That this case be reported to the Provost, with the Student's name
withheld, for publication of a notice of the decision of the Tribunal
and the sanction imposed.

Dated at Toronto, this 31 st day, August, 2015

Andrew Pinto, Co-Chair

5

