Case 942

DATE:

   August 30, 2018

PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v. A.A.(âthe Studentâ)

Hearing Date(s):

   May 25, 2018

Panel Members:

   Ms. Johanna Braden, Barrister and Solicitor, Chair
   Professor Michael Evans, Faculty Panel Member
   Ms. Sherice Robertson, Student Panel Member

Appearances:

   Ms. Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland,
   Barristers
   Professor Luc De Nil, Vice-Dean, Students, School of Graduate Studies,
   University of Toronto
   Mr. Philip Norton, Counsel to the Student, Norton Barristers
   The Student

In Attendance:

   Ms. Tracey Gameiro, Associate Director, Office of Appeals, Discipline
   and Faculty Grievances
   Mr. Brian Alexic, Technology Assistant, Office of the Governing Council
   The Student was charged with twelve charges of forging or falsifying an
   academic record contrary to s.B.i.3(a) of the Code, or in the
   alternative twelve charges of academic dishonesty not otherwise
   described contrary to s. B.i.3(b) of the Code . The charges related to
   information that the Student had uploaded to a career database
   maintained by the Rotman School of Business for students in its
   program. The Student falsified and then uploaded: preliminary grade
   reports, academic records, correspondence purporting to be sent on
   behalf of the Dean conferring awards to the Student, as well as a
   resume that reported this false information (inflated GPA, awards that
   the Student had not been awarded).Â  The forgery was uncovered when a
   prospective employer contacted the school to verify the Studentâs
   information. Afterwards, the University uncovered that the Student had
   misrepresented his grades and awards in 42 different job applications.
   The Student admitted guilt at the first Deanâs meeting and expressed
   remorse.Â  He pled guilty to seven charges. Five charges were withdrawn
   because counsel agreed that the Tribunal lacked jurisdiction over
   misrepresentations that had been made after the Student had graduated.
   The joint submission on penalty (JSP) recommended that the Tribunal
   make an order that it: (a) cancel and recall the Studentâs MBA degree;
   (b) suspend the Studentâs B.ASc degree for a period of five years; (c)
   that it make a permanent notation of the sanctions on the Studentâs
   record and transcript; and (d) a report to the Provost with the
   Studentâs name withheld. The Tribunal applied the Mr. C. factors,
   finding that mitigating factors were that the Student admitted guilt,
   expressed remorse, cooperated with the process and had no prior
   offences. The aggravating factors were the seriousness of the offences,
   the deliberate and repeated nature of the offences committed, the
   chance that the Student would commit the same offences again, as well
   as the impact that the Studentâs misrepresentations had on other
   students who would have been competing for the same jobs. The Tribunal
   found that the JSP was harsh but fair â that it reflected that the
   Student had earned his credits, at the same time having the degrees
   cancelled and suspended would limit his job prospects significantly.
   Tribunal accepted the JSP, and made an order recommending that: (a) the
   Studentâs MBA degree be cancelled and recalled; (b) the Studentâs B.ASc
   degree be suspended for a period of five years; (c) a permanent
   notation of the sanctions be placed on the Studentâs record and
   transcript; and (d) a report to the Provost with the Studentâs name
   withheld.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12973
