Case 1059 - APPEAL

DATE:

   April 29, 2022

PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v. J.H.L. ("the Student")

HEARING DATE:

   March 3, 2022, via Zoom

PANEL MEMBERS:

   Ms. Patricia D.S. Jackson, Senior Chair
   Professor Ramona Alaggia, Faculty Panel Member
   Mr. Amin Kamaleddin, Student Panel Member

APPEARANCES:

   Ms. Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg
   Rothstein LLP
   Mr. William Webb, Co-Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg Rothstein LLP
   The Student

HEARING SECRETARY:

   Mr. Christopher Lang, Director, Office of Appeals, Discipline and
   Faculty Grievances

   The Student appealed the finding and sanction of the Tribunal‚s Trial
   Division on the basis that the Tribunal erred in failing to address
   several places where the University failed to prove that differences on
   her exam demonstrate that she had falsified the exam. Furthermore, she
   alleges that the Tribunal did not adequately consider her evidence and
   that she is entitled to a presumption of innocence. The Student
   requests that the Tribunal‚s decision be reversed.

   In dismissing the Student‚s appeal, the Board noted that the first two
   pages of the Student‚s documentary evidence in question were evidence
   and marked as such, but the balance of the document was not marked as
   evidence. However, the Board noted that it was clear from the
   Tribunal‚s Reasons for Decision, from the Student‚s summary of that
   document in her factums, and from the arguments before it, that the
   balance of the document constituted argument which, while considered by
   the Tribunal, was not evidence, and was properly not treated as such.
   The Student asked the Board to review ‚each question‚ raised in her
   list of doubts and discrepancies. The Board noted that the Code of
   Behaviour on Academic Matters, 1995‚Ø(the ‚Code‚) makes it clear that
   the purpose of an appeal is not to seek a reversal of purely factual
   findings. The Code expressly provides that a student may not appeal
   questions which are purely factual. Furthermore, it is well established
   that the Board will not simply substitute a decision it would have made
   for that of the Tribunal on the basis that it would place a greater
   emphasis or different meaning on particular pieces of evidence. The
   Board noted that it has neither the jurisdiction nor the relevant
   information to be able to attempt to reassess the weight of the
   evidence on which the Tribunal relied. Regarding the Student‚s
   assertion that she is entitled to the ‚presumption of innocence,‚ the
   Board noted that the University is required to establish its case on a
   balance of probabilities and not on the basis of a criminal standard
   (beyond a reasonable doubt).

   Regarding the Tribunal‚s decision, the Student‚s effort to take issue
   with specific findings does not provide a basis upon which to dislodge
   the finding that the charge was made out. Furthermore, the Board does
   not consider that there is a reasonable basis for an appellate body to
   interfere with those findings. The Board found that there was a
   reasonable basis for each of the Tribunal‚s specific findings.

   Appeal dismissed.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/30472
