Case 786

DATE:

   March 24, 2016

PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v S.H.L.

Hearing Date(s):

   December 4, 2015 and January 15, 2016

Panel Members:

   Sana Halwani, Chair
   Chris Koenig-Woodyward, Faculty Member
   Alice Zhu, Student Member

Appearances:

   Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel
   Tegan O‚Brien, Counsel for Mr. S.J.P.
   Lawrence Veregin, Counsel for Mr. S.J.P.
   Rabiya Mansoor, Counsel for Mr. S.J.P.
   Steve Joordens, Professor of the Course
   Ada Le, Invigilator for the Final Exam in the Course
   Ainsley Lawson, Undergraduate Course Coordinator, Department of
   Psychology & Neuroscience
   Wayne Dowler, Dean‚s Designate, University of Toronto Scarborough
   Emily Dies, Law Student, University of Toronto Faculty of Law
   Kinson Leung, Invigilator for the Final Exam in the Course

In Attendance:

   Hayley Ossip, Articling Student, Gilbert‚s LLP
   Christopher Lang, Director, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances
   Krista Osbourne, Administrative Assistant, Appeals, Discipline and
   Faculty Grievances
   Tracey Gameiro, Observer
   Nisha Panchal, Observer, Student Conduct & Academic Integrity Officer
   Mr. S.J.P., the suspected collaborator
   Mr. S.H.L., the Student
   NOTE: Heard together with [1]Case #785
   Student charged under s. B.i.1(b) , s. B.i.1(a) , and s. B.i.3(b) of
   the Code . The charges related to allegations that the Student
   knowingly used or possessed an unauthorized aid in connection with a
   final exam, that the Student obtained the unauthorized aid while he
   went on a bathroom break during the Exam, and that the Student
   subsequently forcefully took and destroyed the unauthorized aid after
   it was seized by the Exam invigilators.
   Student was not present for the initial hearing date. Reasonable notice
   of the hearing was provided. The Student claimed that he had become too
   ill to attend the hearing, and contacted the Office of Appeals,
   Discipline, and Faculty Grievances in the early hours of the scheduled
   hearing date. The initial hearing was adjourned, with reluctance,
   because though the evidence with respect to the Student‚s illness
   warranted skepticism, the evidence was essentially uncontradicted. The
   Student was present at the subsequent hearings.
   The Panel emphasized the onus of proof set out in the Code , noting
   that to prove the charges against the Student, the University must
   satisfy on a balance of probabilities standard, with clear and cogent
   evidence, that the Student used an unauthorized aid to assist him in
   the exam and then destroyed the unauthorized aid. For the purposes of
   the Student‚s charges, it was not necessary for the Panel to determine
   how or where the Student obtained the cheat sheet.
   Taking into account the evidence supporting the existence or absence of
   the unauthorized aid, the Panel accepted the evidence of the
   invigilators and determined that even without the physical cheat sheet
   being in evidence, the University had provided ample evidence to meet
   its burden of proving the existence of the cheat sheet. The Panel
   placed no weight on the statistical evidence that compared the
   Student‚s exam answers to those of the suspected supplier of the
   unauthorized aid because of the lack of expert evidence provided as
   well as the general difficulties associated with statistical evidence.
   Student was found guilty of all three charges. The Panel took into
   account that the Student was a first time offender. The Panel also took
   into account several aggravating factors; namely, that the Student
   destroyed the evidence rather than dealing with the repercussions of
   being caught cheating, the serious nature of the offence, and the
   Student‚s lack of remorse throughout the proceeding and failure to
   accept responsibility. The Panel imposed a grade assignment of zero in
   the Course; a 2-year suspension; a 3-year notation on the Student‚s
   academic record and transcript; and that the case be reported to the
   Provost for publication.
   [2]View Case

References

   1. file:///processes/acdiscipline/Case_Summaries/University_Tribunal_Case_Summaries_Listed_by_Year__2000_-_Present_/2015-2016/Case__785.htm
   2. file:///media/28449
