UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
IN THE MATTER OF charges of academic dishonesty made on December 8, 2014;

AN D IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters,
1995;

AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Act, 1971. S.O . 1971, c. 56 as amended

s.o. 1978, c. 88;

BETWEEN:
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
-AND-

S - ~ ~ D SHIitREASONS FOR DECISION
Hearing Dates: Friday, December 4, 2015 and Friday, January 15, 2016
Members of the Panel:
Ms. Sana Halwani, Barrister and Solicitor, Gilbert's LLP, Chair
Professor Chris Koenig-Woodyard, Department of English, Faculty Panel Member
Ms. Alice Zhu, Student Panel Member
Appearances:
Ms. Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Barristers
Ms. Tegan O'Brien, Law Student for Mr. P • Downtown Legal Services
Mr. Lawrence Veregin, Law Student for Mr. Fa Downtown Legal Services
Ms. Rabiya Mansoor, Law Student for Mr. F9Downtown Legal Services
Professor Steve Joordens, Course Instructor for PSYA01H3Y
Dr. Ada Le, lnvigilatorforfinal exam in PSYA01H3Y
Ms. Ainsley Lawson, Undergraduate Course Coordinator, Department of Psychology &
Neuroscience
Professor Wayne Dowler, Dean's Designate, University of Toronto Scarborough (WD)
Ms. Emily Dies, Law Student, University of Toronto Faculty of Law
Dr. Kinson Leung , Invigilator for final exam in PSY A01 H3Y

In Attendance:
Ms. Hayley Ossip, Articling Student, Gilbert's LLP
Mr. Christopher Lang (December 4, 2015), Director, Appeals, Discipltne and Faculty Grievances
Ms. Krista Osbourne, Administrative Assistant, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances
Ms. Tracey Gameiro, (Observer, January 15, 2016)
Ms. Nisha Panchal, (Observer. Student Conduct & Academe Integrity Officer. Office of the
Dean & Vice-Principal Academic, University of Toronto, Scarborough)
Mr.
the Student

•w•

1

Mr.

S-~

the Student

I.

Charges

1.

The Trial Division of the University Tribunal convened on July 8, 2015 to consider
charges under the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters, 1995
(the "Code laid against Mr. S.f-1111.("L■") and Mr.
0

)

sl J■ P-("f8)trom

letters to each student dated December 8, 2014 from Professor Sioban Nelson, Interim
Vice-Provost, Faculty & Academic Life.
2.

L9did not attend the hearing at the schedu led time . T he hearing was thus adjourned
and rescheduled for December 4, 2015. Details of the adjournment are recorded in the
Reasons for Decision of the July 8, 2015 Hearing, and are attached to these Reasons as

Appendix 1.
3.

The matter was heard on Friday, December 4, 2015 and Friday, January 15. 2016.

4.

L-

tands accused of three Charges. The University alleges that

Li:

a, on or about August 9, 2014, knowingly used or possessed an unauthorized aid or
obtained unauthorized assistance in connection with a final exam ("Exam") in
PSYA01H3Y (the "CoLrse"), contrary to section B.1.1(b) of the University of

Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters, 1995 (the "Code");
b. on or about August 9, 2014, knowingly altered or falsified a document or
evidence required by ihe University, cr uttered, circulated, or made use of any
such altered or falsified document in connection with the Exam, contrary to
section B.1.1(a} of the Code; and
c. on or about August 9, 2014, knowingly engaged in a form of cheating, academ ic
dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or misrepresentation not otherwise described in
the Code in order to obtain academic credit or other academic advantage of any
kind in the Exam, contrary to section B. 1.3 (b) of the Code.
5.

FIii stands accused of two Charges. T he University alleges that 1111:

2

a. on or about August 9, 2014, knowingly provided an unauthorized aid or
unauthorized assistance to -

in connection with the Exam in the Course

contrary to section B.1.1(b) of the Code;
b. in the alternative, on or about August 9, 2014, knowingly engaged in a fonn of
cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or misrepresentation not
otherwise described in the Code in order to obtain academic credit or other
academic advantage of any kind, in connection with the Exam, contrary to
section B. l.3(b) of the Code.
6.

- nd fllboth pied not guilty to their respective charges.

7.

At the co nclusion of the hearing on January 15, 2016, the Tribunal found .
the charges against him, but dismissed the charges against -

guilty of

· finding that the

Universi ty had not proven its case on a balance of probabilities based on "clear and
convincing evidence."

II.

Background to the Charges

8.

ti and FIii both tool< the Cou rse taught by Professor Joordens in Summer 2014.

9.

The Course was an online course with no in-class component.

Final grades for the

Course were determined by online evaluations worth 38%, a written assignment to be
evaluated by peers worth 12% , and the Exam worth 50%. The syllabus {Exhibit 5)
clearly stated the course requirements and the university policy on academic dishonesty.
10.

The Exam was a multiple choice exam, which was held in multiple locations on the
University of Toronto Scarborough ("UTSC
wrote the Exam in different buildings.

0
)

-

Campus at the same time. .

and -

wrote in the Academic Resource Centre

("ARC") Room 223, a large, ranked classroom with two floors; 9,vrote the final exam
in the Arts Administration ("AA") building Room 112. The relative locations of ARC and
AA can be seen in the LITS map at Exhibit 21.
11.

During the Exam,

tll was allegedly caught using an unauthorized aid. The University

alleged that .

provided Lllwith the unauthorized aid. The theory of the University

was that P■had produced the unauthorized aid from a piece of paper ripped out of his
own exam, on which he had written down answers, and which he had taken to a
washroom near ARC, where LJll picked it up during a bathroom break during the exam.
3

12.

The charges at issue in this proceeding arise from this series of events.

13.

The University called five witnesses:
a. Professor Steve Joordens, Course Instructor for PSYA01H3Y;
b. Dr. Ada Le, Invigilator for final exam in PSYA01 H3Y in ARC 223;
c. Ms. Ainsley Lawson, Undergraduate Course Coordinator, Department of
Psychology & Neuroscience and Invigilator formal exam in in PSYA01H3Y in
AA 112;

d. Professor Wayne Dowler, Dean's Designate, University of Toronto Scarborough;
and
e. Dr Kinson Leung, Invigilator for final exam in PSYA01 H3Y in ARC 223.
14.

' 9called two witnesses:
a. Mr. Yoon Jang, a friend who wrote the PSYA01H3Y exam In AA 112; and
b.

Ms. Emily Dies, a University Faculty of Law Student with knowledge of statistics.

15.

The Panel also heard from .

Ill.

Summary of Evidence

and 19

The Exam
16.

The Exam was held on August 9, 2014 and was a two•hour multiple choice exam.

17.

Students were given exam booklets containing 80 multiple choice questions with four
answer choices - A, B, C, 0 . There were two versions of the exam: A and B. Questions
1-40 of Version A were questions 41-80 of Version B (and vice versa). There was also
an 81 st question, which simply asked students to darify if they were give n Version A or
B. Students were also given "Scantron" pages in which to input their answers. These
Scantron pages - not the exam booklets - were graded electronically by a Scantron
mach ine.

4

18. The first page of the Exam booklet explained that use of unauthoriZed aids during the
examination was proh ibited. L■ and . s respective booklets were made Exhibits 6
and 9, respectively, in the proceeding.

19. The Exam was held in multiple locations on the University of Toronto Scarborough
("UTSCu) Camp us at the same time. Indeed, Laland P■ wrote the Exam in different
buildings.

-

wrote in the Academic Resource Centre ("ARC~) Room 223, a large,

theater-style classroom that spanned two f loors; ~wrote the fina·1 exam in the Arts
Administration ("AA") building Room 112. The relative locations of ARC and AA can be
seen in the UTSC map at Exhibit 21.
20.

Dr. Ada Le and Dr. Kinson Leung were invigilators in ARC where ■ wrote the Exam.

21.

Ms. Lawson was an invigilator in AA where 9,vrote the Exam. In addition, Mr. Yang,

PIii'sfriend, also wrote the exam in AA.
22.

None of these details about the Exam were disputed.
s examination

23.

The evidence was cons istent that during the two hour exam. •went to the washroom
at least twice.

ti testified that he had a stomach ache during the exam and that was

the reason for his multiple visits.
24.

It is clear that students in AA were taken to a washroom on the lower level (through the
doors at the fronUbottom of the classroom).

It is also clear that there were other

washrooms available on the upper level (through the doors at the back/top of the
classroom).

Ll5 testimony was that he had no way of knowing to which bathroom Dr.

Leung wo uld take him.

Dr. Leung testified that he could not take students to the

washroom on the upper level, as the upper door out of the exam room is a "one-way
door• which does not permit re-entry.

Professor Joordens testified that there were

multiple washrooms, and students would not necessarily know to which washroom they
would be taken during an exam. Dr. Leung testified that there was only one bathroom
stall, while .testified that there were multiple stalls.
25.

ti's evidence was that Dr. Leung made him tum out his pockets before each
washroom visit and followed him into the washroom (not into the stall). Once in the

s

washroom, Dr. Leung allegedly examined the stall before allowing . t o enter. Anyone,
including the general student population, can use these washrooms during exams.
26.

Dr. Leung stated that L I did not act suspiciously after the first wastvoom visil
However, after the second, Lai looked around the exam room. He then continued to
work on his mulUple choice exam by simply filling in bubbles, without looking at the exam
booklet which contained the questions.

27. Near the end of '!he exam (about ten to fifteen minutes before its conclusion), Dr. Leung
observed ~ copying answers onto his Scantron sheet from a piece of paper containing
rows of numbers and letters under

t9s

exam booklet. The piece of paper appeared to

be an unauthorized aid containing answers b the exam questions. Dr. Leung described
the paper as being roughly the size of a hand or a palm - "a pretty big piece, actually" containing handwritten rows of numbers and corresponding letters. On the back of the
paper, the words "6 or 8of 15" were typed. Dr. Leung did not recall the precise number
but rather the shape of the number.
28.

On observing this, Dr. Leung took t.a, exam from him and directed nm to the front of
the room.

29.

Dr. Le testified that Dr. Leung called her over to

'-Is

chair right after he confiscated the

paper and had a chance to look at it. He handed her the piece of paper and she walk~d
with it down to the front of the classroom. On this walk she had the chance to look at the
piece of paper. She noted that the paper was roughly 5x3 inches or 4x1.5 inches (Dr. Le
put her forefingers together and her thumbs together to form an oval to demonstrate the
approximate size} and that it had 3-4 rows of 20 or so numbers that were handwritten on
the paper in small writing in pencil. "VA" was also written in pencil on the piece of paper.
Dr. Le also noticed that there was a typed mark on the page indicating a number she did
not recal Ifo Ilowed by the words "of 15".
30. When Dr. Le reached the front of the classroom, she placed the piece of paper on the
podium in front of her.
classroom.

Dr. Le then asked

ii to take a seat at the front of the

~ did not ask the invigilators why his exam had been taken away.

Instead, when Dr. Le had her back turned to him, he bumped her, managed to grab the
piece of paper from the podium, and proceeded to run out of the classroom.

6

31.

L■ testified that he did not have a piece of paper on tis desk and that there was no
piece of paper im,ulved in the situation at all. He also denied jostllng Dr. Le or grabbing
anything from her.

~ testified that he had run out of the room because he was

frustrated by the way he had been treated by Dr. Leung during his bathroom breaks as
well as by the way Dr. Leung had taken his exam away from him before the end of the
Exam {his testimony was not clear on this point}.
32.

L■left his car keys in the dassroom and so had to return to the room to retrieve them.
When he returned, Dr. Le observed that he had a calm demeanour. Dr. Le asked if he
had the piece of paper and he said several times that he did not have it.

33.

As is required by the University, both Dr. Leung and Dr. Le wrote incident reports
describing what had occurred in the classroom. Dr. Leung wrote his incident report at
11 :21 AM - roughly 10 minutes after the exam ended {Exhibit 22), and Dr. Le wrote her
incident report at 11:40 AM (Exhibit 15}.

~
34.

Ms. Lawson was an invigilator in AA, the room where P■ wrote the Exam. She
testified that she did not notic e • during the exam. Her only interaction with him was
when she signed him in to the exam room and when he handed back his exam.

35.

P■testified that he was nervous during the exam, and was chewing a piece of gum b
manage his anxiety. When the gum lost its fla\/Uur, he spat it out and disposed of it into
a piece of paper that he ripped out of the exam booklet. He stated that he stayed in the
exam room until the end and then met Mr. Yoon Jang (a friend of tis who also wrote the
PSYA01 H3Y exam in AA 112) at the front of the classroom where they proceeded b
pick LP their belongings and head for lunch.

36.

Mr. Yoon Jang also testified that he did not see Fa leave the room during the exam,
that PIii stayed for the entire exam, and that he met FIii at the end of the exam at the
front of the classroom where the two gathered their belongings and went for lunch.

37.

Dr. Joordens' testified that the majority of the class finishes the exam in under an hour
and a half, but that he gave the class tv.o hours so everyone can finish. He also stated
that the bulk of students leave the exam between forty-five minutes and one hour before

7

the end of the exam. Ms. Lawson testified that students started leaving about an hour
into the exam, with a steady stream leaving between the hour and hour and a half mar1<.

P•

38.

However, there was no evidence provided to the Panel that

left the Exam early.

39.

As will be discussed below, the University's theory with respect to fllls involvement in
this matter requires that fllll;om pleted his exam and left the room before the end of the
exam. The Panel heard no evidence to support such a finding of fact.
Collecting Evidence after the Exam

40.

Following the exam, the invigilators met and reviewed the entire class' exams, and
noticed that a section of a page in P - exam booklet was ripped out. The part of the
page is also where the page number - "6 of 15" - would have been written. Dr. Le
testified that ro other students' exam booklets had pages that were ripped. She also
checked the unused exam booklets and all of them had iltact pages.

~

•s exam

booklet was made Exhibit 8 in ttiis proceeding. Measuring the rip as presented in the
Exhibit, it is just over 4 inches X 1 inch.
41.

Dr. Le testified that she wrote a second exam incident report after re.dewing p••s exam
booklet (Exhibit 16). In this incident report, Dr. Le stated that Dr. Leung "knew that the
cheat sheet was ripped out of another student's exam boo klet" and that "6 of 15" had
been written on it.

f9's exam booklet was the only exam booklet with a corner ripped

off. Dr. Le also stated in her incident report that "the size and shape ct the ripped out
corner coincides with the size and shape of the cheat sheet."
42.

In her testimony, Dr. Le concluded that, in order to pass the note to another student,

fllllwould have needed to finish the exam, walk over to the men's bathroom in ARC,
and leave the note there, since students may not leave an exam room unattended before
they have completed their exam.
Descriptions of the Unauthorized Aid - The "'Cheat Sheet''
43.

Dr. Le and Dr. Leung provided the following descf'l)tions of the cheat sheet:
a. Size and shape

i. Dr. Le; Described the cheat sheet as roughly 5 inches by 3 i'lches a 4
inches by x 1.5 inches.

Dr. Le put her forefingers together and her
8

thumbs together to form an oval to demonstrate the approximate size.

In

her incident report, as described above, she had correlated the size and

-

shape of the cheat sheet to the size and shape of the ripped corner from
P
ii.

's exam.

Dr. Leung: Described the cheat sheet as being roughly the size of a hand
or a palm - "a pretty big piece, actually".

In his incident report he had

described the cheat sheet as both "small" and "the size of a palm".
b.

Answers
i.

Dr. Le: The cheat had three to four rows of 20 or so numbers 1-4 that
were handwritten on the paper in small writing arranged in rows in pencil.
There were no handwritten letters.

Dr. Le's evidence was that she

understood the cheat sheet to be using a simple code of A=1, B=2, C=3
and D=4 to convey the multiple choice answers.

It was unclear from the

evidence how the recipient of the cheat sheet would know whether to go
down or across first.
ii.

Dr. Leung: The cheat sheet contained handwritten rows of numbers and
corresponding letters.

c.

Other handwritten markings
i.

Dr. Le: "VA" was also written in pencil on the piece of paper.

Her

evidence was that she assumed this meant Version A.
ii.

Dr. Leung: Provided no evidence of any additional markings on the cheat
sheet, or of any way in which to determine which version the answers
related to.

d.

Typed page number reference
i.

Dr. Le: There was a typed mark on the page indicating a number she did
not recall followed by the words "of 15".

Dr. Le did not indicate whether

the typed page number was located on the same side of the cheat sheet
as the handwritten answers.

9

ii. Dr. Leung: On the back of the paper (i.e. not the side of the paper
containing the answers). the words "[6 or 8) of 15" were typed. Dr. Leung
did not recall the precise number but rather the shape of the number.
Analysis of the Exam Responses
44. After the exam, Professor Joordens and Ms. Lawson compared the exa m answers of the
entire class, and noted that P■ and - h ad identical answers to the first twelve
questions of the exam.

Of these twelve answers, both

Pa and 11111 answered

questions 3, 4, and 12 incorrectly.
45.

Further, L•and -were the only students who answered questions 1-12 in the same
manner. No analysis was done to determine if any other students had also answered
questions 3, 4 and 12 incorrectly.

46. Professor Joordens, with the assistance of Ms. Lawson, conducted a statistical analysis
of the answers given by PIii and L• Professor Joordens explained that he had taught
statistics and used statistical analysis in experiments. This experience was provided as
the basis for th is testimony.

Professor Joordens was not qualified as an expert in

statistical analysis prior to giving this testimony, but there was no objection to his
testimony by LIi or P■, the former of which was self-represented and the latter of
which was rep resented by Downtown Legal Serv ices.
47.

Although the statistical analysis conducted by Professor Joordens appears on its face to
consist of simple math, and so to fall into the category of facts rather than opinions, upon
further scrutiny, it is clear that both the a_ssumptions underlying the analysis and the
inferences drawn from the analysis push this testimony squarely into the realm ct
opinion.

48.

Professor Joordens made clear that this kind of analysis must focus on common
incorrect answers since common correct answers are to be expected {since they are
correct).

49.

Professor Joordens testified that it is highly unlikely that
L{) with the same answers by coincidence.

LI and P■ could have come

He had designed the exam such that certain

wrong answers would be more tempting than others, given their proximity in sound or
subject matter to the correct answer. In particular, two answers given by both students

10

were considered "low probability" wrong answers. Question 4 was only answered
incorrectly in the same way as F9 and Lm by approximately 5% of the class.
Question 12 was answered incorrectly in the same way as

Pl and Li by

approximately 19% of the class.
50. There was also evidence presented that the two students had the same answers to the
last eight questions in the Exam, if F9s answers were seen as shifted up from l9s

by one number. If this shifting theory is accepted, P•s answers to questions 74-78

correspond with L•'s answers to questions 75-79. However, �answered all these
questions correctly, and as already noted, correct answers are not helpful to this kind of
statistical analysis. If this shifting theory is not accepted, then the answers do not
correspond and, again, these questions are not helpful to the analysis. In any case,
Professor Joordens placed little emphasis on this part of his analysis, preferring to focus
on the first 12 questions.
51. Overall, Professor Joordens stated that there was a 0.4% chance that two random
students would provide identical answers to the first 12 questions. He also stated that if
probability is less than 5%, a result is statistically significant and it is possible to reject
the notion that the occurrence happened by chance alone. The implied inference was
that there was a 99.6% chance that f9 and -had cheated together.
52. On cross-examination, it became clear that Professor Joordens had assumed that all the
questions analysed were independent - i.e. that the probability of answering one
question right or wrong would not affect the probability of answering any other question

right or wrong. This assumption would not be reasonable if, for example, two questions
came from the same chapter of a textbook. This assumption also does not take into
account any language difficulties or other weaknesses that students may have in
common and that may influence student responses.
53. Ms. Emily Dies, a law student with extensive math undergraduate studies called by
P.'s DLS representative, also examined the analysis conducted by Professor
Joordens. Ms. Dies was initially presented as an expert witness to counter Professor
Joordens' testimony. Because insufficient notice and information had been provided by
DLS to counsel to the University about Ms. Dies' testimony (The University Tribunal
Rules of Practice and Procedure Rules 72-73), there was an initial objection to Ms. Dies
testifying. However, after being told the intended scope of Ms. Dies testimony it became
11

clear that Ms. Dies would be providing no opinion evidence, or at the very least no more
opinion evidence than Professor Joordens had already provided. On that basis, the
Panel allowed her to testify.
54.

Ms. Dies testified that there was only a 0.02% chance that any student would answer all
twelve questions correctly when the probabilities of a student's answering each question
correctly were multiplied. When this probability, in turn, was mu ltiplied in order to discern
the likelihood or any student getting 100% on the exam, the probability ·approached zero
very quickly." In contrast, Professor Joordens had noted that some students did indeed
get 95% - or possibly higher- on the exam.

55. The intent of the testimony - as the Panel understood it - was to highlight the way in
which statistics could be misleading when taken at face value. Thus, the reality was that
getting 100% on the exam was completely feasible, but the statistical analysis made it
look impossible (a probability approaching zero). This was a caution well received by
the Panel and discussed in greater detail below.
The Relationship between the Students
56.

P.

The relationship between the students was a contested issue at the Hearing. The
University sought to provide evidence that

and Lal were friends , even very close

friends. Th is was strongly disputed by both P•and L•
57.

After establishing that L•and P•s answers were so similar, Ms. Lawson testified that
she checked Facebook and learned that ~ and

FIi had on at least two occasions

communicated on Facebook. Screenshots from Facebook were labeled Exhibit 18 of the
proceeding. Most of the messages between Flllland L•were in Korean and had been
translated by Ms. Lawson using a "Bing" translation widget.

Ms. Lawson could not

confirm the accuracy of the translations since she does not speak Korean. She rather
relied on the accuracy of the widget.
58.

The two messages on which the University focussed were as follows:
a. A message in English from ~to P•on Aprll 21, 2014 which stated "I love you
Hyung" followed by a smiley face emoticon;
b. A happy birthday message (in Korean) from

ta to P■in July 2014.
12

59.

Fil

and tml both testified that they had met before at a party, but they "were not friends

outside of Facebook".

P•and

L. also both testified that Li's Facebook post of "I

love you Hyung [big brother]" on April

21, 2014 was much more casual in its Korean

context than in English, because "love" is not interpreted the same way and "Hyung" is a
term of respect used for someone older.
birthday (July

Similarly, tm's message to P. on his

16, 2014) was also rather impersonal; it was just one that he sends to

many Facebook friends on their birthdays after receiving Facebook birthday notifications.

60. The "I love you" statement was followed by an exchange on April 24, 2014 in which
(according to the translations provided by P.)

L. asked P. "When did I write this

down?"; to which Fml replied, "hahahaha, I am the hacker"; and then to which l9
replied "hahaha I think I do remember". The way the Panel understood this exchange,
based on the testimony of P

. was that Lm could not remember having written the

message on P•s Facebook page,

L9 joked that he must have hacked into .s

Facebook page to leave the message, to which P. replied ("laughing") that he thought
he did now remember leaving the message.

61. Professor Dowler was questioned about the students' academic histories. Li s
'

academic history was made Exhibit 19 and Pl's academic history was made Exhibit

20.

These academic histories made clear that the students only had two courses in

common (apart from the Course at issue here).

62.

Both students had taken "Health and the Environment" and "Introduction to Japanese".
The Health and Environment course occurred prior to the Course at issue here, while the
Japanese course was taken the semester after the Course.

63. Professor Dowler explained that the Health and the Environment class was a large
lecture class of about 400 students. In contrast, Japanese classes are small, do not
have online components, and he did not believe that there were multiple sections of that
course, though he was not sure. Therefore, Professor Dowler testified that the chance of
knowing someone in the Introduction to Japanese class would be much higher than in
the Health and the Environment class.

64. P•testified that he did not know that Li was in his Health and the Environment class.

Further, he testified that, the Japanese course was divided into three sections and that

13

he and

LI were not In the same section. He stated that he had only learnt that ia was

In the Japanese class because of these disciplinary proceedings.

P■ and
65.

LI Meetings with Professor Dowler

In October 2014,

ta and Fa met with Professor Dowler. Professor Dowler testified

that he administered the Dean's Warning t:l the students and presented the evidence
against them.
66.

Professor Dowler met with L.once on October 20, 2014 and testified that tlldenied
having a cheat sheet and stated that the Invigilator had searched his pockets after he
went to the washroom and had not found anything.

67.

Professor Dowler met with

PIii three times In September and October 2 014. P■

explained to Professor Dowler that he was nervous during the exam and was chewing
gum, and that he tore off a piece of paper to 1hrow out the gum. Professor Dowler -.vent
over this account with P■ several times.
68.

P■ testified that Professor Dowler did not at first tell him which Lllie was accused cl
aiding, explaining that

ta is a very common Asia n surname. Accorc:ing to -

•

Professor Dowler rather said that FIii would "find out later." P■ stated that he only
learned which

ta was at Issue when the charges were provided to him In a December

8, 201 4 letter. On cross-examination, University counsel challenged
during which P • clarfied that he knew that the ...

FIi on this poi1t,

at Issue must have been

someone In his PSYA01H3Y class.
IV.

The Onus of Proof

69.

The onus of proof i1 the Code is described in section E.4(b): "the onus of proof sha I be
on the prosecutor, who must show on clear and con\1ncilg evidence that the accused
has committed the alleged offence."

70.

To prove the charges against L■and

Pal the University must satisfy us on a balance

of probabiities standard with clear and cogent evidence that (1 )

ia used an

unauthorized aid to assist him in the Exam and then destroyed the unauthorized aid, and
that (2) P.il>rovided the unauthorized aid to

FIi. See Universly of Toronto and O.M.

(Case 497- Appeal), a decision of the Discipline Appeal Board, March 25, 2009 and F.H.

14

v McDougall, 2008 sec 53. The question is whether it is more likely than rot that the
relevant events occurred.
71.

PIiis DLS counsel cited University of Toronto aoo K.U. and R.D. (Case 00-01-02), a
decision of the University Tribunal, April 25, 2001, in which the Tribunal stated that the
''clear and convincing evidence standard" includes intent, and that more than a mere
suspicion is required to satisfy the standard (at para 19). In this case, K.U. and RD. sat
beside each other and provided almost identical answers in two separate exams, and
both students were observed as being suspicious. This evidence was not deemed
sufficient to amount to a conviction for either student. The University's position was that
this case is no longer good law since it was decided before McDougall clarified the
standard for discipline hearings. However, that is not entirely clear.

72.

McDougall established that the only civil standard of proof at common law is proof on a
balance of probabilities (para 40).

Further, McDougall equates the "clear and

oonvincing" standard and the "balance of probabilities" standard:
...evidence must always be suffictently cl.ear, convincing and

cogent b satisfy the balance of probabilities test (...] If a
responsible judge finds for the plainliff, it must be accepted that
the evidence was sufficienlly clear, convincing and cogent to that
judge that the plainliff satisfied the balance of probabilities test
{para 46}.
73.

It is dear that more than a mere suspicion is reqt.ired to meet this standard.

74.

Further, there is no explicit fonnula for assessing whether an event is "more likely than

not" - it is up to the trier of fact to make that determination in the circumstances (para
48). It could therefore be open to a Panel of the Tribunal to include a consideration of
intent into the weighing of the evidence.
75.

In the context of this case, however, clear and convincing evidence does not reqL.ire
separate evidence of intent. Rather, intent would be a corollary of the use or proVision of
a cheat sheet.

V.

Findings
The Existence and Destruction of the Cheat Sheet

15

76.

With respect to

Llls charges , there are two material factual findings that need to be

made: (1) di:! tal have or use an authorized aid during the Exam? Ard (2) did L■
destroy that unauthorized aid?
77. On the basis of all the evidence the Panel finds that

LI used an unauthorized aid in the

Exam to cheat, and then destroyed that unauthorized aid, thereby destroying evidence
needed by the University.
78. The Panel preferred the evidence of Ors. Leung and Le to that of

t.11 Both Ors. Leung

and Le handled and observed the cheat sheet. In addition, Dr. Leung witnessed •
actually using the cheat sheet during the exam. Further, Dr. Le testified that she was
bumped by •

ti

79.

when he took back the cheat sheet. and both Dr. Le and Dr. Leung saw

run out the exam room.

Li's evidence, in contrast was simply not credible and is rejected by the Panel. In
particular,

LIii provided no explanation for the observations of Drs. Leung and Le. He

simply denied the existence of the cheat sheet. Further, his explanation for why he ran
out of the exam room was undear and implausible.

LIi testified that he had run out of

the room because he \NaS frustrated by the way he had been treated by Dr. Leung during
his bathroom breaks and by the way Dr. Leung had taken his exam away from him
before the end of the Exam. However, instead of asking the invigilators why his exam
had been taken away or if he could continue his exam, he ran out
80.

E
-

The University pointed the Panel to the decision in University of Toronto and CNovember 12, 2013, (Case 648), in support of the argunent that the Panel

could return convictions in this case even without the physical cheat sheet being in
evidence. In that case, as here, the student was entirely responsible for this lack of
evidence. Despite this lack, the University had provided ample evidence to meet its
burden of proving the existence of the cheat sheet.
The Relationship Between P■ and

11111

81. With respect to P■s charges, there are several factual findings that must be made, the
first of which is establishing the relationship between

PIii and t.11-

16

82.

cheating.
83.

P.

PIii and ~ is important to University's theory of the case
because it helps to answer the question of 'Mly
would be willing to assist tJI in
The relationship between

PIiand L■ admit that they are acquaintances and have at least some overlap in their
social network. That they are acquaintances may make the assistance alleged to be
plausible, but it certainly is not enough to explaln why one student would go so far as to
help another student cheat on a final exam.

84.

The University attempted through Facebook evidence to show a stronger connection
between P■ and t.111, but on the evidence, the Panel cannot find that the students
were more than acquaintances.

85.

It is a notorious fact that social networks like Facebook are not reflective of actual friend
networks, and certainly, the two exchanges introduced as evidence by the University and
discussed above do not reflect a strong friendship between

PIii and L■ In a nutshell,

to the Panel, these exchanges reflected the trivial interactions common on Facebook,
and not the sincere emotion that the words "I love you" might reflect in ·real life".
86.

The University also drew the Panel's attention to the courses that ~ and ~ had in
common.

However, these were not helpful in establishing anything more than an

acquaintance status.
87.

Although, at times,

Pl

tried perhaps a little too hard to distance himself from -

that

instinct is understandable given the circumstance in which he found himself. On the
whole, the Panel accepts as cred ible the evidence of

PIii and LI that they were not

close friends.
The Common Answers and the Statistical Analysis of the Exams
88.

Before addressing the substance of the statistical analysis provided by the University, we
must address a threshold question: was the statistical evidence provided in the nature of
expert opinion evidence, or was it fact evidence, as characterized by the University?

89.

Professor Joordens was not put forward as an expert witness. However, the statistical
analysis he conducted and testimony he gave in that regard were opinion evidence.
While the math itself (the multiplication of ratios to calculate probabilities) is factual,
Professor Joordens made assumptions in deciding how to do that math. In particular,

17

Professor Joordens assumed that the events at issue (each incorrect answer) were
independent and provided opinion evidence to the Tribunal about why that was a
reasonable assumption.
90.

Similarly, the testimony he gave about the likelihood of L. and Pll having the same
three incorrect answers based on his analysis was also an opinion. He did not simply
provide the mathematical answer, he told the Panel that it was extremely unlikely that
two students would randomly answer those questions the same.

91. Given Professor Joordens' involvement in this case, it is questionable that he would
have been qualified as an expert even if had he had been tendered as such. We do not
say this to impugn Professor Joordens' credibility or evidence generally - he was a
credible witness and provided other clear and helpful testimony to the Panel. But he was
too closely linked to the case - it was his exam, after all - to be considered independent
92.

Had his evidence been restricted, for example, to pointing out that Lm and P. had
identical answers in the first 12 questions, three of which were incorrect, he would likely
have stayed on the right side of the experlJopinion divide. That evidence would
obviously not have been as helpful a statistical analysis because it does not allow for any
"easy" inferences to be drawn from those facts (12 identical answers, 3 of them
incorrect) to the likelihood that Llland Fi cheated together. But those kinds of ready­
made inferences are the purview of an independent expert, not of a fact witness, no
matter how well-meaning.

93.

When opposing Ms. Dies' testimony (discussed above), counsel to the University made
statements to the effect that the Tribunal sometimes allows professors with some
knowledge of a specialised subject matter like statistics to provide evidence to the Panel
that may be helpful in making this determination. We are also keenly aware that the
Tribunal is not a Court and so the rules of evidence can be somewhat relaxed. (See for
example, Bailey v Barbour 2013 ONSC 4451 at 8 in which the Court referenced the "the
potential for relaxed rules of evidence before administrative tribunals."

94.

Where statistical evidence is concerned, however, a Panel should proceed with extreme
caution. Much has been written about the difficulties associated with statistical evidence,
including the many statistical fallacies that the uninitiated can be drawn into.

18

95.

For example, the Fundamentals of Probability and Statistical Evidence in Criminal
Proceedings: Guidance for Judges, Lawyers, Forensic Scientists and Expert Witnesses,

published by the Royal Statistical Society1 begins with a caution: "There is a long history
and ample recent experience of misunderstandings relating to statistical information and
probabilities which have contributed towards serious miscarriages of justice." That
caution extends to ensuring that experts are competent to provide statistical evidence:
Perhaps somewhat more surprisingly, even forensic scientists

and expert witnesses, whose evidence is typically the immediate
source of statistics and probabilities presented in court, may also

lack familiarity with relevant terminology, concepts and methods.
Expert witnesses must satisfy the threshold
/

legal

test of

competency before being allowed to testify or submit an expert
report in legal proceedings.

1

96.

For these reasons, during the hearing, I expressed concerns about the statistical
evidence. I also spectfically asked counsel to the University what if any inferences the
Panel should draw from the statistical evidence. Perhaps heeding my concerns, Ms.
Harmer answered that she was not asking for inferences to be drawn regarding
Professor Joordens' analysis. Rather, Ms. Harmer stated that she was attempting to
demonstrate that the statistical evidence corroborated the unlikelihood that Mr. Li and
Mr. P• could have answered the questions in the same manner by coinc·idence.

97.

Regardless, because of the concerns we have with the lack of expert evidence in this
regard, the Panel is not willing to place any weight on the statistical analysis conducted
by Professor Joordens and Ms. Lawson, or Ms. Dies.

98.

We now turn to the factual, non-statistical evidence relating to the exam answers. The
Panel has taken into considerat1on the fact that l9and P. had 1 2 common answers
of which three were incorrect and that of the 400 students in the class, only L.and
P. had those same 1 2 answers. However, we are not willing to draw any inferences
from this evidence to the likelihood that l9 and Pll cheated. Further, the Panel has

Colin Aitken, Pa u l Roberts, Graham Jackson Fundamentals of Probability and Statistical Evidence in Criminal

Proceedings: Guidance for Judges, Lawyers, Forensic Scientists and Expert Witnesses ( Royal Statistical Society Law,

2010) online: <http://www.rss.org.uk/I mages/PDF/influencing-change/rss-funda mentals-probability-statistica1-

evidenc�.pdf> at p. 3.

19

not placed any weight on the answers to the last eight questions in the Exam for the
reasons set out above.
99.

The Panel has taken into consideration the cross-examination and submissions of DLS
counsel with respect to the whether there was any common element to the three wrong
answers that could explain why both

L■ and P■ answered them incorrectly.

Professor Joordens was clear that the three questions came from different chapters and
covered different subject-matter. However, it does not appear that he considered that
L I and

Flis shared cultural background, or the fact that English was a second

language for both of them, could have played a role.
100. There does appear to be some evidence that language could have had an impact on the
incorrect answers.
questions.

Pl's

exam booklet (Exhibit 9) contains notes alongside certain

Next to two of the questions he got wrong in those first 12 questions

(Questions 3 and 4), P■ made notes that indicated that he struggled with certain terms
in those questions during the Exam: "gender" and "prey''.

Interestingly, one of those

questions was a rare wrong answer (Question 4) with only 5% of students getting it
wrong. If Lllsim ilarly struggled with the language in those questions, that could provide
an alternative explanation for why the students had similar answers.
101. The point here is not to speculate but to explain that Professor Joordens' evidence that it
was unlikely that L■ and P■ would provide those same three incorrect answers
randomly was rooted in a view that the questions were independent, and that view is
questionable.
102. In all these circumstances, we have placed little weight on the analysis of

LIi and P■s

Exam answers i1 coming to our decision.
The Origin of the Cheat Sheet
103. The University urged us to rely on University of Ta-onto and S-

(Case

595), a decision of the University Tribunal, dated October 12, 2010, in which the Tribunal
held that it is not necessary to determine how cheating occurred but rather the test is
whether the University has provided "clear and convincing evidence that the student
violated the Code in the manner described" (para 32).

20

104. We agree that, for the purposes of Li's charges, it is not necessary for us to determine
how or where L. obtained the cheat sheet. However, for the purposes of Pm's
charges these questions are engaged as there is no direct evidence linking P. to the
cheat sheet. That is not to say that the Panel must determine every aspect of the
alleged cheating plan, but to convict we must be satisfied that it was more likely than not
that (1) Pi prod uced the cheat sheet and (2) Pll had an opportunity to deliver the
cheat sheet (directly or indirectly) to L•. We are not.
105. With respect to the evidence that F91 produced the cheat sheet, given the concerns set
out above with respect to the statistical evidence, we are left with (1) the fact that a
ripped corned was missing from one page of 9's exam booklet; (2) the ripped comer
was roughly the size and shape of the cheat sheet; (3} no other booklets from the Exam
were found with a ripped corner; and (4) the cheat sheet contained the printed text "_ of
15" that indicated it originated from an exam booklet (the Exam had 15 pages and was
marked on each page with "_of 15").
106. P• provided a very plausible explanation for the missing corner from Pl: he needed
to spit out some gum during the exam. That explanation extends to the size and shape
of the missing corne
Interestingly during .her examination, Ms. Le noted that students
sometimes rip out corners from exam booklets in order spit out a piece of gum - and
even she, on occasion would rip out a corner for such a purpose As a result, she
checked every exam booklet in the class twice.
107. P. wa s a credible witness and his evidence was clear and consistent. His explanatio n
for the torn corner had been given consistently to Professor Dowler, the Dean's
r.

I

,

,

.

Designate, and to the Panel,

108.

With respect to the printed text and links to the Exam booklets more generally, Dr.
Leung's testimony was that the number was either 6 or 8 (the missing corner from Fil's
booklet would have had the text "6 of 15" on it) and Ms. Le did not remember what
specific number appeared on the page, just that it was a number "of 15". There are
additional inconsistencies in their evidence about the cheat sheet as detailed above.
Although the evidence that no other booklets from the Exam were found with a ripped
corner is compelling, it does not.sufficiently link the cheat sheet to P21

109. We also note that there was no evidence that P■ was acting suspiciously in the exam.
Just as Dr. Leung noticed

tlls suspicious behaviour when he was oopying answers

from the cheat sheet, one might have expected an invigilator in P■s exam to have
noticed L■ copying 80 answers onto his exam booklet and ripping that corner. We
heard no evidence that -drew any attention from the invigilators during his exam.

i=IIII had an opportunity to deliver the cheat sheet to L•
The University's theory is that ill retrieved the cheat sheet from a bathroom stall during

110. Nor are we convinced that

one of his bathroom breaks. The only evidence in support of this theory is that most
students finished the exam within an hour and a half, and the inference is that if had finished the exam in this time, he would have been able to plant the cheat sheet in
the bathroom near

ti's

exam classroom. There is no evidence that P■ in fact left the

Exam early. This evidence is insufficient for the University to meet its burden of proof.
111 . Further, there is significant evidence that contradicts or calls into question the plausibility
of the University's theory. Most importantly, -and Mr. Jang testified that

Pl

stayed

in his exam room to the end of the Exam, and this evidence was found to be credible
and accepted by the Panel. Further, there were multiple bathrooms near Li's exam
room and students would not know which one they would be taken to during the exam.
112. For these reasons, there is insufficient evidence to f ind, on a balance of probabilities,
that ~ was the origin of the cheat sheet. or was involved in any way with

l9s

cheating.

VI.

Conclusion on Charges

113. Following deli be ration and based on the testimony of Professor Joordens, Dr. Le, Ms.
Lawson, Professor Dowler, Dr. Leung, Ms. Dies, Mr. Jang, P■ and LIi the Panel
concluded that there was clear and convincing evidence that it was more likely than not
that L■ had used -or possessed an unauthorized aid during the exam, disposed of the
unauthorized aid, and engaged in academic misconduct.
114. The Panel therefore held that -

is guilty on three charges: using or possessing an

unauthorized aid or obtaining unauthorized assistance in connection with a final exam.

22

contrary to section B.l.1(b) of the Code; knowingly altering or falsifying a document or
evidence required by the University, or uttering, circulating, or making use of any such
altered or falsified document in connection with the Exam, contrary to section B.I .1 ( a) of
the Code; and knowingly engaging in a form of cheating, academic dishonesty or
misconduct, fraud or misrepresentation not otherwise described in the Code in order to
obtain academic credit or other academic advantage cl any kind in the Exam, contrary to
section B.1.3(b)) of the Code.

115. Following deliberation and based on the testimony of Professor Joordens, Dr. Le, Ms.
Lawson, Professor Dowler, Dr. Leung, Ms. Dies, Mr. Jang, P■ and concluded that there was insufficient evidence to convict

'9

the Panel

of any of the charges on a

balance of probabilities.
116. The Panel therefore found

VII.

PIii not guilty on all charges.

Penalty

117. Counsel for the University started her submissions by requesting a sanction similar to
that imposed on other first time offenders: a mark of zero n the course, a two year
suspension from the University, notation on the student's. record for three years, and
reporting of this decision to the provost for publication with

LIi's name withheld.

Counsel recommended starting the suspension and notation in January 2016, such that
they would end on December 31, 2017 and December 31, 2018 (or until graduation,
whichever occurs first), respectively.
118. This proposed penalty is in line with the Provost's Guidance on Sanctions in the Code.
119. Counsel for the University provided the Panel with a number of cases involving cheating
by first time offenders. Of note, a three year - rather than a two year - suspension was
ordered in Uriversity of Toronto and

CIII ~ November 12, 2013' (Case 648),

because of misconduct following the event. Although •

did not accept responsibility,

and the nature of the offence he committed is serious, there is no evidence of
extenuating circumstances in this case besides the fact that •

ran out of the room and

denied the note's existence. Thus, the University took the position that a three year
suspension was not warranted. We agree.

23

120. The Panel also took the fallowing into account as relevant to penalty:
a. .was a first time offender;
b. Instead of dealing with the repercussions of being caught cheating,

Llran

out

of the room and destroyed the evidence of tis cheating - this behaviour was
extremely inappropriate and the Panel strongly condemns this behaviour;
c. The serious nature of the offence - it is because of this type of offence that the
University has b take significant steps to ensure that cheating does not take
place during exams; and
d, The student's conduct prior to and throughout the proceeding - there was no
evidence that

VIII.

ta had sincerely accepted the offence or that he was remorseful.

Decision of the Panel

121 . At the conclusion of the hearing, the Panel conferred and made the following order:
a. •

is guilty of
i. one count of knowingly using or possessing an unauthorized aid or
obtaining unauthorized assistance in connection with a final exam,
contrary to section B.l.1 {b) of the Code;
ii. one count of knowingly altering or falsifying a document or evidence
required by the University, or uttering, circulating or making use of such
forged, altered or falsified document, contrary to section B.l.1{a} of the
Code;and
iii. one count of knowingly engaging in a form of cheating, academic
dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or misrepresentation not otherwise
described in the Code in order to obtain academic credit er other
academic advantage of any kind in the Exam, contrary b section B.1.3 (b)
of the Code.

b. The f ollowtng sanctions shall be imposed on
L -

LI:

shall receive a final grade of zero in PSYA01 H3Y for the Summer

2014 term;
24

ii.

LJI shall be suspended from the University for a period of two
years, commencing on January 1) 2016 and ending on December 31,

2017;
iii. the sanction shall be recorded on Mr.

as

academic record and

transcript to the effect that he was sanctioned for academic misconduct,
from January 1, 2016 until December 31, 2018, or until his graduation
from the University, whichever occurs first; and
iv. This case shall be reported to the Provost for publication of a notice of the
decision ci the Tribunal and the sanctions imposed, with the name of the
students withheld.

IX.

Post Script: The Recent Discipline Appeals Board Decision in

K-

122. Shortly after the hearing and before an Order had been signed, the Discipline Appeals
Board released a decision holding that students should not be convicted of duplicative
charges and called into question whether Llshould be convicted of all three charges at
issue. In The University of Toronto and ~

{Case 718 - Appeal) dated February 3,

2016, the Discipline Appeals Board stated:
The rule against multuple convictions has developed in the
criminal context, and been well established as a matter of
Canadian law since at least the decision in Kienapple v The
Queen, [1975) I SCR 729.

The essence of the rule is that

''Canadian courts have long been concerned to see thct multiple
convictions a-e not without good reason heaped on an accused
in respect of a single criminal delict." The principle is equally
applicable in the case of noncriminal convictions, such as those
in issue here. (para 27)

123. The Discipline Appeals Board held that the rule against multiple convictions is applicable
where there is a relationship of sufficient proximity between (1) the facts and (2) the
offences which form the basis of the two or more charges. The factual proximity requires
that the charges arise from the same transaction or act. The proximity of the offences
requires, essentially, that one charge is no more than a specification of the other, without
any distinguishing or additional elements.

25

124. In

, 1he plagiarism and unauthorized ai:1 charges arose from the same factual

circumstances (the plagiarism occurred when the student represented the ideas <i
another in the unauthorized aid as her own), and the plagiarism charge did not add any
additional elements to the unauthorized aid charge.
125. In this case, charges 2 and 3 both relate to i a•s action in removing from the Exam room
and destroying evidence (the cheat sheet).

Charge 2 addresses the element of

knowingly altering evidence required by the University, while charge 3 adds that the
misconduct engaged in be to obtain an academic advantage.
126. These charges against iaarise from the same facts: the removal and destruction of a
cheat sheet.

Further, the altering evidence charge provides no distil'YJuishing or

additional elements over the misconduct charge. Put another way, altering evidence Is a
type cl misconduct engaged in to obtain an academic advantage.
127. The Panel asked the University for its views on whether the conviction should be
amended. The University agreed and on that basis, the Panel gave the parties an
opportunity to provide brief written submissions on whether the change in conviction
should have any impact on penalty.
128. Va-y brief submissions were received from both

a

and the University on whether the

change in conviction should have any impact on penalty. -simply asked the Panel to
reconsider his penalty on the basis that this was his first offence and that the conviction
had been reduced to two counts. The University stated that the penalty ordered was
entirely consistent with those usually given for a single first offence, that the A'ovost had
not sought any additional penalty despite there having been tvvo offences, and that the
amendment to the conviction should not change the imposed sanction.
129. In our view, it is clear that conviction on two or three charges would not have had any
impact on ■·s penalty as it is in line with the Provost's Guidance on Sanctions in the
Code that a student be suspended for two years for any offence involving academic

dishonesty, where a student has not committed any prior offences.

This

recommendation is the same regardless of the number of counts with respect to which
the student is found guilty.
130. Further, as noted by the University, it did not seek any additional penalty to reflect the
fact that Ll!was corwfcted of multiple charges.

26

131. In these circumstances, the Panel did not see a need to revisit

t.is

penalty, and

maintains the penalty ordered at the hearing.

DATED at Toronto, March 2..~ 2016

~~ --

Sana Halwani, Co-Chair

27

APPENDIX 1
THE UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
IN THE MATTER OF charges of academic dishonesty made on December 8, 2014,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Cooe of Behaviour on Academic

Matters, 1995,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the Un;versity of Toronto Act, 1971, S.0. 1971, c. 56 as
amended S.O. 1978, c. 88
BETWEEN:
UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO

- and -

REASONS FOR DECISION
Hearing Date: Wednesday, July 8, 2015
Members of the Panel:
Mr. Bernard Fishbein, Chair
Professor Markus Bussman, Faculty of Applied Science and Engineering, Faculty Panel
Member
Mr. Carl Shen, Student Panel Member

Appearances:
Ms. Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Barristers
Ms. Tegan O'Brien, Law Student for Mr . . . Downtown Legal Services
Ms. Nicole Wilkinson, Law Student for Mr. . . Downtown Legal Services

J•

In Attendance:
Mr. ~
P■, the Student
ProfessorWayne Dowler. Dean's Designate, University of Toronto Scarborough
Ms. Andrea Russell, Office of the Vice-Provost, Faculty and .Academic Life, Observer
Mr. Christopher Lang, Director, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances

Not in Attendance:
Mr.

H■I, the Student

2
[1]

These are Charges under the Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters, 1995

(the "Code") of the University of Toronto ("the University") brought against - ~ and

SI JI ~ ("the Student(s)"). The Charges are as follows:
CHARGES

1.

On or about August 9, 2014, you knowingly provided an unauthorized aid
or unauthorized assistance to S

•

L■in connection with a final

exam ("Exam") in PSYA01H3Y (the "Course"), contrary to section B.1.1(b)
of the Code.
2.

In the alternative, on or about August 9, 2014, you knowingly engaged in
a form of cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct. fraud or
misrepresentation not otherwise described i1 the Code n order to obtain
academic credit or other academic advantage of any kind, in connection
with the Exam, contrary to section B.l.3(b) of the Code.

Particulars

The particulars of the offences charged are as follows:
(a)

At all material times you were a registered student at the
University of Toronto Scarborough.

(b)

In Summer 2014 you enrolled in the Course, taught by Professor
Steve Joordens.

( c)

Part of the requirements for the Course was the writing of the final
Exam, which you wrote on August 9, 2014. The Exam was worth
50% of the final Course grade.

( d)

No aids were allowed in the Exam.

(e)

You knowingly provided an unauthorized aid in the form of a small
piece of paper containing answers to the Exam questions or other

3
information relevant to the subject matter of the Course to S

H■ • who was also writing the Exam.
(f)

You knowingly provided the unauthorized aid to s■ H■ ~
to assist him to use the unauthorized aid in the Exam to obtain
academic credit or other academic advantage.

CHARGES
1.

On or about August 9, 2014, you knowingly used or possessed an
unauthorized aid or obtained unauthorized assistance in connection with
a final exam ("Exam") in PSY A01 H3Y (the "Course"), contrary to section
B.1.1(b)ofthe Code.

2.

On or about August 9, 2014, you knowingly altered or falsified a
document or evidence required by the University, or uttered, circulated or
made use of any such altered or falsified document in connection with the
Exam, contrary to section B.1.1(a) of the Code.

3.

On or about August 9, 2014, you knowingly engaged i1 a form of

cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or misrepresentation
not otherwise described in the Code in order to obtain academic credit or
other academic advantage of any kind in the Exam, contrary to section
B.1.3(b) of the Code.

Particulars
The particulars of the offences charged are as follows:
(a)

At all material times you were a registered student at the
University of Toronto at Scarborough.

(b)

In Summer 2014 you enrolled in the Course, taught by Professor
Steve Joordens.

4
(c)

Part of the requirements for the Course was the writing of the final
Exam, worth 50% of the Course grade, which you wrote on
August 9, 201 4.

(d )

N o aids were allowed i n the Exam.

( e)

During

the

Exam

you

knowingly used

or

possessed

an

unauthorized aid in the form of a small piece of paper containing
answers to the Exam questions or other information relevant to
the subject matter of the Course.
(f)

You knew, or ought to have known, that you were not permitted to
have such an aid in you r possession during the Exam.

(g )

You knowingly used o r possessed the unauthorized aid in the
Exam in o rder to assist you to obtain academic credit or other
academic advantage.

(h)

After the unauthorized aid was confiscated from you, you pushed
the Exam invigilator out of the way, grabbed the u nauthorized aid,
and ran from the room, after which you disposed of the
unauthorized aid .

(i)

You did this knowing that the unauthorized aid was evidence that
could be used to implicate you in the commission of an academic
offence, and that the unauthorized aid was required by the
University as such evidence.

(j)

You knowingly engaged

in a form of cheating , academic

dishonesty, or misconduct in order to obtain academic credit or
other academic advantage during the Exam.
[2]

Not surprisingly, due to the com mon incident and the interrelationshi p of the

alleg ations i nvolving the two Stud ents, both Stud ents and the University had agreed that
there be a single hearing for both sets of Charges. That hearing was scheduled for July 8,
201 5 .

5
Background with respect to Adjournment

[3]

At approximately 3 a.m. on July 8, 2015, Christopher Lang, the Director, Appeals,

Discipline and Faculty Grievances at the University received an email from Mr.
Mr. -

tJI.

advised Mr. Lang:
"From July 7th, my body condition was not good. I tried to have a rest at home
but it is getting worse and worse now.
I am writing an email at 3:00 A.M because I cannot sleep well with this poor
condition.
Af, the sun comes out, I will go to walk-in clinic to see a doctor.
I think that I cannot got to hearing due to my illness.
Please email me back asap with future instructions."

[4]

At approximately 4:36 a.m ., Mr. Lang forwarded Mr. ■s email to counsel for the

University seeking the University's position. At approximately 7:47 a.m., counsel for the
University responded to Mr. Lang:
"I will get instructions as soon as I can when I get to the omce. I am very
concerned about losing this hean·ng date, as I have 5 witnesses, and there are
3 parties, and so expect that finding a future mutually available hearing date in
the next few months could be very difficult. At a minimum I expect we will need to
see clear medical evidence from Mr. •
which provides sufficient details of the
nature of his illness and it's impact on his ability to attend the hearing to permit us
(and the Chair) to make an informed assessment. I don't expect a short note
simply saying he is unable to attend school for the day will be sufficient. I would
therefore ask that Mr.
be required to obtain such a note by no later than
10:00 a.m. and to advise his physician about the hearing, ifs significance, and
the issues it will cause if he is truly unable to attend, and to request a detailed
note explaining why Mr.
is unable to attend in those circumstances. Once we
have such a note we will be in a better position to assess the request and provide
an informed response."

tlll

LIi

[5]

Mr. Lang forwarded that email from counsel for the University to Mr.

counsel for Mr.

Pl

Lal and to

at approximately 8:51 a.m. At approximately 9 :17 a.m., Mr. Lang sent

an email to Mr. L■ advising him that counsel for Mr. P■, the other Student, agreed with
the position of counsel for the University.

6

[6]

A! approximately 9:58 a.m., Mr. Lang received an email from Mr . •

indicating:

"I just went to the doctor's office.
I kept vomiting and diarrhea from yesterday and asked it to the doctor.
Doctor thought that it was a problem with the food that I ate yesterday (Sushi and
so on).
I attached tv.o medical files so that you can look at it.
If you have any questions, feel free to call doctor's office."
Attached to that email was a hand-written note on the letterhead of the Northtown Medical
Clinic (which indicated that it was a "Walk- In Clinic I No appointmen t needed") da ted July 8,
20 15. It indicated:
"Patient assessed today. Due to medical illness he is unable to attend school
July 7-11, 2015. Please excuse. He may return earlier if better."
The note was signed over a stamp of Dr. C.K . Ng. Also attached was a medical requisition
form from Dr. Cindy K. Ng at the Northtown Medical Clinic for some microbiology lab tests,
particularly, a stool culture and stool ova & parasites. It was also signed by Dr. Ng and
dated July 8, 2015.
[7]

As a result, at approxima tely 10:27 a.m ., Mr. Lang sent Mr. .

an email:

"I have spoken wlh the chair and have sent him your medical documents
attached. He asked that I email you and copy Ms. Harmer and DLS.
The hearing is NOT yet adjourned.

You can seek an adjournment at the beginning of the hearing this afternoon,
unless you can provide medical documentation from the same doctor that
contains ALL of the following information:
•

That the doctor knows there is a hearing today;

•

That the doctor knows the nature of the hearing today;

•

That the doctor knows that it has been scheduled for a long time;

•

That the doctor knows you have to testify;

•

That the doctor specifically provide clear informatt'on that says you are in no
medical condition to attend and testify; AND,

7

•

That the doctor provide the medical reasons for which you are unable to
testify.

IF you provide this information before the hearing, it does not necessarfly mean
the hearing is adjourned, as the new information will have to again be assessed
by the parties and the chair. Depending on the positions of the parties and
instructions from the chai r, the hearing is not adjourned unless you hear
otherwise from us.
As stated above, if you do not provide any further information, the hearing is not
adjourned, but you can attend and request an adjournment at the beginning of
the hearing .... "
This solicited an email response from Mr. L■at approximately 10:30 a.m.:
"Thanks for your replying.
As you know, I could not sleep yesterday because of vomiting and diarrhea.
I cannot go to doctor's office again as well as hearing.
I sincerely hope that the hearfng will be adjourned.
Also, you can call to the doctor's office and asked questions about me.
I hope you can understand my situation.·
Mr. Lang acknowledged receipt of Mr. L■s email indicated that he had copied it to
counsel for Mr. ~ and counsel for th~ niversity and would forward it to the Chair
of the panel.
[8]

Mr. Lang responded with a further email at 11 :09 a.m. indicating:
"I have received instructions from the chair.
Unfortunately the hearing is not yet adjourned because both the other parties at
this point in time are not consenting to adjourn the hearing. I have already
indicated to you the missing information that the other parties have indicated they
require in order to consider consenting to the adjournment-as well as the
information the Chair has asked to be provided in order for the panel to also
consider the adjournment request. At this point in time I cannot assure you that if
yru do not attend the hearing, that the hearing will not proceed ln your absence."

[9]

As well, at 12:49 p.m .• counsel for the University sent Mr.

LIii an email indicating:

"Tribunal hearings have accommodated students' attendance via Skype, if that
would assist you to participate this afternoon I will request that the Tribunal could
accommodate you in that way. Please respond immediately so that we can make

8

the request a,d the technical requirements can be a-ranged. You would only
need your computer."
[1 O]

Neither the University nor the Tribunal received any further response to its last email

or the email from counsel for the University.

The hearing convened at 1:45 p.m. as

scheduled. The panel waited 20 minutes before commencing the hearing. Mr. •
attend. Arrangements had been made so that Mr. •

did not

uld have participated by Skype.

The Positions of the Parties

[11]

The University advised us that until late in the week before the hearing, Mr . •

had

been represented by counsel who then notified the other parties that she was withdrawing
as counsel and Mr. Ll!would no longer be represented.
[12]

The University also pointed out (without going into any extensive detail) that there

was a history of Mr. ■ seeking deferrals of examinations at the last moment based on
late-emerging acute medical issues.
[13]

However, as skeptical as the University was about the circumstances of Mr. Li's

request for an adjournment, it would not oppose the request although it did so regretfully as
it had four witnesses arranged to attend that day.
[14]

The University did say that if an adjournment was granted, it would seek conditions

to be imposed on such an adjournment. It also wished the Charges against Mr. P■ and
Mr.

LI to continue to be scheduled together, as the Charges were interrelated, essentiaUy

arising out of the same incident, involved the same witnesses, and would risk the possibility
of inconsistent conclusions if they proceeded separately.
[15]
Mr.

Lastly, in response to questions from the panel, the University advised that both

PIii and Mr. Lill remained currently enrolled at the University. They were both

significantly short of credits necessary for graduation so that a delay i1 the hearing of these
Charges would not necessarily delay their graduation. Moreover, Mr. Li's status in the
Course was subject to a grade withheld pending review notation ('' GWR") which would
preclude his graduation in any event until such notation was removed.

9
(16]

Counsel for Mr. -

· however, opposed the adjournment.

She confirmed that

Mr. LIii had been represented by counsel until days before and there had been no inkling of
an adjournment.

She also confirmed that after Mr. ~ was no longer represented by

counsel, she had spoken directly to Mr.~ at approximately 2 p.m. on the day prior to the
hearing and there had equally been no inkling at that time of any illness or any need for an
adjournment.
[17]

She also indicated that Mr.~ wished to can one witness who, although not

present at the time the hearing had commenced, was going to be contacted to appear later.
(18]

When questioned by the panel as to the prejudice that the adjournment Mr.

LI

sought would cause Mr. P■ counsel indicated that Mr. ~also had a GRW notation on

his academic record with respect to the Course. Although also not scheduled to graduate
imminently, the GRW notation precluded Mr. P■ from taking further courses for which the
Course was a required prerequisite and, in that sense, would delay his graduation should
he wish to major in that course area (although Mr.

Pl

conceded that approval to major in

that area had not yet been granted by the University). As well, there were suggestions that

Mr.

'111's ability to participate in an exchange program i1 the Winter Term 2016 might be

jeopardized by the delay in resolving these Charges. That suggestion was subsequently
withdrawn.

[191
Mr.

Lastly, counsel for Mr.

P■ indicated that although Mr.

Pl

had agreed to his and

tl·s Charges being heard together, that consent was given at an earlier time when

there was no way Mr. P■ could be aware of how events would unfold. In the present
circumstances, Mr.

FIi withdrew his consent for the Charges to be heard together,

although he conceded that his consent would be dependent on the adequacy of the
conditions imposed on any such adjournment.
(20]

In reply, the University indicated that the prejudice to Mr. P■ of an adjournment did

not outweigh the prejudice to Mr. •

if the hearing proceeded in his absence. Moreover, in

view of the position of Mr. P■ announced only at the hearing, i.e., withdrawing his
agreement that the Charges be heard together, the University took the position that it would
make a motion for the Charges to be heard together pursuant to Part 6 of the Tribunal's
Rules of Practice and Procedure (the "Rules"). Section 27 of the Tribunal's Rules provides

10
that a panel may direct charges to be heard at the same time (or one immediately after the
other) if:
(a)

the proceedings have a question of fact, law or mixed fact and law in
common;

(b)

the proceedings involve the same parties;

(c)

the proceedings arise out of the same transaction or occurrence or
series of transactions or occurrences; or

(d)

for any other reason an order ought to be made.

Moreover, section 28 of the Tribunal's Rules allows a motion for the hearing of cases
together to be made either prior to the hean·ng on the merits or at any time with leave of the
panel. In the event that the panel was prepared to adjourn the Charges against Mr. L~ut
proceed with the Charges against Mr. i:1111, the University wished an opportunity to make
full submissions (in writing, if necessary) why these Charges should be heard together.
Decision

(21)

The panel ruled unanimously that regrettably, and with some degree of reluctance,

the hearing scheduled for July 8, 2015 would be adjourned.
advanced by Mr.

Simply put, the prejudice

FIi in granting the adjournment did not outweigh the obvious prejudice of

proceeding in the absence of Mr.

tllll. This was particularly so when the scanty evidence

before us with respect to Mr. i.Jls illness, although perhaps warranting a healthy degree of
scepticism, was still essentially uncontradicted.
[22]

At this point, the Tribunal was prepared to leave the Charges against both

Messrs.

Fill and 1111 scheduled to be heard together. If Mr. Fill wished to pursue a

motion to sever the Charges, he would be free to do so. A prima facie review of the
circumstances seemed to warrant that the Charges should be heard together and
Mr. P■'s withdrawal of his agreement to do so was conditional on the decision the panel
would make, and more importantly, the adequacy of any condition the panel imposed on
any such adjournment.

!
"'

11
[23]

However, the panel was concerned about how this adjourn m ent arose, and therefore

im poses these further conditions on the adjournm ent:
(a)

The hearing was to be scheduled to the next available date to the
parties. That scheduled date would be marked peremptory and would
not be adjourned again unless com pletely u nforeseen circum stances,
com pletely beyond the control of any party, arose . In the event such
circumstances should arise, and they were m ed ically related , the party
seeking the adjournment would be required to provide the Tribunal
and the other parties with m edical information confirm ing:
(i)

that t h e Doctor was aware of t h e history of these proceedings;

(ii)

that the Doctor was aware of the nature of the hearing;

( iii)

that the Doctor was aware that the hearing was scheduled on a
perem ptory basis;

(iv)

that the Doctor was aware that the party seeking

the

adjournment is required to attend and will have to participate in
the h earing (if only to instruct counsel if so retained);
(v)

that the Doctor provide clear and specific information in the
event that the party seeking the adjourn m ent is not in any
m edical condition to participate i n the h earing;

(vi)

that the Doctor provide clear m edical i nformation that the party
seeking the adjournment would alternatively not be able to
attend electronically by video conference or otherwise;

(vii)

that the Doctor provide m edical reasons why the party would
be unable to participate on any of these bases.

!"'

12
(b )

This panel was not necessarily seized so a hearing could be arranged
as soon as possible before whatever panel was available.

(c )

That whatever h earing i s scheduled , it is recommended that it possibly
comm ence at 9 a . m . so that it could possibly be concluded in a single
day.

Dated at Toronto, this

23

Mr. Bernard Fishbei n , Chair

day of J uly, 201 5

