Report 301

DATE:

   July 8, 2005

PARTIES:

   Ms. G. S. (the Student) v. UTSC

Hearing Date(s):

   June 24, 2005

Committee Members:

   Assistant Dean Kate Hilton, Chair
   Dr. Pamela Catton
   Professor Clare Beghtol
   Professor Yuki Johnson
   Mr. Ari Kopolovic

Judicial Affairs Officer:

   Mr. Tony Gray

In Attendance:

   Ms. G. S. (the ‚Student‚)
   Associate Dean Nick Cheng, UTSC

   Request to submit late work in three courses. The Student filed a
   subsequent request for late withdrawal without academic penalty, due to
   the fact that two years had passed since the original petition was
   filed. The Student claimed that she experienced periods of illness
   during the term and suffered a back injury. The Student did not
   complete her course work in the three courses and received a failing
   grade in each course. The Committee agreed with the Faculty and
   Divisional Appeals Committee that the medical evidence offered by the
   Student was incomplete, but found that the Student‚s testimony was
   credible and thus the content of the Medical Certificate was adequate.
   The Committee found that the University afforded accommodation to the
   Student but that the Student‚s situation was not sufficiently serious
   by the drop date that she should have known to withdraw from one or
   more courses. The Committee found that it was not appropriate to allow
   the Student to withdraw without academic penalty. Appeal allowed in
   part. The Committee ordered that the Student be permitted to submit
   late work for the three courses. The already completed assignment was
   to be submitted to the Faculty within twenty business days of the date
   of release of the decision. For the assignments that the Student had
   not completed, the University had ten business days from the Student‚s
   notification to provide her with a new assignment. The Student then had
   twenty business days to submit the completed work. If reasonably
   feasible, the new assignments were to be set, and all assignment were
   to be marked, by the instructor who offered the courses, based on the
   content of the courses as they then existed. If not feasible, then the
   Faculty was to request the assistance of other instructors in the area
   who could set the new assignments and provide fair assessments of the
   work.
   [1]View Report

References

   1. file:///media/12659
