Report 385

DATE:

   July 26, 2016

PARTIES:

   Ms. V.T. (the Student) v. the Faculty of Arts and Science

Hearing Date(s):

   May 27, 2016

Committee Members:

   Ms. Sara Faherty, Chair
   Professor Jan Mahrt-Smith
   Mr. Alex Ivovic

Secretary:

   Krista Osbourne, Administrative Assistant, Office of Appeals,
   Discipline and Faculty Grievances

Appearances:

For the Student Appellant:

   Ms. V.T.

For the Faculty of Arts and Science:

   Professor Anne-Marie Brousseau, Assistant Dean, Undergraduate

   Appeal from the decision of the Academic Appeals Board of the Faculty
   of Arts and Science refusing the Studentâs request for a deferral of
   three examinations and the completion of two missed term tests. The
   Student cited multiple legal, personal, and health issues to explain
   her failure to write the evaluations. The Faculty refused to accept the
   Studentâs Verification of Student Illness or Injury form due to the gap
   in time between the date of the doctorâs examination of the Student and
   the dates of the missed exam; the form was completed by the examining
   physician nine months after the Studentâs illness and amended again
   eight months later. The Student first appealed the Facultyâs refusal to
   grant her deferrals for the five examinations to the Committee on
   Standing, then to the Academic Appeals Board, and then to the Academic
   Appeals Committee.

   The Committee found that the Facultyâs rule that a medical visit must
   be close in time to the missed exam to be reasonable. The doctorâs
   examination occurred on March 18th, and the missed exams took place
   between April 3rd and 24th, leaving a 23-day gap between the Studentâs
   verified illness and missed exam. The comments regarding the Studentâs
   inability to write the test on her exam days were added to the form one
   year and five months after the medical examination. The Facultyâs
   Calendar set forth its policies on deferred examinations and medical
   documentation in great detail, and it emphasizes that the physicianâs
   report must establish that the patient was examined and diagnosed at
   the time of the illness, not after the fact.

   The Committee noted that the Student did not try to register with
   Accessibility Services until the day of her first missed term test, and
   emphasized that Accessibility Services did not support the Studentâs
   petition. The Committee also took into account the Studentâs apparent
   confusion regarding the instructions given to her by Accessibility
   Services, and the lack of a clear Faculty rule regarding an acceptable
   amount of time between the date of a doctorâs examination and the date
   of the missed exam. The Committee concluded that though the Facultyâs
   complex and nuanced rules and policies around accommodations places a
   burden on students, ultimately the Studentâs failure to provide
   reliable evidence, coupled with the fact that Accessibility Services
   did not support her petition, made it difficult to accept her
   arguments.

   The Committee also noted that the Studentâs legal problems began at the
   beginning of the term in question, and though it expressed sympathy for
   the Studentâs personal difficulties, the Committee concluded that the
   Studentâs difficulties were not unforeseen and did not significantly
   worsen at the time of her missed exams.

   The Committee stated that it believed the Student and the doctor had
   acted in good faith, but noted the problems inherent in the Studentâs
   Verification of Student Illness or Injury form made the form
   insufficient to establish the Studentâs right to a deferral. The
   Committee concluded that the decision of the Academic Appeals Board was
   reasonable. Noting the Facultyâs tailored approach to cases and its
   lack of a rigid timeframe, the Committee recommended that the Faculty
   provide clearer reasons with respect to the criteria considered in
   determining whether a medical visit is sufficiently close in time to
   the relevant exam date in different cases. Appeal dismissed.
   [1]View Report

References

   1. file:///media/12631
