Case 813

DATE:

   February 1, 2016

PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v J.W.K.

Hearing Date(s):

   December 15, 2015

Panel Members:

   Johanna Braden, Chair
   Louis Florence, Faculty Member
   Jeffery Couse, Student Member

Appearances:

   Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel

In Attendance:

   Emma Thacker, Associate Director, Graduate Affairs, School of Graduate
   Studies
   Krista Osbourne, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances
   Student charged with two offences under s. B.i.1(f) and, in the
   alternative, an offence under s. B.i.3(b) of the Code . The charges
   related to allegations that the Student knowingly and repeatedly
   concocted data over a two-year period, that he presented this concocted
   data to his thesis supervisor and others, and that this concocted data
   was presented in a conference poster and a grant application. The
   Student was not present at the hearing. The Panel proceeded in the
   absence of the Student given that the Student had expressly admitted in
   writing that he had received reasonable notice of the hearing, and that
   the Student requested that the Tribunal proceed in his absence as he
   did not want to attend or participate further in the proceedings.
   Student was found guilty with respect to both charges of concoction.
   The Panel accepted the Agreed Statement of Facts in which the Student
   admitted to the offences. In considering the Joint Submission on
   Penalty, the Panel considered the factors and principles relevant to
   sanction set out in the Mr. C case. Â The Panel emphasized that the
   serious nature of the offences committed was a significant aggravating
   factor, stating that deliberate, repeated concoction of data strikes at
   the very heart of academic integrity. The Panel also took into account
   the fact that the Studentâs misconduct affected the reputation of the
   Universityâs innocent researchers who were listed as co-authors on the
   Studentâs research, as well as the damage to the integrity of the
   University as a whole. The Panel took the Studentâs admission of
   misconduct as a sign that he accepted some responsibility for his
   misconduct, and the Panel noted that the Student had successfully
   obtained one degree from the University prior to this misconduct. The
   Panel also took into account that the Student was challenged by
   personal issues and that this was the Studentâs first academic offence.
   The Panel accepted the Joint Submission on Penalty. The Panel imposed a
   5-year suspension; a recommendation of expulsion; and that the case be
   reported to the Provost for publication.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12893
