Case No: 1335
THE UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
IN THE MATTER OF charges of academic dishonesty filed on January 26, 2022,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic
Matters, 2019,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Act, 1971, S.O. 1971, c. 56 as amended
S.O. 1978, c. 88
B E T W E E N:
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
- AND I

M

REASONS FOR DECISION
Hearing Date: December 9, 2022 and February 10, 2023, via Zoom
Panel Members:
Christopher Wirth, Chair
Professor Vivienne Luk, Faculty Panel Member
Giselle Sami Dalili, Student Panel Member
Appearances:
Tina Lie, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg Rothstein LLP
William Webb, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg Rothstein LLP
Hearing Secretary:
Christopher Lang, Director, Office of Appeals, Discipline and Faulty Grievances
Not in Attendance:
I

M

A Panel of the Trial Division of the University Tribunal was convened on December 9,
2022, by videoconference to consider charges brought by the University of Toronto (the
“University”) against I

M

(the “Student”) under the University’s Code of

Behaviour on Academic Matters, 2019 (the “Code”).
Preliminary Issue: Proceeding in the Absence of the Student
The hearing was scheduled to begin at 9:45 a.m. At that time, neither the Student, nor
anyone on the Student’s behalf, were logged onto the Zoom link. The Panel adjourned the
hearing until 10:00 a.m. to allow time for the Student to attend it. At that time, the Student
was still not present and the University then requested that the Panel proceed with the
hearing in the Student’s absence.
Pursuant to Rule 16 of the University Tribunal’s Rules of Practice and Procedure
(“Rules”), a notice of an electronic hearing must include the date, time, place and purpose
of the hearing; a reference to the statutory authority under which the hearing will be held;
information about the manner in which the hearing will be held; and a statement that if a
person does not attend the hearing, the Panel may proceed in the person’s absence. Rule
17 provides that where notice of an electronic hearing has been given to a person and that
person does not attend the hearing, the Panel may proceed with the hearing in the party’s
absence. The Rules conform to sections 6 and 7 of the Statutory Powers Procedure Act
(the “SPPA”), which set out the notice requirements.
Pursuant to Rule 9, a notice of hearing may be served on a student by various means,
including by emailing a copy of the document to the student’s email address contained in
the University’s Repository of Student Information (“ROSI”).
The University’s Policy on Official Correspondence with Students dated September 1,
2006 expressly states that students are responsible for maintaining on ROSI a current and
valid mailing address and University-issued email account, and that “[f]ailure to do so may
result in a student missing important information and will not be considered an acceptable
rationale for failing to receive official correspondence from the University.” Students are
expected to monitor and retrieve their email on a frequent and consistent basis. Students

2

have the right to forward their University issued email account to another email account,
but remain responsible for ensuring that all University email communications are received
and read.
The onus of proof is on the University to establish that it provided the Student with
reasonable notice of the hearing in accordance with these Rules.
In this case, the University provided evidence relevant to service by way of the evidence
of two witnesses: Alexciya Blair (“Ms. Blair”), a Legal Assistant at the law firm of Paliare
Roland Rosenberg Rothstein LLP and Andrew Wagg (“Mr. Wagg”), a Manager, Incident
Response at Information Security, Information Technology Services at the University.
These two witnesses provided their evidence by affidavit, which were accepted by the
Panel pursuant to Rule 61 of the Rules.
The contents of the affidavits (without Exhibits) of these two witnesses are set out below:
a) Evidence of Ms. Blair
Ms. Blair’s affidavit provides as follows:
1.

I am a legal assistant at the law firm Paliare Roland Rosenberg Rothstein LLP. I
work with William Webb, an associate at Paliare Roland, who acts as Assistant
Discipline Counsel to the University of Toronto. As such, I have knowledge of the
matters contained in this affidavit. Where I do not have direct knowledge of a matter
contained in this affidavit, I state the source of my knowledge and I believe it to be
true.

A.

Correspondence with UTSC

2.

Our office received a file from the Office of the Dean & Vice-Principal Academic
at the University of Toronto Scarborough that contained a copy of an email and
letter from their office to I

M

(the “Student”). The letter states that the

Student attended a dean’s designate meeting on October 26, 2021 to discuss the
allegations that she forged documents in support of an award and plagiarized in an
essay. Our office also received a copy of the meeting notes from the dean’s
3

designate meeting that took place on October 26, 2021. I have attached a copy of
this email and letter, and the meeting notes to my affidavit as Exhibit A.
3.

The Office of the Dean & Vice-Principal Academic also provided our office with a
copy of the contact information for the student in the University’s Repository of
Student Information (“ROSI”) and a copy of her academic record. I have attached
a copy of the Student’s contact information and academic record to my affidavit as
Exhibit B.

4.

The Student’s academic record shows that she has not enrolled in courses at the
University since the Winter 2022 semester.

B.

Charges and Disclosure

5.

On January 26, 2022, the Office of the Vice-Provost, Faculty and Academic Life
served the charges in this matter on the Student by email to her official University
email address. I have attached a copy of this email and the charges to my affidavit
as Exhibit C.

6.

On January 26, 2022, Robert Centa (as he then was), sent the Student an email to
introduce himself as the prosecutor who was assigned to present the case against
the Student at the University Tribunal. I have attached a copy of this email to my
affidavit as Exhibit D.

7.

On January 26, 2022, the Office of Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances (the
“ADFG Office”) sent the Student a letter about the charges and a pamphlet for
Downtown Legal Services. I have attached a copy of this email, letter, and pamphlet
to my affidavit as Exhibit E.

8.

On January 27, 2022, the Student responded to Mr. Centa (as he then was) and
agreed to meet the next day to discuss the matter. A copy of this email is included
in the thread at Exhibit D.

9.

Mr. Webb has advised me that, on January 28, 2022, he, Mr. Centa (as he then was),
and the Student had a call to discuss the charges.
4

10.

On March 7, 2022, Mr. Webb emailed the Student links to a disclosure letter, a
disclosure brief, and a drop box that contained further disclosure materials. On
March 10, 2022, the Student responded to Mr. Webb’s email. I have attached a copy
of the email thread and the disclosure letter to my affidavit as Exhibit F.

C.

Hearing

11.

From March to July 2022, Mr. Webb and the Student exchanged several emails
about scheduling a hearing.

12.

On July 25, 2022, Mr. Webb emailed the Student with several additional dates for
a hearing. On July 26, 2022, the Student responded “Fri. Dec 9 (9:45 a.m.”. Copies
of these emails are attached to my affidavit at Exhibit F.

13.

On July 26, 2022, Mr. Webb emailed the ADFG Office to request that a hearing be
scheduled for December 9, 2022 at 9:45 am. On July 28, 2022, the ADFG Office
issued a Notice of Electronic Hearing to take place via zoom on December 9, 2022
at 9:45 am. The ADFG Office served the notice on the Student by email to her
official University email address. A copy of this email and the Notice of Electronic
Hearing is attached to my affidavit as Exhibit G.

14.

On November 17, 2022, Mr. Webb emailed the Student that he had uploaded
additional disclosure to the disclosure drop box. Mr. Webb again provided the
Student with the link and the password to the drop box. A copy of this email is
attached to my affidavit at Exhibit F.

15.

On November 29, 2022, Mr. Webb emailed the Student secured links to the
affidavits of the University’s witnesses. Mr. Webb stated that the University would
rely on the affidavits at the hearing, and he asked the Student to let our office know
whether she intended to cross-examine any of the affiants. I have attached a copy
of this email to my affidavit as Exhibit H.

5

D.

Further Attempts to Contact the Student

16.

On November 30, 2022, at 3:42 PM, local Toronto time, Tina Lie, Assistant
Discipline Counsel to the University of Toronto and a Partner at Paliare Roland,
emailed the Student that she and Mr. Webb would like to discuss the case with her.
Ms. Lie also attached a copy of the Notice of Electronic Hearing and cover email
from the ADFG Office, and she reminded the Student that the hearing was
scheduled for December 9, 2022 at 9:45 am. A copy of this email is included in the
email thread at Exhibit H.

17.

On December 2, 2022, the ADFG Office informed the parties that their office had
a hard stop at around 5:00 or 5:30 pm on the date of the hearing. I have attached a
copy of these emails to my affidavit as Exhibit I.

18.

Mr. Webb has advised me that, on December 6, 2022:
(a)

He called the Student at the alternate number listed in ROSI, but she did not
pick up. He left a message asking the Student to contact him as soon as
possible, and reminding the Student that her hearing was scheduled for this
Friday December 9 at 9:45 am via Zoom.

(b)

He tried to call the Student at the business number listed in ROSI, but he
received a message stating that the number was no longer in service.

19.

There are no other phone numbers for the Student listed in ROSI.

E.

Student Web Services Activity Log

20.

Acorn is a web-based tool that stores University of Toronto students’ academic,
personal, and financial records. Students can update their contact information in
Acorn. To access their Acorn account, students need to input their UTORid and the
password for that account. I have attached a copy of the “about Acorn” webpage to
my affidavit as Exhibit J.

6

21.

On December 7, 2022, the Office of the Dean & Vice-Principal Academic sent our
office a copy of the Student Web Services Activity Log (“SWS Activity Log”) for
the Student. The SWS Activity Log shows that the last time that someone accessed
the Student’s Acorn account was on November 30, 2022, at 3:04 PM, Toronto time.
I have attached a copy of the Student’s SWS Activity Log to my affidavit as Exhibit
K.

F.

LinkedIn Activity

22.

The email that the Student sent our office on July 26, 2022 contains a link to her
profile on the professional networking website LinkedIn. The profile contains
educational information that matches the Student’s academic history in ROSI. As
of December 8, 2022, the Student’s LinkedIn profile had made several posts
between December 4 and 8, 2022. I have attached a copy of the Student’s LinkedIn
profile and its recent activity to my affidavit as Exhibit L.

23.

To date, our office has not received any communications from the Student since the
email that she sent our office on July 26, 2022, in which she confirmed that she was
available for a hearing.

b) Evidence of Mr. Wagg
Mr. Wagg’s affidavit provides as follows:
1.

I am Manager, Incident Response at Information Security, Information Technology
Services at the University of Toronto (the “University”). As such, I have knowledge
of the matters contained in this affidavit. Where I do not have direct knowledge of
a matter contained in this affidavit, I state the source of my knowledge and I believe
it to be true.

2.

Information Technology Services provides many services to the University,
including management of the email accounts used by students. To access an email
account one needs to input both the user’s login id and the password for that
account. The Microsoft 365 Exchange portal automatically records the last time

7

someone accessed a particular university-issued email account. This is denoted
with the code “LastUserActionTime.” The LastUserActionTime log only updates
when someone logs in to a university-issued email account.
3.

On December 1, 2022, I checked the portal records to determine the last time
someone accessed the email account i

.m

@mail.utoronto.ca. In order to

view the LastUserActionTime log, I ran a PowerShell script.
4.

I determined that the last time someone accessed this e-mail account was on
November 30, 2022, at 5:09 PM, local Toronto time.

The evidence establishes that the Student was aware that December 9, 2022 had been
chosen as the date for the hearing. The University then did everything it could reasonably
have done to contact the Student and did take the steps it was required to under the Rules.
Accordingly, the Panel was satisfied it was more likely than not that the Student had made
a deliberate choice to avoid and turn her back on any official communications from the
University and not to attend the hearing. That choice has consequences.
Therefore, in light of the evidence and the submissions of Assistant Discipline Counsel,
the Panel was satisfied that the Student had been given reasonable notice of the time, date
and place of the hearing and of the fact that it may proceed in her absence if she did not
attend it, in compliance with the notice requirements of the SPPA and the Rules.
Accordingly, the Panel decided to hear the case on its merits in the absence of the Student.
Charges and Particulars
The charges alleged against the Student as filed by the Provost on January 26, 2022 are as
follows:
A.

CHMB62H3

1.

On March 8, 2021, you knowingly represented as your own an idea or the
expression of an idea, and/or the work of another in a literature searching
assignment titled “The Benefits of Vitamin B6: Harnessing Brain Health and
Physical Health Through Increased Vitamin B6 Intake to Prevent Colorectal
8

Cancer, Heart Disease and Parkinson's disease (PD)“ (the “Assignment”) that you
submitted in partial completion of the requirements in CHMB62H3, 2021(1)
Introduction to Biochemistry (the “Course”) contrary to section B.I.1(d) of the
Code.
2.

In the alternative to the charge above, on or about March 8, 2021, in the
Assignment, you knowingly engaged in a form of cheating, academic dishonesty
or misconduct, fraud or misrepresentation not otherwise described in the Code in
order to obtain academic credit or other academic advantage of any kind in the
Course, contrary to section B.I.3(b) of the Code.

B.

King Faisal Prize

3.

On or about March 30, 2021, you knowingly forged or in any other way altered or
falsified an academic record, and/or uttered, circulated or made use of such forged,
altered or falsified record, namely, a document that purported to be a letter signed
by Hira Ali with the re: line “Nominations for the King Faisal Prize for Medicine
for Dr. I

M

” (the “Prize in Medicine Nomination Letter”), contrary to

section B.I.3(a) of the Code.
4.

On or about March 30, 2021, you knowingly forged or in any other way altered or
falsified an academic record, and/or uttered, circulated or made use of such forged,
altered or falsified record, namely, a document that purported to be a letter signed
by Hira Ali with the re: line “Nominations for the King Faisal Prize for Science for
Dr. I

M

” (the “Prize in Science Nomination Letter”), contrary to

section B.I.3(a) of the Code.
5.

On or about October 18, 2021, you knowingly forged or in any other way altered
or falsified a document or evidence required by the University of Toronto, or
uttered, circulated or made use of such forged, altered or falsified document,
namely, an email from the email address ummatyfoundationcanada@gmail.com,
which was sent by you or on your behalf to the Academic Integrity Office at the
University of Toronto Scarborough, contrary to section B.I.1(a) of the Code.

9

6.

In the alternative to each of the charges numbered 3 to 5 above, you knowingly
engaged in a form of cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or
misrepresentation not otherwise described in the Code in order to obtain academic
credit or other academic advantage of any kind, contrary to section B.I.3(b) of the
Code.

The particulars related to charges 1 and 2 are as follows:
(a)

At all material times, you were a registered student in the University of
Toronto Scarborough.

(b)

In Winter 2021, you registered in the Course, which was taught by Natashya
Falcone.

(c)

On or about March 8, 2021, you submitted the Assignment, which was
worth 10% of the final grade in the Course.

(d)

In the Assignment, you knowingly represented the work of other persons as
your own, and you knowingly included ideas and expressions that were not
your own, but were the ideas and expressions of other persons, which you
did not acknowledge.

(e)

You submitted the Assignment knowing that it contained ideas, the
expression of ideas, and verbatim or nearly verbatim text from articles,
textbooks, or other academic work that you did not cite appropriately,
including but not limited to:
(i)

Harvard T.H Chan School of Public Health. Vitamin B6.
https://www.hsph.harvard.edu/nutritionsource/vitamin-b6/

(f)

For the purposes of obtaining academic credit and/or other academic
advantage, you knowingly committed plagiarism in the Assignment.

The particulars related to charges 3, 4, 5 and 6 are as follows:

10

(a)

At all material times, you were a registered student in the University of
Toronto Scarborough.

King Faisal Prize
(b)

In 2021, the King Faisal Prize advertised that it would accept nominations
for various prizes from universities, scientific institutions and research
centers, but not from individuals or political parties. The King Faisal Prize
advertised that its laureates would receive a certificate, a commemorative
24-carat, 200-gram gold medallion, and a sum of SR 750,000 (US$
200,000).

(c)

On or about March 29, 2021, you emailed University of Toronto officials,
faculty, and/or staff, including Hira Ali, a staff member at the University of
Toronto, to request a nomination for the King Faisal Prize due to the work
that you had purported to complete on “Gene Editing Technologies and
Mathematics.”

(d)

On or about April 1, 2021, you submitted or had an application submitted
on your behalf to the King Faisal Prize in medicine, which included a copy
of the Prize in Medicine Nomination Letter. Your application contained
other documents that state your application had the approval of the
University of Toronto.

(e)

On or about April 1, 2021, you submitted or had an application submitted
on your behalf to the King Faisal Prize in science, which included a copy of
the Prize in Science Nomination Letter.

(f)

The Prize in Medicine Nomination Letter and the Prize in Science
Nomination Letter were forged, altered or falsified. They were not prepared
or signed by Hira Ali.

(g)

Your applications to the King Faisal Prize in medicine and the King Faisal
Prize in science did not have the approval of the University of Toronto.

11

(h)

You submitted the Prize in Medicine Nomination Letter and the Prize in
Science Nomination Letter or had the letters submitted on your behalf to the
King Faisal Prize knowing that they had been forged, altered or falsified.
You did so as part of applications to the King Faisal Prize and for the
purposes of obtaining an academic advantage.

(i)

You knew that your applications to the King Faisal Prize in medicine and
the King Faisal Prize in science contained false and/or misleading
information. You submitted the applications or had them submitted to the
King Faisal Prize for the purposes of obtaining an academic advantage.

The Ummaty Foundation Canada
(j)

On or about July 5, 2021, the Academic Integrity Office at the University
of Toronto Scarborough requested that you meet with them to discuss
allegations of academic misconduct.

(k)

On or about October 12, 2021, you sent an email to the Academic Integrity
Office stating that “UMMATY Foundations” submitted a reference letter
on your behalf to the King Faisal Prize.

(l)

On or about October 18, 2021, the Academic Integrity Office received an
email from the email address ummatyfoundationcanada@gmail.com, which
stated that UMMATY Foundations had sent a letter to the King Faisal Prize
to support your application and that there was not any forgery of documents
on your part.

(m)

The email from ummatyfoundationcanada@gmail.com to the Academic
Integrity Office was forged, altered or falsified. It was not from the Ummaty
Foundation Canada.

(n)

You sent the email from ummatyfoundationcanada@gmail.com to the
Academic Integrity Office or had it sent on your behalf knowing that the
Academic Integrity Office would rely on it.

12

(o)

You sent the email from ummatyfoundationcanada@gmail.com to the
Academic Integrity Office or had it sent on your behalf knowing that it was
forged, altered or falsified. You sent the email or had the email sent on your
behalf to obtain an academic advantage.

(p)

You sent the email from ummatyfoundationcanada@gmail.com to the
Academic Integrity Office or had it sent on your behalf knowing that doing
so is a form of cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or
misrepresentation. You sent the email or had the email sent on your behalf
to obtain an academic advantage.

Assistant Discipline Counsel advised the Panel that if a finding was made for Charges 1,
3, 4 and 5, the Provost would then withdraw Charges 2 and 6.
The Student’s Position
Given that the Student was not present nor represented, she was deemed to have denied the
charges. As a result, the hearing proceeded on the basis that the University bore the burden
of proving the charges on the balance of probabilities.
Overview
In addition to the previously identified affidavits, the University tendered the evidence of
three witnesses, Tsuimy Shao (“Ms. Shao”), a PhD student in the Department of Chemistry
at the University, Professor James Donaldson (“Professor Donaldson”), a Professor of
Chemistry in the Department of Physical and Environmental Sciences and was the Vice
Dean, Recruitment, Enrolment and Student Success from 2020 to 2022 at the University
and Hira Ali (“Ms. Ali”), an Internship Program Assistant in the Department of Physical
and Environmental Sciences and was a Student Services Assistant in the Office of the
Registrar, who provided their evidence by affidavit, which was accepted by the Panel
pursuant to Rule 61 of the Rules.
After careful deliberation, and having considered all the evidence, the Panel found that on
the balance of probabilities the evidence was sufficiently clear, cogent and convincing to

13

discharge the burden of proof on the University and found that the Student had committed
academic misconduct.
The Evidence
The contents of the affidavits (without Exhibits) of these three witnesses are set out below:
a) Evidence of Ms. Shao
Ms. Shao’s affidavit provides as follows:
1.

I am a PhD student in the Department of Chemistry at the University of Toronto. I
have worked as a teaching assistant at the University of Toronto since September
2019. As such, I have personal knowledge of the matters set out in this affidavit.
Where I do not have personal knowledge of a matter, I state the source of my
information and I believe it to be true.

A.

The course

2.

In Winter 2021, I was a teaching assistant for the course CHMB62H3: Introduction
to Biochemistry (the “course”). The course was taught by Natashya Falcone, who
was a doctoral researcher and course instructor at the University of Toronto in
Winter 2021. The course is a second-year undergraduate course that provides
students with an introduction to the molecular structures of living systems.
M

(the “student”) was a student in the course.

3.

I

4.

The syllabus contained a section on academic integrity, which provided a link to
the Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters and stated that potential academic
offences included “[u]sing someone else’s ideas or words without appropriate
acknowledgement.” I have attached a copy of the syllabus to my affidavit as
Exhibit A.

14

B.

The literature searching assignment

5.

Students were required to complete a literature searching assignment, worth 10% of
their final grade in the course. The syllabus stated that students would be required
to submit their assignments through a Turnitin program imbedded into the Quercus
course page, and that Turnitin would be used to detect plagiarism.

6.

The assignment instructions stated that students were required to provide citations
for all ideas/statements that are not common knowledge to a second-year
undergraduate student studying biochemistry, to cite in-text using superscript
numbers, to paraphrase rather than use direct quotes, to follow the American
Chemical Society (“ACS”) Style Guide, and to use reliable and appropriate
academic sources. I have attached a copy of the assignment instructions to my
affidavit as Exhibit B.

7.

The assignment instructions stated that students could access a copy of the ACS
style guide on Blackboard, the University’s learning management system. I have
attached an excerpt of the ACS style guide that was available to students on
Blackboard to my affidavit as Exhibit C.

8.

The assignment instructions stated that students would peer review each other’s
assignments and provide feedback.

9.

Students were also given an assignment rubric that stated they would be evaluated
based on their references, including their paraphrasing and their compliance with the
ACS Style Guide. I have attached a copy of the rubric to my affidavit as Exhibit
D.

10.

On February 14, 2021, the student messaged Instructor Falcone and I on Canvas to
ask whether her proposed title was acceptable, who would mark her assignment
after she received peer feedback, and whether the page limit included appendices,
figures, and tables. Instructor Falcone told the student that her title was a good start
and that her teaching assistant would mark the assignment. I have attached a copy
of Instructor Falcone’s message to my affidavit as Exhibit E.
15

11.

On February 16, 2021, I responded to the student, noting that Instructor Falcone
had already responded to her, and that she could find out information about the
literature assignment in the instructions. I have attached a copy of all messages
between me and the student on Canvas to my affidavit as Exhibit F.

12.

On February 21, 2021, the student sent me a draft of her assignment and asked me:
“Can you please give me feedback on the attached assignment before I hand it in?”
The next day, I replied to the student: “Today’s deadline for the literature
assignment is only for the draft. You will feedback from 2-3 of your fellow
classmates during the upcoming week.” I have attached a copy of the student’s draft
assignment to my affidavit as Exhibit G.

13.

On March 1, 2021, one the students’ classmates sent the student feedback about the
assignment. I have attached a copy of the feedback to my affidavit as Exhibit H.

14.

On March 8, 2021, the student submitted an assignment titled, “The Benefits of
Vitamin B6: Harnessing Brain Health and Physical Health Through Increased
Vitamin B6 Intake to Prevent Colorectal Cancer, Heart Disease and Parkinson's
disease (PD)” (the “Assignment”). I have attached a copy of the student’s
Assignment to my affidavit as Exhibit I.

15.

The Turnitin similarity report for the Assignment came back with a similarity score
of 77%. I have attached a screen shot of the Turnitin score to my affidavit as
Exhibit J.

16.

On its webpage about how to similarity scores, Turnitin states that it “actually does
not check for plagiarism in your work. What we actually do is check your
submissions against our database, and if there are instances where your writing is
similar to, or matches against, one of our sources, we will flag this for your instructor
to review.” I have attached a copy of this webpage to my affidavit as Exhibit K.

17.

The Turnitin report showed that the student’s Assignment was similar to an article
from Harvard T.H Chan, School of Public Health, titled “Vitamin B6” (the “Harvard

16

Article”). I have attached a copy of the Harvard Article to my affidavit as Exhibit
L.
18.

On March 11, 2021, the student messaged me about her Assignment. The student
stated in part:
It has come to my attention that you accused me of plagiarizing and reported
without informing me. I do not appreciate that. Maybe I think 77% like an
expert.
This assignment was peer-reviewed and the reviewer did not accuse me and
this is what she reported:
[…] Overall, well done! I enjoyed how you talked about various research
studies in the literature that examined the benefits/ harms of vitamin B6 on
human health. All your information was very up-to-date with the literature
and provided great support to your topic. One thing I would finally suggest
is to add in-text citations to the paragraphs, as I found the information to not
be common knowledge. But. Other than that all the grammar and sentence
fragments were well written. Good luck with the final paper and great work!
[Emphasis Added]

19.

I had not previously mentioned the issue of plagiarism in the Assignment with the
student, but I understand that students can view the Turnitin similarity score after
they submit an assignment.

20.

The following day, on March 12, 2021, I responded to the student as follows: “Your
assignment was flagged on tumitin and as per protocol, it was brought to the
instructor’s attention for further investigation. There are no accusations that have
been made nor any conclusions as tumitin is not a perfect system. Your assignment
mark will just not be uploaded until the investigation is complete.”

C.

Plagiarism in the Assignment

21.

Because Turnitin is not a perfect system, I compared the student’s Assignment to
the Harvard Article. The student’s Assignment cites the Harvard Article in its

17

references section and occasionally provides in-text citations to the Harvard Article.
That was not my concern.
22.

I was concerned that the student’s Assignment copies several paragraphs of text
verbatim and near verbatim from the Harvard Article without appropriate in-text
citations or quotation marks. The student’s failure to appropriately cite ideas and
put quotation marks around verbatim and near verbatim text is concerning because
the syllabus, the assignment instructions, the rubric, and the ACS style guide
provided guidance about these issues. The student also received feedback from a
peer that warned her she should add in-text citations. I have attached a chart
comparing the student’s Assignment to the Harvard Article to my affidavit as
Exhibit M.

23.

On March 22, 2021, Instructor Falcone and I met with the student to discuss our
concerns about plagiarism in the Assignment.

b) Evidence of Professor Donaldson
Professor Donaldson’s affidavit provides as follows:
1.

I am a Professor of Chemistry in the Department of Physical and Environmental
Sciences at the University of Toronto Scarborough (“UTSC”). I served as Vice
Dean, Recruitment, Enrolment and Student Success at UTSC from 2020 to 2022.
The Registrar’s Office reported through me to the Dean at that time. As such, I have
personal knowledge of the matters set out in this affidavit. Where I do not have
personal knowledge of a matter, I state the source of my information and I believe
it to be true.

2.

I

M

(the “Student”) first enrolled in UTSC in Fall 2020. I have attached

a copy of the Student’s academic record to my affidavit as Exhibit A.
3.

l

.m

@mail.utoronto.ca is the Student’s official University email account.

I have attached a copy of the Student’s contact information in the Repository of
Student Information (“ROSI”) to my affidavit as Exhibit B.

18

A.

The King Faisal Prize

4.

On February 18, 2021, the Office of the Vice-Principal Academic & Dean at UTSC
sent a call for nominations for members to serve on an advisory committee to
appoint a new Vice-Dean Faculty Affairs, Equity & Success. The email contained
a memorandum about the call for nominations that was addressed to faculty, staff,
and students, but the email itself was only sent to faculty and admin staff.

5.

The Student replied to the Office of the Vice-Principal Academic & Dean’s email
on March 29, 2021. I do not know how the Student obtained a copy of this email.

6.

In her reply email, the Student requested a nomination to the King Faisal Prize due to
the work that she had purported to complete on “Gene Editing Technologies and
Mathematics.” The Student sent her email to the Office of the Vice-Principal
Academic & Dean at UTSC, the general UTSC faculty email, the general UTSC
administrative staff email, UTSC Awards, Hira Ali (a Student Services Assistant in
the Office of the Registrar), Maryam Ali (a Manager of Operations & Project
Management in the Office of the Vice- Principal Academic & Dean) and Saleha
Khan (a Petition’s Assistant in the Office of the Registrar). I have attached a copy
of the Student’s email to my affidavit as Exhibit C.

7.

On March 29, 2021, Danielle Moed, Coordinator, Student Development Arts &
Science Co-op, informed the Student that she would not be able to complete a
nomination because she was not familiar with the Student’s work. I have attached a
copy of this email to my affidavit as Exhibit D. To the best of my knowledge, no
one else responded to the Student’s email.

8.

The King Faisal Foundation advertises that the King Faisal Prize recognizes the
outstanding works of individuals and institutions in five major categories: Service to
Islam, Islamic Studies, Arabic Language and Literature, Medicine, and Science. Its
aim is to benefit Muslims in their present and future, inspire them to participate in
all aspects of civilization, as well as enrich human knowledge and develop mankind.

19

I have attached a copy of King Faisal Foundation’s webpage about the King Faisal
Prize to my affidavit as Exhibit E.
9.

On April 1, 2021, Soliman AlMezied (“AlMezied”), Scientific Consultant at the
King Faisal Prize, emailed Rhonda Martin, Executive Assistant to the Vice-Principal
Academic & Dean, to inquire whether certain nominations that the King Faisal
Prize had received were legitimate. Zahra Bhanji, Assistant Dean, Office of the
Vice-Principal Academic & Dean, was copied on this email. AlMezied stated that
the King Faisal Prize had received documents from a person claiming to be
affiliated with the University, including:
(a)

A document that purported to be a letter signed by Hira Ali with the re: line
“Nominations for the King Faisal Prize for Medicine for Dr. I
M

”, dated March 30, 2021 (the “Prize in Medicine Nomination

Letter”); and
(b)

A document that purported to be a letter signed by Hira Ali with the re: line
“Nominations for the King Faisal Prize for Science for Dr. I
M

”, dated March 30, 2021 (the “Prize in Science Nomination Letter”)

(collectively, the “Nomination Letters”).
10.

AlMezied attached copies of the Nomination Letters to the email that he sent to the
University. I have attached copies of the email from AlMezied and the Nomination
Letters to my affidavit as Exhibit F.

11.

Dr. Bhanji sent AlMezied’s email to Curtis Cole, the former Registrar and Assistant
Dean (Enrolment Management) at UTSC, and I to investigate. We reached out to
Fiorella Sabadin, Associate Registrar and Director of Student Services at UTSC, to
see whether Ms. Ali wrote the Nomination Letters. Ms. Sabadin informed us that
Ms. Ali did not write the Nomination Letters.

20

12.

On April 28, 2021, I emailed Al Mezied to confirm that UTSC neither wrote, nor
sent the Nomination Letters to the King Faisal Prize. I also asked AlMezied about
the origin of the letters in question. A copy of my email is included at Exhibit F.

B.

Meeting requests

13.

On May 3 and 11, 2021, Dr. Cole requested that the Student meet with him to
discuss her application to the King Faisal Prize. I have attached a copy of the emails
to my affidavit as Exhibit G. Dr. Cole has since retired from the University.

14.

I understood from Dr. Cole that he did not receive a response to his emails.

C.

The Application to the King Faisal Prize

15.

On June 8, 2021, AlMezied responded to my email of April 28, 2021. In this email,
AlMezied confirmed that the Nomination Letters were part of an application
package received from the email address: i

.m

@mail.utoronto.ca.

AlMezied attached the email that the King Faisal Prize received, which included
the application that was submitted to the King Faisal Prize in medicine. I have
attached a copy of AlMezied’s email and the attachments to my affidavit as Exhibit
H.
16.

The email from i

.m

@mail.utoronto.ca, which was attached to

AlMezied’s email, was sent to Info@kingfaisalprize.org on April 1, 2022. The body
of the email included a UTSC logo and stated:
As the Professor and Founder of the Al-Ihsan Institute of Canada through
which I have taught to students nationally and internationally, I am writing
to indicate strong interest in the King Faisal International Prize for Medicine
and trust that I have the merits for it by the permission of Allah because this
work on Gene Editing Technologies was published and nominated by the
University of Toronto.
I hope that I will be a successful winner because I have conducted and
published an original and outstanding study on the announced prize topic of
Gene Editing Technologies Cas 9 CRISPR, resulting in significant benefit
to humanity and to Muslims at greatest because it is available for free in
preview (please see the link provided below) and numerous individuals
21

have viewed it, and meeting more than one of the KFP prize’s objectives as
determined by the respective Selection Committee. I wish myself every
success in my initiatives. Please see the attached documents. Please confirm
that you have received them. Thank you.
[Emphasis Added]
17.

The application email provided an “about the author” section, which stated:
Professor I
M
was born on February, 2nd 1989, in Zanzibar. She
received her bachelor’s degree from Brock University (2011) and got accept
to an M.D. from Xavier University and completed her placement in medical
program at the University of Toronto in 2006 at the Faculty of Medicine.
She is currently pursuing another internship program at the University of
Toronto pursuing her passion of Medicine, teaching and life long learning.
Professor I
’s
M
’s outstanding contribution to the fields
of Gene Editing Technologies were published in numerous publications and
will be presented in a prestigious university in Canada. She is an elected
President of UMMATY Foundation and she is the chief executive officer
(CEO) and Founder of the Institute of Medicine and Scientific Research
Medical Institute and Medical Supplies which she had presented to the
Unison Health Community staff in Canada.
She hopes to be awarded the KFIP prize, in recognition of the considerable
impact her highly original works have had on the development of a book on
Gene Editing Technologies and its applications in medicine. She also
developed and worked on the idea of I.H.M covid-19 vaccine. Her discovery
of the I.H.M therapeutics have been instrumental to subsequent discoveries
and potential cure of COVID-19 pandemic.
[Emphasis Added]

18.

The signature line of the application email stated:

22

19.

The email contained the following nine attachments:
(a)

Attachment 1: a document that included the UTSC logo, entitled “Gene
Editing Technologies Crispr CAS 9, 1st edition” purportedly authored by
Professor I

(b)

M

, University of Toronto”;

Attachment 2: a cover page that included the UTSC logo and stamp, that
stated “CAS 9, CRISPR Professor I

(c)

M

”;

Attachment 3: a cover page that included the UTSC logo and stamp, that
stated “CAS 9, CRISPR Professor I

M

”;

(d)

Attachment 4: the Prize in Medicine Nomination Letter;

(e)

Attachment 5: a copy of the Student’s passport

(f)

Attachment 6: a copy of the front of Student’s University of Toronto student
card;

(g)

Attachment 7: a Curriculum Vitae for “Doctor I

M

, Professor”,

which included the Student’s contact information and indicated that she was
in a:
(i)

“SCSPE1660 Specialist Program in Physical and Mathematical
Sciences Honours, Bachelor of Science, University of Toronto,
Ontario, Canada” from 2020-2024; and

(ii)

“Placement in Medical Profession at the University of Toronto
Faculty of Medicine” in 2006;

(h)

Attachment 8: a completed application form for the King Faisal Prize; and

(i)

Attachment 9: a letter from the Student to the King Faisal Price, which
included the UTSC logo and stamp.

23

20.

The application form (Attachment 8) states that King Faisal Prize laureates would
receive a certificate, a commemorative 24-carat, 200-gram gold medallion, and a
sum of USD $200,000. The application form also states that the King Faisal Prize
would accept nominations for various prizes from universities, scientific
institutions and research centers, but not from individuals or political parties. The
application form also contains a section on “Nominee’s General Information”,
which uses PDF form fields that are difficult to read. I have attached a document
that contains the text from these form fields to my affidavit as Exhibit I.

21.

The application contains several documents that state or suggest the student’s
academic work was published and nominated by the University of Toronto. In
particular:
(a)

The application email states: “[…] this work on Gene Editing Technologies
was published and nominated by the University of Toronto.”

(b)

The application contains a copy of the Prize in Medicine Nomination Letter
(Attachment 4), which states that the University of Toronto nominated “Dr.
I

M

”: “This is to nominate the above-named individual at the

University of Toronto for the King Faisal Prize. This is due to the nominee’s
achievements in the field of Medicine and her published works in the topic
of Gene Editing Technologies.”
(c)

The application contains a Curriculum Vitae (attachment 7) that states the
Student was in a “Placement in Medical Profession at the University of
Toronto Faculty of Medicine” in 2006 and that she has published the
following “textbook”: “Al-Ustadh. I

M

. Gene Editing

Technologies Cas 9 CRISPR. 1st Edition. Volume 1. Toronto Canada:
The “textbook”

Scribd Publications, 2021. P 1-147. ISBN:

is available for $15.99 at Chapters Indigo, $12.99 at Barnes and Noble, and
for free for those who have a subscription to SCRIBD (an e-book
subscription service that charges $12.99 per month). The cover of these
“textbooks” is the same cover page that I
24

M

submitted in her

application to the King Faisal Prize (Attachments 2 and 3), which contain an
image of the UTSC logo and stamp. I have attached a copy of these Chapters
Indigo, Barnes and Noble, and SCRIBD webpages to my affidavit as Exhibit
J.
(d)

The application contains a letter (Attachment 9) that states: “This letter
includes the approval of the University of Toronto. Numerous professors at
the University of Toronto had been invited to take part in collaboration to
produce this work particular in the departments of Medicine and Molecular
Genetics.”

22.

The application contains several documents that refer to the Student as “Professor”
or “Dr." in close proximity to the UTSC logo or stamp. In particular:

25

Attachment
Attachment 1

Screenshot

Attachment
Attachment 3

Attachment 9

Screenshot

Attachment
Attachment 9

Screenshot

23.

The Student is not a professor at UTSC. She has not done work on Gene Editing
Technologies in connection with UTSC. She did not have authority to use the UTSC
logo and stamp in this manner. Nor was any of her work ever nominated by the
University.

24.

According to the Student’s University of Toronto academic record, the Student did
not complete a “placement in [sic] medical program at the University of Toronto in
2006 at the Faculty of Medicine.” The Student has never been enrolled in the medical
program at the Faculty of Medicine.

25.

As part of her application to UTSC, the Student submitted a copy of her secondary
school transcript, which states that she was enrolled in secondary school in the
Toronto District School Board from 2004 to 2007. This transcript states that the
Student completed a co-op placement as part of a grade 11 biology course in 2006,
but the transcript does not state where she completed the placement. I have attached
a copy of the Student’s secondary school transcript to my affidavit as Exhibit K.

26.

A LinkedIn page with the Student’s full name contains a cover letter and resume in
the Student’s name with her address, phone number, and official University of
Toronto email address. The cover letter and resume state that she participated in the
“University of Toronto Summer Mentorship Program (Medicine)” at Toronto
General Hospital in 2006. I have attached a copy of the LinkedIn page, resume, and
cover letter to my affidavit as Exhibit L.

D.

Meeting requests

27.

In July 2021, at my request, the Registrar’s Office placed an administrative hold on
the Student’s account because she did not respond to Dr. Cole’s meeting requests.

28.

In the meantime, the Office of the Vice-Principal Academic & Dean received a
report that alleged the Student plagiarized in an assignment in CHMB62H3:
Introduction to Biochemistry (the “Assignment”) from an article (“the Harvard
Article”).

29.

On July 5, 2021, the Office of the Vice-Principal Academic & Dean requested that
the Student meet to discuss the allegations of academic misconduct against them.
The Office of the Vice-Principal Academic & Dean and the Student exchanged
emails, but she did not attend the meeting that had been scheduled for July 14, 2021.
Approximately two weeks later, on July 30, 2021, the Student informed the Office
of the Vice-Principal Academic & Dean that she did not attend the meeting because
she was in the hospital. I have attached a copy of these emails to my affidavit as
Exhibit M.

30.

On October 12, 2021, the Student emailed the Office of the Vice-Principal
Academic & Dean, stating that she wanted to resolve the issue. She wrote:
I wanted to resolve this issue. I have drafts of the paper that came high in
turnitin.com. I emailed the draft to the T.A prior to submitting the paper. I was
also in the hospital with denied internet access. I wrote my papers on my
notebook without accessing the instructions to the papers due to denied internet
access. Two students were allowed to meet with the chair and my meeting was
cancelled, which I thought was not fair. I was not able to attend the second
meeting to resolve the issue because I was in the hospital
UMMATY Foundations submitted the reference letter for me to the King Faisal
International Prize.

31.

I have attached a copy of this email to my affidavit as Exhibit N.

32.

On October 18, 2021, the Office of the Vice-Principal Academic & Dean emailed
the Student to reschedule the meeting. Later that day, at 5:26 pm, the Student
emailed the Office of the Vice-Principal Academic & Dean to request that the
meeting be scheduled for a different date. I have attached a copy of this email
exchange to my affidavit as Exhibit O.

E.

The UMMATY Foundations email

33.

Less than two hours later, on October 18, 2021, at 6:51 pm, the Office of the VicePrincipal

Academic

&

Dean

received

an

email

from

ummatyfoundationcanada@gmail.com (the “UMMATY Email”). I have attached a
copy of the UMMATY Email to my affidavit as Exhibit P. Below is a screen shot
of the email that the Office of the Vice-Principal Academic & Dean received:
30

34.

I searched for UMMATY Foundations, Ummaty Foundation Canada, and
ummatyfoundationcanada@gmail.com on Google, but I did not find any direct
results for these organizations or for this email address. I searched “UMMATY”
and the Student’s name on Google, but I could not find any results for the student.
I performed a reverse image search on Google for the logo in the
ummatyfoundationcanada@gmail.com email, but I did not find any results.

35.

During my searches, I found an international Muslim humanitarian organization
called “Ummaty” at https://ummaty.org. The organization states that it has one of
its

headquarters

in

Canada,

and

that

its

contact

email address

is

contact@ummaty.org. The logo on ummaty.org is also different than the logo in

the ummatyfoundationcanada@gmail.com email. I have attached a copy of the
Ummaty contact us webpage to my affidavit as Exhibit Q.
36.

In my experience, anyone can set up a Gmail email account if the account name is
not already taken. ummatyfoundationcanada@gmail.com is a Gmail email account.

37.

During my searches, I found a Facebook page for an organization called “Ummaty
Foundation” that has 47 followers and was created on June 2, 2021.1 I found
accounts on Instagram that were called “ummaty

foundation”2 and

“ummaty_foundation_”.3 None of these social media page lists the Student as
president of the foundation, nor do these pages contain any email addresses. I have
attached a copy of screen shots of these pages to my affidavit as Exhibit R.
38.

Based on my investigation, I concluded that the “UMMATY Email” was not sent
from any of these organizations, and that “UMMATY Foundations”, “Ummaty
Foundation Canada”, and ummatyfoundationcanada@gmail.com have no apparent
presence on the internet.

F.

The Dean’s Designate meeting

39.

On October 26, 2021, the Office of the Vice-Principal Academic & Dean emailed
the Student to see whether she was also willing to discuss the plagiarism allegations
at the Dean’s meeting that was scheduled for later that day. I have attached a copy
of this email to my affidavit as Exhibit S.

40.

Later that day, I met with the Student via videoconference (Zoom) to discuss the
allegations of academic misconduct. Nisha Panchal, an academic integrity
specialist, attended the meeting and took detailed notes. I have attached a copy of
these notes to my affidavit as Exhibit T. I have reviewed the notes and they are in
accord with my recollection of the meeting.

1

https://m.facebook.com/Ummaty-Foundation-107368394895721/?ref=page_internal.
https://www.instagram.com/ummaty_ foundation/?hl=en.
3
https://www.instagram.com/ummaty_foundation_/?hl=en.
2

32

41.

At the start of the meeting, I gave the Student the caution that I am required to
provide under the Code. I informed the Student that she was entitled to seek advice,
or to be accompanied by counsel at the meeting, before making, and is not obliged to
make, any statement or admission, but that if she made any statement or admission
in the meeting, it may be used or receivable in evidence against her in the hearing of
any charge with respect to the alleged offence in question. I advised the Student,
without further comment or discussion, of the sanctions that may be imposed under
section C.i.(b), and that I am not obliged to impose a sanction but may instead
request that the Provost lay a charge against the Student.

42.

After giving the caution, I explained that the King Faisal Prize sent UTSC a
reference letter that endorsed the Student, and that this reference letter had a forged
signature of a UTSC staff member. The Student claimed that she asked for a letter
from a different organization, that the King Faisal Prize had received a letter in
support of her application, and that she did not know how this letter got there. The
Student then stated she had nothing more to say about these allegations.

43.

We then discussed the allegation that the Student plagiarized in her CHMB62H3
Assignment. I showed the Student multiple instances where her Assignment was
virtually identical to the Harvard Article, with no change or minor changes, without
using quotation marks or appropriate citations. The Student stated that: she tried to
paraphrase, her work was not identical to the Harvard article, her paper had a
references section, her professor took the issue too seriously, she should have taken
more time to paraphrase, and she needed more time to work on the assignment.

44.

When I explained that she took ideas and words and presented them as her own, the
Student said that this is not what she intended and that she cited the Harvard Article.
I explained that I had concerns about the fact that the Student did not use quotation
marks or in-text citations. The Student replied that she thought her Assignment was
original, but that her professor disagreed. The Student stated that she had learned
her lesson and that she took an effective writing course that summer.

33

45.

When I asked the Student whether she was prepared to admit to the academic
offence, the Student said that she had nothing more to say. I then asked the Student
whether she believed what she did in the Assignment was correct, and she said
“yes”.

46.

After the meeting, the Student sent UTSC an email that stated:
Hello,
I wished to solve this issue in this meeting.
As I mentioned, I emailed a rough draft of the paper to the T.A prior to
handing in the assignment for feedback to avoid these allegations. I also had
a meeting with Professor Natasha and the T.A which lasted for more than
an hour so that I could solve this. Turnitin is not a perfect system, the
percentage came out about 40% high but I had paraphrased and used
citations. My intentions while studying at UofT was to enroll only in
laboratory Science classes and not writing classes. Perhaps, I should find
out more how I can keep up with my goals of being in laboratory Science
classes and maintaining excellent grades with all integrity while at the
University of Toronto. I decided not to take courses with a writing
component instead of a laboratory component which require the collection
of one's own data.
I learned my lesson, I took Effective Writing in the Summer and I had to
academic integrity issues. The Biochemistry assignment was my first
writing assignment at UofT.
Thank you,
I

M

Independent Scientist, Author, Professional Health Coach ▪ Working
towards MD/PhD ( In progress)
47.

I have attached a copy of the Student’s email to my affidavit as Exhibit U.

48.

The allegations were subsequently forwarded to the Provost’s office.

c) Evidence of Ms. Ali
Ms. Ali’s affidavit provides as follows:

34

1.

I was a Student Services Assistant in the Office of the Registrar at the University
of Toronto Scarborough (“UTSC”). I am currently an Internship Program Assistant
in the Department of Physical & Environmental Sciences. As such, I have personal
knowledge of the matters set out in this affidavit. Where I do not have personal
knowledge of a matter, I state the source of my information and I believe it to be
true.

2.

The Office of the Registrar helps UTSC undergraduate students with registration,
financial aid, scholarships and awards, exams, graduation, petitions and student
cards.

3.

On January 6, 2021, I

(the “student”) requested a proof of enrolment

M

letter. Later that day, I sent the student a proof of enrolment letter (the “Enrolment
Letter”). The Enrolment Letter states in part: “This is to certify that the abovenamed individual is currently registered as full-time for the 2021 Winter session at
the University of Toronto Scarborough”. I have attached a copy of these emails and
the Enrolment Letter to my affidavit as Exhibit A.
4.

The Enrolment Letter contains a copy of my signature and a stamp of UTSC.

5.

On March 29, 2021, the student emailed several people at UTSC, including me, the
Office of Vice-Principal & Dean UTSC, the general UTSC faculty email, the
general UTSC administrative staff email, and UTSC Awards a request for a
nomination to the King Faisal Prize. The student’s email stated in part: “I am
wondering if I can have a nomination kindly sent for me to KFI (
https://kingfaisalprize.org/invitations-to-nominate/ ) due to the work that I did on
Gene Editing Technologies and Mathematics.” I have attached a copy of the
student’s email to my affidavit as Exhibit B.

6.

I did not respond to the student’s request for a nomination.

7.

On April 5, 2021, Fiorella Sabadin, Associate Registrar and Director of Student
Services at UTSC, informed me that the King Faisal Prize received two letters
contained my signature. One letter stated, “Nominations for the King Faisal Prize
35

for Medicine for Dr. I

M

” and the other letter stated, “Nominations for

the King Faisal Prize for Science for Dr. I

M

” (the “Nomination

Letters”). Ms. Sabadin sent me a copy of the letters and asked me whether I wrote
them. Later that day, I informed Ms. Sabadin that I did not write the letters. I have
attached a copy of my correspondence with Ms. Sabadin and the Nomination
Letters to my affidavit as Exhibit C.
8.

I have attached a chart comparing the Enrolment Letter that I sent to the student on
January 6, 2021, to the Nomination Letters to my affidavit as Exhibit D.

9.

I did not write, approve, sign, or circulate the Nomination Letters. I had not seen
them until Ms. Sabadin asked me whether I wrote them on April 5, 2021.

This concluded the University’s evidence.
University’s Submissions
Assistant Discipline Counsel submitted that the evidence of Ms. Shao, Professor
Donaldson and Ms. Ali, supports a finding on the balance of probabilities that the Student
committed the academic offences as alleged.
In that regard, it was submitted that the evidence in its totality demonstrated that the Student
in her CHMB62H3 Assignment relied upon a Harvard article for it without using
appropriate citations and that the Student also forged, altered or falsified and circulated the
Prize in Medicine Nomination Letter and the Prize in Science Nomination Letter (the
“Nomination

Letters”)

as

well

as

an

email

from

the

email

address

ummatvfoundationcanada@gmail.com to the Academic Integrity Office at the University.
Standard of Proof
The onus is on the University to establish, based upon clear and convincing evidence on a
balance of probabilities, that the academic offences charged have been committed.

36

Decision of the Tribunal
Based on the evidence and the submissions by counsel for the University, the Student was
found guilty of:
(a)

One count of the academic offence to knowingly represent as one’s own any idea
or expression of an idea or work of another in any academic examination or term
test or in connection with any other form of academic work, contrary to section
B.I.1(d) of the Code as alleged in Charge 1 filed by the Provost on January 26,
2022;

(b)

Two counts of the academic offence to knowingly forge or in any other way alter
or falsify any academic record, or to utter, circulate or make use of any such forged,
altered or falsified record, contrary to section B.I.3(a) of the Code as alleged in
Charges 3 and 4 filed by the Provost on January 26, 2022; and

(c)

One count of the academic offence to knowingly forge or in any other way alter or
falsify any document or evidence required by the University, or to utter, circulate
or make use of any such forged, altered or falsified document, contrary to section
B.I.1(a) of the Code as alleged in Charge 5 filed by the Provost on January 26,
2022.

Given these findings, the University withdrew Charges 2 and 6.
Reasons for Decision
The Panel accepted the unchallenged evidence of Ms. Shao, Professor Donaldson and Ms.
Ali, finding that their evidence was credible and reliable.
The evidence of Ms. Shao clearly demonstrated that the Student was made aware by the
section in the syllabus on academic integrity that when writing the CHMB62H3
Assignment, she was not permitted to use someone else’s ideas or words without
appropriate acknowledgement, to commit to academic integrity and to be familiar with the
Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters.

37

Despite this, the evidence clearly established that the Student knowingly represented as her
own an idea or expression of an idea or work of another without appropriate citations, in
particular, the Harvard article, in her CHMB62H3 Assignment.
As such, the Panel was satisfied on the balance of probabilities that the Student relied upon
the ideas and expression of ideas by others whom she did not cite and as such, the Student
committed the academic offence of knowingly representing as her own an idea or
expression of an idea or work of another in the Assignment she submitted in CHMB62H3,
contrary to section B.I.1(d) of the Code as alleged in Charge 1 filed by the Provost on
January 26, 2022.
The evidence of Professor Donaldson and Ms. Ali also clearly established that the Student
forged, altered or falsified and circulated the Nomination Letters as well as an email from
the email address ummatvfoundationcanada@gmail.com to the Academic Integrity Office
at the University.
As such, the Panel was satisfied on the balance of probabilities that:
(a)

The Student sent the forged Nomination Letters for the King Faisal Prize and as
such, the Student committed the academic offence of knowingly forging or in any
other way altering or falsifying the Nomination Letters and to circulating the
Nomination Letters, contrary to section B.I.3(a) of the Code as alleged in Charges
3 and 4 filed by the Provost on January 26, 2022; and

(b)

The Student emailed the Academic Integrity Office at the University using an email
address for an organization that does not exist called UNMATY Foundation Canada
in support of her application for the King Faisal Prize and as such, the Student
committed the academic offence of knowingly forging or in any other way altering
or falsifying the email to the University, contrary to section B.I.1(a) of the Code as
alleged in Charge 5 filed by the Provost on January 26, 2022.

38

Adjournment
Shortly after the Panel rendered its decision and just after the University commenced its
submissions on sanction, the Student joined the hearing. She was advised as to what had
transpired and that she should consider retaining legal counsel. On consent of the Student
and the University, the Panel adjourned the hearing until 9:45 a.m. on February 10, 2023,
in order to give the Student time to retain legal counsel.
Sanction
The hearing resumed at 9:45 a.m. on February 10, 2023 to address the issue of sanction.
The Student was not in attendance at that time and so the Panel adjourned the hearing for
15 minutes to see if the Student would arrive. After having waited 15 minutes, the Panel
noted that the Student was still not in attendance.
A further Affidavit of Ms. Blair was provided by the University. The contents of the
affidavit (without Exhibits) is set out below:
I am a legal assistant at the law firm Paliare Roland Rosenberg Rothstein LLP. I
work with William Webb, an associate at Paliare Roland, who acts as Assistant
Discipline Counsel to the University of Toronto. As such, I have knowledge of the
matters contained in this affidavit. Where I do not have direct knowledge of a
matter contained in this affidavit, I state the source of my knowledge and I believe
it to be true.
On December 9, 2022, Mr. Webb emailed I

M

(the “Student”) a

summary of what happened at the hearing of the academic charges against her
earlier that day and urged her to retain counsel. Mr. Webb has advised me that the
contents of his email are true. Mr. Webb stated in part:
You logged into the hearing during the sanction portion of the hearing, and
indicated that you would like an adjournment to retain counsel. The Provost
agreed to your adjournment request to obtain counsel for the sanction
portion of the hearing. You indicated that you thought that you would be
able to retain counsel by February 2023, and we agreed to reconvene to deal
with the sanction portion of the hearing on February 10, 2023 at 9:45 am.
39

We urge you to retain counsel as soon as possible. Downtown Legal
Services provides free legal services to University of Toronto students. You
can find out more information at their website here:
https://downtownlegalservices.ca/. Their intake office re-opens on January
9, 2023. We urge you to contact them as soon as their intake office re-opens.
Alternatively, we can provide you with the contact information for lawyers
who work in this area that charge fees for their services. Please let us know
whether you would like referrals.
On January 8, 2023, Mr. Webb emailed the Student to remind her that Downtown
Legal Services’ (“DLS’”) intake office would open the next day. I have attached a
copy of these emails to my affidavit as Exhibit A.
On January 11, 2023, the Student copied Mr. Webb on an email to DLS. The first
email in the thread was from DLS to the Student on October 13, 2021. In this email,
DLS advised the Student that it could not help at the time due to limited resources,
and provided the Student with information about other legal resources. The next
email in the thread was from the Student to DLS on January 11, 2023. In this email,
the Student stated in full: “I am not in a position to pay for a lawyer, is there a
possible of obtaining legal services out if [sic] charge? Thank you.”
On January 17, 2023, Mr. Webb emailed the Student as follows: “Based on the
email chain below, DLS advised you that it was unable to help you due to limited
resources in October 2021, which was over one year ago. Given that it is now
January 2023, I urge you to call DLS again to see whether they now have resources
to take on your case.” I have attached a copy of this email to my affidavit as Exhibit
B.
On February 9, 2023, the ADFG Office emailed the parties to remind them about
the continuation of the hearing. Mr. Webb asked the ADFG Office to confirm the
date of the continuation hearing, and the ADFG Office confirmed that the hearing
would take place on Friday, February 10th, 2023 at 9:45 a.m. I have attached a copy
of these email to my affidavit as Exhibit C.
To date, our office has received no further communications from the Student.

40

Given this, Assistant Discipline Counsel asked the Panel to proceed with the hearing in the
Student’s absence. As the Student had been in attendance at the hearing on December 9,
2022 and had consented to its adjournment until February 10, 2023 at 9:45 a.m., the Panel
was satisfied that the Student had actual notice of the continuation of the hearing and
decided to proceed in her absence.
The University’s Evidence on Sanction
The University had no further evidence.
The University’s Submissions
The University provided the Panel with a Book of Authorities containing a number of prior
decisions of this Tribunal and a chart summarizing them.
Counsel for the University submitted that the proper sanctions to be imposed on the Student
should be:
(a)

a final grade of zero in CHMB62H3;

(b)

a recommendation from the President of the University to Governing Council that
the Student be expelled from the University;

(c)

an immediate suspension from the University for a period of up to five years from
the date of this order or until Governing Council makes its decision on expulsion,
whichever comes first, and that a corresponding notation be placed on the Student’s
academic record and transcript; and

(d)

that this case be reported to the Provost for publication of a notice of the decision
of the Tribunal and the sanctions imposed, with the name of the Student withheld.

Assistant Discipline Counsel reviewed with the Panel the chart summarizing the sanctions
which have been given to students by this Tribunal in prior similar cases.

41

Assistant Discipline Counsel then reviewed with the Tribunal the principles relative to
sanction as set out in The University of Toronto and Mr. C. (Case No. 1976/77-3,
November 5, 1976) (“Mr. C.”), namely:
(a)

The character of the Student;

(b)

The likelihood of a repetition of the offence;

(c)

The nature of the offence committed;

(d)

Any extenuating circumstances;

(e)

The detriment to the University caused by the misconduct; and

(f)

The need for general deterrence.

In this regard, Assistant Discipline Counsel submitted that as the Student did not attend the
hearing and as such there is no evidence of remorse or insight or whether the Student has
taken responsibility and learned from her mistakes consequently, there is no evidence as to
her character or any extenuating circumstances and so that is a neutral factor.
Further, with respect to the Student’s character, there is no evidence from the Student and
as a result there is little information on this, however, the Student did deny having
committed plagiarism at her meeting with the Dean and denied circulating two forged
letters in order to obtain an international prize which would have had a significant monetary
component of $200,000.00 US and other elements to it. She then circulated a false email
to the Dean’s office all of which is highly troubling.
With respect to mitigation as the Student did not attend the hearing there was no evidence
from her and so there is no evidence with respect to mitigation before the Panel apart from
the fact that she had no prior academic misconduct.
With respect to likelihood of repetition, Assistant Discipline Counsel noted that the Student
did not have any prior discipline history, but that there was a strong likelihood of repetition
of the conduct given that she had in this case falsified and forged two letters and an email.

42

Further, she did not only deny her conduct, but she went to significant lengths to cover it
up and to make excuses. This all suggests that there is a likelihood of repetition of the
conduct by the Student.
With respect to the nature of the offence, the University of Toronto and J.O. (Case No. 870,
October 31, 2016) is one which dealt with forged letters for an internal prize. There the
student denied the conduct and did not take responsibility and as well engaged in extensive
plagiarism in an assignment.
Here, the Student engaged in a significant amount of false work in order to attempt to
obtain a substantial prize. She created nine attachments including a manuscript and claimed
to be a professor. Her conduct was deliberate, intentional and very serious. Her email to
the Academic Integrity Office was calculated and very concerning.
With respect to the detriment to the University, the Student’s conduct was directed towards
an external organization and constituted forgery in addition to the plagiarism which she
engaged in with respect to her Assignment. Her conduct was deliberate and not careless.
With respect to deterrence, it is important that students be deterred from creating false
recommendation letters. Academic integrity is seriously undermined by plagiarism and
there is significant detriment to the University as these type of documents are relied upon
by third parties and therefore this conduct needs to be deterred.
Assistant Discipline Counsel reviewed with the Panel comparisons between the letters in
this case and how they had been altered and forged by the Student. The Student’s conduct
in this regard shows why deterrence is equally applicable to detriment to the University in
this case.
The Student in this case forged letters in order to obtain a monetary benefit and consistent
with other cases from this Tribunal those circumstances require expulsion as the Student’s
conduct was egregious.
In the submission of Assistant Discipline Counsel, where the Student has engaged in
conduct such as this including forgery, expulsion can only be avoided by significant

43

mitigating factors, but none are present here and therefore the appropriate sanction is to
recommend expulsion.
Assistant Discipline Counsel also reviewed with the Panel the chart of prior decisions and
reviewed in detail several of those prior decisions of the Tribunal to demonstrate that the
proposed penalty was consistent with decisions of this Tribunal in similar circumstances.
Sanction Decision
After deliberations, the Panel ordered that the following sanctions shall be imposed on the
Student:
(a)

a final grade of zero in CHMB62H3;

(b)

a recommendation from the President of the University to Governing Council that
the Student be expelled from the University;

(c)

an immediate suspension from the University for a period of up to five years from
the date of this order or until Governing Council makes its decision on expulsion,
whichever comes first, and that a corresponding notation be placed on the Student’s
academic record and transcript; and

(d)

that this case be reported to the Provost for publication of a notice of the decision
of the Tribunal and the sanctions imposed, with the name of the Student withheld.

An Order was signed at the hearing by the Panel to this effect.
Reasons for Sanction
The Panel considered the submissions of Assistant Discipline Counsel and the factors and
principles relevant to sanction in Mr. C, supra, as set out above.
In addition to these factors, the Panel considered the chart of prior decisions and the other
decisions of this Tribunal involving similar misconduct as contained in the University’s
Book of Authorities and the sanctions imposed. However, the Panel remained cognizant of
the fact that no two cases are identical and that it is not bound by past decisions of this

44

Tribunal. However, the Tribunal does try to develop a consistent body of cases so that
students are treated fairly and consistently in similar circumstances.
By knowingly representing as her own an idea or expression of an idea or work of another
in the Assignment she submitted in CHMB62H3, the Student undermined the grades-based
system of evaluation and broke the honour code that is essential to modern learning.
Students must understand that this kind of misconduct will have serious repercussions so
that they will be dissuaded from the temptation to consider cheating.
The Panel accepted the University’s submission that by knowingly representing as her own
an idea or expression of an idea or work of another in her Assignment, the Student
committed a serious form of academic misconduct.
The Student’s other offences were even more serious as forgery is among the most serious
offences, but this should not overshadow that plagiarism is also a serious offence, a
conclusion echoed in many decisions of this Tribunal, and in the Code. As discussed below,
the Student committed each of the offences knowingly and deliberately, not through
carelessness or inadvertence. The offences were the result of the Student’s calculated
conduct.
As noted above, the forgery here was a grave offence. The Student forged letters to the
King Faisal Prize from Hira Ali on University letterhead, recommending her for a
substantial scholarship, holding herself out to be a Doctor and a Professor. In doing so, she
misled the King Faisal Prize. The Student’s forgery could have resulted in a significant
financial gain to her.
In different ways, the University is vulnerable to, and suffers detriment from, the forgery
and plagiarism offences that the Student committed here particularly as the forgery was
directed towards a third party in the University’s name.
As this Tribunal held in the University of Toronto and M.K. (Case No. 491, November 5,
2008), at para. 43, “such conduct will and must meet with the most severe reaction when
uncovered.”

45

The plagiarism offence also caused harm to the University. This Tribunal has frequently
observed that plagiarism is an offence that strikes at the heart of the academic integrity of
the University. That is all the more so where the plagiarism is deliberate and conscious,
rather than careless.
This factor weighs heavily in favour of a recommendation of expulsion.
The need to deter others from committing similar offences also weighs heavily in the
circumstances of this case. In the Tribunal’s view, a strong message must be conveyed to
the University community that serious offences such as these will not be tolerated, and that
those who commit them will face serious sanctions.
It is critical for the University that students be dissuaded from committing forgery. Forgery
is often difficult to detect, thus requiring a strong deterrent when it is discovered.
The integrity of the University is seriously undermined by plagiarism. The University’s
academic program is eroded when students’ work product is not their own. Turnitin and
other tools facilitate the detection of plagiarism, but they must be backstopped by
meaningful penalties, particularly in cases where a student has committed more than one
act of plagiarism.
The Panel is persuaded that a severe sanction is required where a student is guilty of both
forgery and plagiarism to deter others who may contemplate similar misconduct.
This factor also weighs in favour of a recommendation of expulsion.
As indicated, forgery is among the most serious academic offences. The usual penalty is a
recommendation of expulsion, although in some cases a five-year suspension has been
imposed. As the Tribunal observed in the University of Toronto and M.S. (Case No. 498,
February 3, 2010), at para. 30, “it is clear that forgery is treated as one of the most serious
offences in the University environment and most cases result in expulsion.”
Where forgery has been found, a student normally only avoids a recommendation of
expulsion where there are significant mitigating factors, or where there is a joint
recommendation on sanction, or both. There is no joint recommendation on sanction here,
46

and as discussed above, no real mitigating circumstances, which in our view, outweigh the
effect of the other factors here. See the University of Toronto and L.M. (Case No. 808,
February 1, 2016), at paras. 78-79.
Lastly, the addition of another serious offence, in this case, plagiarism, on top of forgery
weighs in favour of a recommendation of expulsion. See the University of Toronto and
S.G. (Case No. 711, May 11, 2015).
In the circumstances, the Tribunal’s view is that the factors heavily weigh in favour of
expulsion. The seriousness of the offences and the need for deterrence are particularly
compelling in this case.
Accordingly, the Tribunal finds that a recommendation that the Student be expelled (along
with the additional terms sought by the University) is the appropriate sanction.
Dated at Toronto, this 19th day of April 2023

______________________________________
Christopher Wirth, Chair
On behalf of the Panel

47

