Case 1335

   [1]Case 1335 - Appeal

FILE:

   Case # 1335 (2022-2023)

DATE:

   April 19, 2023, via Zoom

PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v. I.M. (‚the Student‚)

HEARING DATE(S):

   December 9, 2022, and February 10, 2023 via Zoom

PANEL MEMBERS:

   Christopher Wirth, Chair

   Professor Vivienne Luk, Faculty Panel Member

   Giselle Sami Dalili, Student Panel Member

APPEARANCES:

   Tina Lie, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg
   Rothstein LLP

   William Webb, Co-Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg Rothstein LLP

HEARING SECRETARY:

   Christopher Lang, Director, Office of Appeals, Discipline and Faculty
   of Grievances

   The charges alleged against the Student pertained to two separate
   incidents of offence. In the first incident, the Student was charged
   under s. B.i.1(d) of the Code for knowingly representing as her own an
   idea or expression of an idea, and/or the work of another in a
   literature searching assignment in CHMB62H3 (the ‚Course)‚. In the
   alternative to this charge, the Student was charged with knowingly
   engaging in a form of cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct,
   fraud, or misrepresentation to obtain academic credit or advantage,
   contrary to s. B.i.3(b) of the Code.

   The second incident concerns the King Faisal Prize which the Student
   applied for using forged materials from the University of Toronto. With
   respect to this incident, the Student was charged with two counts under
   s. B.i.3(a) of the Code, for knowingly forging or in any other way
   altering or falsifying an academic record, and/or uttering, circulating
   or using such forged, altered, or falsified record. Both charges under
   s. B.1.3(a) pertained to documents that purported to be a letter signed
   by Hira Ali: the first a ‚Prize in Medicine Nomination Letter‚ and the
   second a ‚Prize in Science Nomination Letter.‚ The Student was also
   charged under s. B.i.1(a) with knowingly forging or in any other way
   altering or falsifying a document or evidence required by the
   University of Toronto, or uttering, circulating or making use of such
   forged, altered, or falsified document, which in this case was an
   email.

   In the alternative to each of the charges related to the King Faisal
   Prize, the Student was charged with knowingly engaging in a form of
   cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or
   misrepresentation, not otherwise described in the Code to obtain
   academic credit or advantage, contrary to s. B.1.3(b).

   The Student was enrolled in the Course in Winter 2021. The Student
   submitted the literature searching assignment online. The Turnitin
   similarity report for the Student‚s submission yielded a similarity
   score of 77%. The Turnitin report showed that the Student‚s assignment
   was similar to an article from Harvard T.H Chan, School of Public
   Health. The instructor then compared the Student‚s assignment to the
   Harvard article. While the Student had included citations to the
   Harvard article in the reference section and body of their assignment,
   the teaching assistant found that the Student‚s assignment had copied
   paragraphs of text verbatim or near verbatim from the Harvard article,
   without appropriate citations or quotation marks.

   Additionally, in February of the Winter 2021 semester, the Student
   emailed several offices and staff members of the University of Toronto
   Scarborough Campus (‚UTSC‚), requesting a nomination to the King Faisal
   Prize for the Student‚s purported work on ‚Gene Editing Technologies
   and Mathematics.‚ The King Faisal Prize recognizes outstanding works of
   individuals in five major categories, including medicine and science.
   The Student was emailed back by one of the offices the Student had
   reached out to and informed that the office would not be able to
   complete a nomination due to not having familiarity with the Student‚s
   work.

   In April 2021, the Executive Assistant to the Vice-Principal Academic
   and Dean was emailed by Soliman AlMezied, a consultant at the King
   Faisal Prize, seeking to verify if certain nominations were legitimate.
   The documents in question were two letters, each purporting to be
   signed by Hira Ali, for nominations for the Student for the King Faisal
   Prize in medicine and science, respectively. It was confirmed by
   University staff that Hira Ali did not write the letters. The
   University contacted the Student to request a meeting. The Student did
   not respond.

   In the application, the Student alleged to have completed the
   University of Toronto Faculty of Medicine program in 2006 and claimed
   to be an elected President of UMMATY Foundation. The application also
   contained a letter purporting to have the approval of the University of
   Toronto, as well as documents referring to the Student as ‚Professor‚
   or ‚Dr.‚ in proximity to the UTSC logo.

   In July 2021, the Office of the Vice-Principal Academic and Dean
   requested that the Student meet with them to discuss the allegations of
   academic misconduct. While the Student was in contact with the Office,
   she did not attend the meeting, later explaining by email that she was
   in the hospital at the time of the meeting. The meeting was
   rescheduled. The Office of the Vice-Principal Academic and Dean also
   received an email from the UMMATY Foundation, continuing to endorse the
   Student and stating that there was no forgery of documents on her part.
   Further investigation found that the UMMATY Foundation and email linked
   to the Student did not have an apparent presence on the internet.

   At the Dean‚s Designate meeting, the Student claimed she did not know
   how the reference letter with a forged signature from University of
   Toronto staff got to the King Faisal Prize. The Student then stated she
   had nothing more to say about these allegations. When discussing the
   allegation that the Student had plagiarized in her assignment, the
   Student was asked whether she believed what she did in the assignment
   was correct, to which she responded ‚yes.‚

   The Student confirmed in July 2022 that she was available to attend
   proceedings but did not continue correspondence with the University
   afterwards. The Student joined the hearing after she was found guilty
   but before the sanctions were determined. With the consent of the
   Student and the University, the Panel adjourned the hearing to a later
   date to allow the Student to retain legal counsel. The Student did not
   attend this hearing. The Panel heard evidence that the University had
   made serious efforts to serve the Student with notice, through email
   and telephone. The Panel found that reasonable notice of the hearing
   was provided according to the Rules of Practice and Procedure and the
   Statutory Powers Procedure Act .

   The Panel was satisfied on a balance of probabilities that the Student
   had used the ideas and expressions of ideas by others whom she did not
   cite, and thus committed the academic offence of knowingly representing
   as her own, another‚s work. The Panel was also satisfied on the balance
   of probabilities that the Student had sent the forged letters for the
   King Faizal Prize and emailed the Academic Integrity Office from an
   organization that does not exist, thus committing academic offences
   contrary to s. B.i.3(a) and s. B.i.1(a) of the Code. After considering
   the evidence in its totality, the Panel found the Student guilty of one
   count under s. B.i.1(d), two counts under s. B.i.3(a), and one count
   under s. B.i.1(a) of the Code. The University withdrew the alternative
   charges.

   In determining the appropriate sanctions, the Panel considered the
   chart of prior decisions and sanctions in similar cases contained in
   the University‚s Book of Authorities. The Panel considered the
   Assistant Discipline Counsel (‚ADC‚) submission that because the
   Student did not attend the hearing, there was no evidence of remorse or
   insight into whether the Student had taken responsibility, nor any
   evidence to the Student‚s character or any extenuating circumstances.
   The Panel accepted the ADC‚s submission that though the Student had no
   prior academic offences, there was a strong potential of repetition
   considering that she falsified and forged two letters and email. The
   Panel agreed with the ADC that not only did the Student deny
   wrongdoing, but the Student also went to great lengths to cover it up,
   suggesting a likelihood of repetition of the conduct. The Panel found
   that with respect to the nature of the offence, similar to a previous
   Tribunal case, the Student had engaged in extensive false work to
   obtain a substantial prize, which the Panel found very concerning. The
   Panel affirmed that a severe sanction is required in cases of serious
   offence for deterrence.

   The Panel imposed the following sanctions: a final grade of zero in the
   Course; a recommendation from the President of the University that the
   Student be expelled from the University; immediate suspension from the
   University for a period of five years from the date of the Tribunal‚s
   order or until the Governing Council makes its decision on expulsion; a
   corresponding notation on the Student‚s transcript; and a report to the
   Provost for publication.
   [2]View Case

References

   1. https://governingcouncil.utoronto.ca/case-summary/case-1335-appeal
   2. file:///media/31082
