Case 834

DATE:

   February 25, 2016

PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v J.Y.

Hearing Date(s):

   February 10, 2016

Panel Members:

   Roslyn M. Tsao, Chair
   Pascal Van Lieshout, Faculty Member
   Michael Dick, Student Member

Appearances:

   Robert Centa, Assistant Discipline Counsel
   Lucy Gaspini, Manager, Academic Integrity and Affairs, University of
   Toronto Mississauga
   Kalina Staub, Instructor of the Course

In Attendance:

   Krista Osbourne, Administrative Assistant, Appeals, Discipline and
   Faculty Grievances

   Student charged under s. B.i.1(d) , s. B.i.1(b) and, in the
   alternative, s. B.i.3(b) of the Code . The charges related to
   allegations that the Student submitted an Assignment with a very high
   degree of similarity to an essay submitted by another student in the
   Course. The Panel found that the similarities between structure,
   phrases, grammatical errors, and the peculiar use of some words could
   not have been innocuous. The Student did not attend the hearing. The
   Panel determined that reasonable notice had been provided pursuant to
   the Rules of Practice and Procedure , and it proceeded in the absence
   of the Student.

   Student was found guilty of plagiarism and of obtaining unauthorized
   assistance. The Panel noted that it was not necessary to determine
   whether it was the Student or the suspected collaborator who drafted
   the original content of the Assignment or whether the Student copied
   the collaboratorâs assignment or vice versa; all of these scenarios
   will attract a finding of guilt provided the Panel concludes that the
   Students collaborated or that the original drafter was aware that his
   work was being used for assistance. The Panel found the Studentâs
   failure to respond to the Course Instructorâs emails about the
   Assignment to be an aggravating factor. The University did not withdraw
   the alternative charge but did not pursue a finding thereon. The Panel
   imposed a grade assignment of zero in the Course; a 2-year suspension
   from the University; a 3-year notation on the Studentâs academic record
   and transcript; and that the case be reported to the Provost for
   publication.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12894
