1
UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
TRIAL DIVISION

IN THE MATTER charges of academic dishonesty made on July 8, 2009
AND IN THE MATTER of the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic
Matters, 1995;
AND IN THE MATTER of the University of Toronto Act, 1971, S.O. 1971, c. 56, as
amended S.O. 1978, c. 88;

BETWEEN:

THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
- and -

6

G

Hearing Date: September 8, 2009

Members of the Panel:
Mr. Michael Hines, Barrister and Solicitor, Chair
Dr. Annette Sanger, Faculty of Music, Faculty Member
Mr. Jamon Camisso, Student Member

Appearances:
Mr. Robert A. Genta, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Barristers
Professor Berry Smith, Vice-Dean, Students, School of Graduate Studies
In Attendance:
Mr. 6
·G

, the Student, not in attendance

2

1.

The Trial Division of the University Tribunal was convened on September 8, 2009
to consider charges under the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on
Academic Matters, 199.5 (the "Code") laid against Mr. G
by letter dated
July 8, 2009 from Professor Edith Hillan, Vice-Provost, Faculty & Academic Life.

2.

The Vice-Provost's letter advised the student that he had been charged with
three offences under the Code concerning the doctoral dissertation he had
submitted to fill the research and writing requirements of the Doctor of
Philosophy program in the Department of Political Science (designated as course
RST 9999Y).

3.

(i)

Charge #1 alleged that Mr. G
had knowingly represented as his
own ideas, expressions of ideas and/or the work of another,
contrary to section B.1.1(d) of the Code.

(ii)

Charge #2 alleged that Mr. G
had knowingly submitted a
doctoral dissertation that contained concocted references to
sources.

(iii)

Charge #3 alleged that Mr. G
had knowingly engaged in a form
of cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or
misrepresentation not otherwise described in the Code in order to
obtain academic credit or other academic advantage of any kind,
contrary to section B.l.3(d) of the Code.

The matter proceeded before the Tribunal on September 8, 2009. On consent,
Mr. G
did not attend. In a signed Consent form, he stated, inter alia:
I have signed an agreed statement of facts and a joint submission on
penalty, and I do not wish to attend or participate further in these
proceedings.
I understand that, in my absence, the University Tribunal may find that I
have committed an act or acts of academic misconduct, and may impose
sanctions against me as set out in the University of Toronto, Code of
Behaviour on Academic Matters, 1995, including that the Tribunal may
recommend to the President that he recommend to Governing Council
that I be expelled from the University.

4.

The Assistant Discipline Counsel for the University of Toronto advised the Panel
that he had reached an Agreed Statement of Facts with the Student concerning
the matters in question, and that Mr. G
was content that the hearing proceed
in his absence based upon the agreed-upon document. The Agreed Statement
of Facts was introduced as Exhibit 3, and is attached as Schedule "A".

3

5.

On the basis of this Agreed Statement of Facts, the Panel reached a finding that
Mr. G
was guilty of having knowingly represented as his own ideas,
expressions of ideas and/or the work of another, contrary to section B.l.'l(d) of
the Code and knowingly submitting a doctoral dissertation that contained
concocted references to sources, all as described in Charges #1 and #2 as listed
in the Notice of Hearing. Charge #3 was withdrawn at the request of the
University.

6.

The Panel was advised further that the Student had also agreed to a Joint
Submission on Penalty. That Joint Submission is attached as Schedule "B".

7.

The Panel reviewed this agreement and concluded that it did, indeed, reflect an
appropriate penalty under the circumstances. The academic misconduct
admitted to in this case is as serious, comprehensive and pre-meditated as one
might imagine. In our respectful opinion, there is no place for Mr. G
in the
University of Toronto academic community.

8.

Accordingly, the Panel hereby imposes the following sanctions, namely that Mr.
G

(a)

shall be assigned a final grade of zero in course RST 9999Y; and

(b)

shall be suspended from attendance at the University of Toronto for a
period of five years, with the suspension to run from September 8, 2009 to
September 7, 2014.

9.

The Panel further recommends to the President that he recommend to the
Governing Council that Mr. G
be expelled from the University.

10.

The Panel further recommends that this case be reporied to the Provost who
may publish a notice of the decision of the Tribunal and the sanctions imposed
with the Student's name withheld.

11.

I certify that this is the decision of the Panel:

DATED at Toronto this

/ 111/ day of April, 2010.

Michael A. Hines, Chair

Schedule A

Uni'1ersity ofTorcnto and 6

G

I -~=, I

)- Agreed Statement of Facts

University of Toronto and 6

1\10.

G

1

~IB~N!\10:::Y:,': --\' TC-_ :i[PlD,L
UNIVERSJT;

,,,,.:: 1; ·0 ,:,

Agreed Statement of Facts

1.

~~"~d~iiiie,;;;;i~~~~;d"t~" " ... " ..
1,G................................................
("Mr. G
") have
f u·-,1:··,.

For the purposes of this hearing under the Code of Behavi~~; ·

("Code"), the University of Toronto (the "University") and 6

prepared this agreed statement of facts ("ASF") and a joint book °ff,1/;ocu,_g:ien~

~

University and Mr. G

(a)

<;1BD"__Jr:.-::,/fe

Y

, -., i

they consent to the admission into evidence of each document contained in the
JBD for all purposes, including for the truth of its contents, without further need to
prove the document; and

(b)

if a document indicates that it was sent or received by someone, that is prima
facie proof that the document was sent and received as indicated.

2.

This hearing arises out of charges of academic misconduct filed by the Provost under

the Code. A copy of the Charges, which were filed on July 8, 2009, is included in the JBD at Tab

1. Mr. G

3.

acknowledges that he received a copy of the Charges.

In Fall 2003, Mr. G

registered in the Doctor of Philosophy program in the Department

of Political Science in School of Graduate Studies at the University. He remained registered at
the University at all material times. A copy of Mr. G

's academic record dated May 29, 2009,

is included in the JBD at Tab 2.

4.

Mr. G

admits that he received and reviewed a copy of the SGS Calendar, which

states:

The Governing Council of the University of Toronto has approved a Code of
Behaviour on Academic Matters applying to members of the University. The
Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters addresses the responsibilities of all
parties to the integrity of the teaching and learning experience. It concerns the
accountability of faculty members and students as they cooperate in all phases of
this relationship. Honesty and fairness must inform these activities, the
foundation of which is mutual respect for the aims of education and for those
ethical principles which characterize the pursuit and transmission of knowledge
within the University.

728047-1

, 20.~'.i ..

. .
............. ' ..,.....·:~·~•-.-: ::::-......... .

agree that:

University of Toronto and b

G

2

. - Agreed Statement of Facts

The Code addresses offences, procedures, sanctions: more information appears
in three appendices. The Code is enforced by Divisional Deans, the Provost, and
the University Disciplinary Tribunal.
In cases involving graduate students, the divisional dean is the Dean of the
School of Graduate Studies.
5.

The doctoral degree in political science is an academic degree of the highest level. To

obtain a doctoral degree in political science, students must complete course work and a thesis.
tvlr. G

completed all requirements for the Ph. D. degree exclusive of thesis research and

was thus designated as a doctoral candidate in the School of Graduate Studies.

The SGS Calendar describes a doctoral thesis as follows:

6.

The candidate, through the graduate unit, shall present a thesis embodying the
results of original investigation, conducted by the candidate, on the approved
topic from the major field. The thesis shall constitute a significant contribution to
the knowledge of the field and must be based on research conducted while
registered for the PhD program.
A thesis should have a coherent topic with an introduction presenting the general
theme of the research and a conclusion summarizing and integrating the major
findings. Nonetheless, it may contain a collection of several papers. The
collection of papers may be expanded or supplemented by unpublished material,
scholarly notes, and necessary appendices. In all theses, pagination should be
continuous; there should be a common table of contents and an integrated
bibliography for the whole thesis. A thesis must be prepared in a standard format
(see National Library guidelines and Guidelines for the Preparation of Theses
referred to below).
tvlr. G

7.
G

commenced work on his thesis shortly after registering at the University. tvlr.

's thesis supervisor was Prof. Alan Brudner.

8.

In May 2009, Mr. G

submitted the final version of his doctoral thesis to Prof. Brudner

and the other members of his examination committee. A copy of Mr. G

's final version of

thesis is found in the JBD at Tab 3.

9.

Mr. G

admits that the thesis he submitted consists almost entirely of lengthy

passages of text taken directly from a variety of secondary texts. He admits that he copied
lengthy paragraphs, and sometimes entire pages, from these texts into his thesis. He admits
that he sometimes he altered a few words from the text he copied, but often he did not. He

728047-1

Un! 11ersity of Toronto and 6

G

) ~

Agreed Statement of Facts

3

admits that, but for a few concluding paragraphs, the thesis does not contain any of his own
academic work.

10.

With respect to the thesis, Mr. G

(a)

3dmits that he knowingly:

included lengthy verbatim and nearly verbatim excerpts from secondary sources,
including, but not limited to:
(i)

Katerina Deligiorgi's book Kant and the Culture of Enlightenment, a copy
of which is included in the JBD at Tab 4;

(ii)

Steven B. Smith's book Hegel's Critique of Liberalism - Rights in Context,
a copy of which is included in the JBD al Tab 5; and

(iii)

Alice Ormiston's book Love and Politics - Re-interpreting Hegel, a copy of
which is included in the JBD at Tab 6.

(b)

failed to attribute those excerpts appropriately using quotation marks;

(c)

failed to attribute the true source of those excerpts through accurate references
or footnotes;

(d)

represented as his own an idea or expression of an idea or work of another;

(e)

did no meaningful academic work on the thesis; and

(f)

committed the academic offence of plagiarism with respect lo the thesis as set
out in charge #1 of the Charges, which are included in the JBD at Tab J.'. I

11.

Mr. G

admits that he concocted the references that he included in the thesis. Mr.

G

admits that committed the academic offence as set out in charge #2 of the Charges,
1
which are included in the JBD at Tab 2.

12.

Mr. G

(a)

acknowledges that the Provost of the University of Toronto has:

made no representations or promises as to what sanction the Provost will seek in
this case;

728047-1

University of Toronto and 6.

(b)

G

(;

) - Agreed Statement of Facts

advised him to obtain independent legal advice before signing this ASF and that
he has either done so or deliberately waived his right to do so.

Signed in Toronto on August 21, 2009.
G

Signed in Toronto on August 21, 2009.
Robert A. Genta
Assistant Discipline Counsel
University of Toronto

728047-1

4

Schedule B

Universti:'; of Toronto and O

- Joint Submission on Penalty

·G

University of Toronto and 6

1

G

Joint Submission on Penalty
The Provost and Cl

1.

G

submit to the University Tribunal that the

appropriate penalty in all the circumstances of this case is that the Tribunal:
a) impose a final grade of zero in course RST 9999Y
b) immediately suspend Mr. G

from the University for a period of up to 5 years;

c) recommend to the President of the University that he recommend to the
Governing Council that Mr. G
The University of Toronto and Mr. G

2.

be expelled from the University; and
submit that the Tribunal should report this case

to the Provost who may publish a notice of the decision of the Tribunal and the sanctions
imposed, with Mr. G

acknowledges that the University of Toronto has advised him to obtain

Mr. G,

3.

's name withheld.

independent legal advice before signing this Joint Submission on Penalty and that he has done
so or has deliberately waived the right to do so.

Signed in Toronto on August 21, 2009.
G

THE UN!VERS:TV TR18U~-li~L
UN~ffi:1Wil'9r0:(1!\):09·bjq.e,1'ftcJ009.
AND
I ·.

............-...............
1_,I

r,

............. .

L=

;,..,:..

This Exhibit is producad by

'

.

.

the •• 11.
"--'1:,:1
1h'-ti\~/,r1i,1: Cu.l,:J;'/_
r.l)J.,7/t
. ..........-....................... ' ..... ' •••••
, 20.i✓..'/ ..
!

i (.' /

L.1\..../;,'.L

•••••••• .. ••h,,,,,, ... ,,.,, ••..•• ,,,

731150-1

,--------...

~A~e=Lfs¾
Robert A. Cenfa
Assistant Discipline Counsel
University of Toronto .

