Case #587

   DATE: April 14, 2010
   PARTIES: University of Toronto v. O.G.
   Hearing Date(s): September 8, 2009
   Panel Members:
   Michael Hines, Chair
   Dr. Annette Sanger, Faculty Member
   Jamon Camisso, Student Member
   Appearances:
   Rob Centa, Assistant Discipline Counsel for the University
   Professor Berry Smith, Vice-Dean, Students, School of Graduate Studies
   Trial Division - s. B.I.1(d) and s. B.I.3(d) of Code â doctoral
   dissertation - plagiarism â concocted references - plagiarism â
   verbatim and near verbatim excerpts â failure to attribute excerpts
   properly â no meaningful academic work on thesis - hearing not attended
   â Agreed Statement of Facts - finding on evidence from Agreed Statement
   of Facts of guilt â Joint Submission on Penalty âÂ Â  Joint Submission
   on Penalty acceptedÂ  -Â  grade assignment of zero for course;
   five-year suspension; recommendation; recommendation for expulsion; and
   report to Provost
   Student charged with three offences under s. B.I.1(d) and s.B.I.3(d) of
   the Code. The Student did not attend the proceedings on consent. The
   matter proceeded on an Agreed Statement of Facts. The Student admitted
   to including lengthy verbatim and near verbatim excerpts from secondary
   sources and failing to attribute these excerpts properly, to
   representing others work as his own, to doing no meaningful academic
   work on his thesis, and to committing the academic offence of
   plagiarism. On the basis of the Agreed Statement of Facts, the Panel
   found the Student was guilty. The Panel was advised that the Student
   had also agreed to a Joint Submission on Penalty. The Student
   acknowledged the University made no promises as to what sanctions the
   Provost would seek. The Panel reviewed the Joint Submission and found
   it reflected an appropriate penalty under the circumstances. The Panel
   found that the academic misconduct was serious, comprehensive and
   pre-meditated.Â  The Panel imposed a grade of zero in the course, a
   five-year suspension, a recommendation to the President that the
   Student be expelled, and that a report be issued to the Provost.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12752
