Case #423

   DATE: November 2005 (no exact date provided)
   PARTIES: University of Toronto v. The Student Hearing Date(s): August
   31, 2005
   Panel Members:
   Mr. Raj Anand, Chair
   Professor Melanie Woodin, Faculty Panel Member
   Ms Sujata Pokhrel, Student Panel Member
   Appearances:
   Rob Centa, for the University of Toronto
   Mark Lapowich, appearing on behalf of the Student
   The Student
   Trial Division - s. B.i.l(a) and s. B.i.3(a) of Code â forged documents
   - falsified document substituted for test after the fact â guilty plea
   to s. B.i.l(a) of Code â Agreed Statement of Facts - Joint Submission
   on Penalty â premeditated offence impacted significantly on integrity
   of University â possibility for rehabilitation â Joint Submission on
   Penalty accepted â grade assignment of zero for course; one-year
   suspension; one-year notation on transcript; and report to Provost
   Student charged under s. B.i.l(a) and s. B.i.3(a), and alternatively
   with three offences under s. B.i.3(b) and two offences under s.
   B.i.l(b) of the Code. The charges related to allegations that the
   Student substituted a falsified document for a test in an attempt to
   secure a higher grade after the fact. The Student pleaded guilty to the
   charge under s. B.i.l(a) of the Code. The parties submitted an Agreed
   Statement of Facts. The Panel accepted the Studentâs guilty plea. The
   parties submitted a set of Agreed Facts Relevant to Penalty and a Joint
   Submission on Penalty. The Panel found that the offence required
   premeditation and had a significant impact on the integrity of the
   University and its processes. The Panel considered the mitigating facts
   of the Studentâs recognition and acceptance of responsibility in the
   form of a guilty plea, the Studentâs serious and significant
   psychiatric difficulties, which were supported by medical evidence, the
   character references on the Studentâs behalf and the evidence of the
   Studentâs motivation and involvement in the University, and found that
   the Student was a good candidate for rehabilitation. The Panel accepted
   the Joint Submission on Penalty and imposed a grade of zero in the
   course; a one-year suspension; a one-year notation on the Studentâs
   academic record and transcript; and that a report be issued to the
   Provost.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12729
