DISCIPLINE APPEALS BOARD
UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
IN THE MA1jTER OF an appeal b y ~ · ~ from findings against him by The
University Triounal of the University of Toronto of academic dishonesty and an appeal by
~•
~ against the imposition of sanctions and penalties imposed in consequence
thereof;

AND IN THE:MATTER OF charges of academic dishonesty made on July 19, 2012;
AND IN THE'MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic
Matters, 1995; '
AND IN THKMATTER OF the University of Toronto Act, 1971, S.0. 1971, c. 56 as amended
S.O. 1978, C. 8;8

BETWEEN:
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
Respondent
and

Appellant
REASONS FOR DECISION

Appeal hearing date: December 3, 2013
Members of the Discipline Appeal Board:
Ms. Patricia DlS. Jackson, Chair
Ms. Beth Martj.n, Student Panel Member
Professor Elizabeth Peter, Faculty Panel Member
Mr. Michael Dick, Student Panel Member

Appearances:i
Mr. David B. Cousins, for the A p p e l l a n t ~ . ~
Mr. Robert A. ;Centa and Ms. Tina Lee for the Respondent, the University of Toronto
;

''

Parties in att~ndance:
l

Mr.~,t-~

-2-

REASONS FOR DECISION
1.

Mr. M111111 ("the Student") was charged and convicted of the following academic

offence:
On or April 3, 2012, you knowingly engaged in a form of a cheating, academic
dishon~sty misconduct, fraud or misrepresentation in order to obtain academic
credit ot other academic advantage of any kind, by altering and submitting a
document that you claimed was your examination for Class Test 1 in the Course,
contra1 to Section B.1.3(b) of the Code.
2.

The PJ et hearing the case imposed the following sanctions:

(a) ; a final grade of zero in the Course;
(b) ! a suspension from the University for a period not to exceed 5 years from the
date of the Panel's order or until the Governing Council makes its decision on
expulsion, whichever comes first;
(c) i a recommendation to the President of the University that he recommend to the
Governing Council that the Student be expelled from the University; and

(d) that the case be reported to the Provost, with the Student's name withheld, for
publication of a notice of the decision of the Tribunal and the sanction imposed.

3.

'

The Stildent appeals from the sentence imposed, and further seeks to introduce further

evidence on th¢ appeal.

4.

In summary, the Student asserts that the sanction imposed was excessively harsh and

severe having regard to:
'

-3(a)

the Panel not being apprised of his personal circumstances, antecedents and
prospects;

(b) his ineptitude and lack of expertise in attempting to defend himself;

(c)

his exercise of his right to a hearing on the issues of his guilt;

(d) his position that he was not accusing or blaming anyone for his situation;
(e)

that although assisted by counsel, he was not in fact represented by counsel; and

(f)

his infraction concerned a test representing 5% of the total mark in the Course
and in the absence of any mark on the test he would still have passed the Course.

5.

The Student asks that the recommendation for expulsion be quashed, that he be assigned

a mark of zero in the Course and the balance of the penalties imposed be quashed or reduced.
6.

The Student has abandoned his appeal of the conviction. That conviction was based on

the facts set forth below.
7.

The Student was enrolled in ECE3 l 8 - Fundamentals of Optics (the "Course"). In

February of2012 a class test, worth 5% of the final mark, was administered. The Student did not
attend or write the test. A student who subsequently dropped the Course did write the test and
received 20/20 or 100%.

8.

After tie tests had been returned, the Student approached the Professor with the assertion

that there had been an error with respect to the recording of his test results, and that rather than
the zero he w$ recorded as having received he in fact got 20/20. He asked the Professor to
correct the

mark from zero to 20 and showed him a copy of the examination paper. The test

-4paper the Student gave the Professor was the one written by the student who had dropped the
Course after obtaining 100% in the test. The Student had changed the name on the test to make
it appear to be his own.
9.

A subsequent meeting was held among the Professor, the Student and the Dean's

designate to discuss these events. The Student was aware that he could bring someone to the
meeting but chose not to. He was advised that notes would be taken and could be used at a later
time. At that meeting, the Student admitted the offence. He was told that a sanction would be
imposed, but at that meeting was not told what the sanction would be.
10.

Thereafter the Dean's designate wrote to the Student to advise that on the basis of the

facts, including the fact that this was his second academic offence (the first is described more
fully below) the sanction for the offence would be:
(a)

a mark of zero in the Course;

(b) the placing of the Student's name on an offence database as a second offender
with a copy of the sanction letter in his student file;
(c)
11.

no official recording of the sanction on his academic transcript.

After receiving this letter, the Student decided to withdraw his admission and the charges

were laid that led to the hearing below.

The Hearing on Liability
!

12.

The Student was originally represented by counsel including at a settlement conference

held before a qifferent Tribunal Co-chair. Although the Student represented himself at the

-5-

hearing, his previous counsel attended the portion of the below hearing that considered whether
the Student had committed an offence. Counsel said that he was there in case any issues with
respect to previous communications had with himself as counsel became an issue, and also to
consult with the Student ifhe required assistance. During the course of the hearing counsel did
from time to time consult with the Student and on occasion made observations to the Tribunal,
apparently designed to clarify the Student's position.

13.

As the Student is not appealing the finding of guilt, we do not review in detail the

evidence below upon which the panel below made its finding of guilt.

14.

In summary, the evidence showed that the Student did not sign in at the test although the

student who subsequently dropped the Course did. After the tests were returned, the Student
approached the Professor on the basis that there had been an error in recording the test results
and showed him a test paper that had received 20/20. The Professor examined the test paper and
noticed that it looked like the name had been changed, a conclusion which was reinforced when
he examined it with a magnifier. The test paper was subsequently examined by a Forensic
Document Examiner who testified that she conducted a number of tests and concluded that
underneath the, Student's name, which had been entered in ink, was erased pencil writing which
was consistentwith the letters and student number of the student who had dropped the Course
after receiving .100% on the test.

15.

The Student's defence called in to question the University's evidence in a number of

ways, includin~ on the basis that the statements of recollection by the Professor and Teaching
Assistants in ~e Course were not "proof', that copies of emails sent and received by the Student
I

had been fabricated, and that the evidence based on those emails was equally fabricated. In
!

-6cross-examination and in argument the Student asserted that both the Teaching Assistant and
Professor had made up or possessed bogus emails, and fabricated their evidence.

16.

The Student testified in his own defence. He testified that he did not write the test, that

he did not submit the 100% test written by another student as his own, that he was not the
recipient of the emails from the Teaching Assistant and the Professor, and that he had not seen
the emails, which he characterized as fabricated, until a week before the hearing.

17.

He acknowledged attending the meeting with the professor and the Dean's designate, but

said that he did not say that he had committed the offence but was saying "yes" because he
wanted "to get out of it".

18.

The Panel below did not believe the Student's evidence. It rejected his defence and

found him guilty.

The Hearing on Sanction
19.

When the hearing resumed for the consideration of sanction, the Student continued to

represent himself, but no longer with the assistance of his previous counsel.

20.

The University led evidence that showed that the Student had previously violated the

Code of Beha~iour on Academic Matters in the context in plagiarism and collaboration on two
i

lab reports an1 a quiz during his first year. Although these were in fact three separate violations
they occurred {vithin a short period of time during the Student's first term and were treated as
one concurrent first offence.

- 721.

The letter sent to the Student recording these violations noted his assurance that a

violation of the Code would never be repeated and determined on that basis that the penalty
would be a mark of zero in each of the lab reports, a reduction of marks equal to a double zero
for the quiz, and a letter documenting the incident in his student file but without official
recording of the decision on his academic record. The letter concluded:
"academic offences are extremely serious and constitute unacceptable behavior in
the University and in the Faculty of Applied Science and Engineering. I want you
to clearly understand that a second offence will result in more severe sanctions.
As a student working towards becoming a professional engineer, you need to
possess; integrity and understand the ethics involved in order to succeed. I urge
you to I.et this letter serve as a strong warning to you that any future academic
work must be conducted in full accordance with the rules and regulations of the
University." (Emphasis in the original.)

22.

Following the University's evidence on sanction, the Student sought to introduce

evidence whicn he described as relevant to the issue of his liability and not to sanction. The
Panel was uncertain whether it had the jurisdiction to reconsider the liability portion of the
hearing. However, the Panel concluded that even if it did it would not exercise its discretion to
admit new materials given that a full hearing had already occurred, that the Student had had
access to counsel at that hearing even though he was not represented by counsel, and that all of
the information he wished to present to the Panel was in existence and available to him at the
time of the initjal hearing.
23.

The Stµdent advised that he had no evidence on the issue of sanction and was not going
'

to talk about t~e issue of sanction since he disagreed so strongly with the decision of the Panel.

24.

The uJiversity submitted the offence was very serious, planned and deliberate and that
i

the student had demonstrated that he was dishonest, would be dishonest to obtain an advantage
:

i

-8for himself, an4 was not afraid to point fingers and implicate others, including by making serious
i

unfounded allegations against University members. The University further submitted that the
likelihood of r~petition of the offence was high given the pre'l.iious three code violations and that
there was nothing to suggest the student had any insight or remorse to deceive.
25.

The Pal},el rejected the submission of the University that it was an aggravating factor for

the Student to Suggest in his defence that there was a "systems error". The panel concluded, in

l

our view correJtly, that students must be able to bring forward questions about the systems in
I

I
place without ~ear of these questions being cast as aggravating factors.
26.

The P~el otherwise accepted the submissions of the University and imposed the

sanctions set forth
in paragraph 2 of this Decision. In doing so, it noted:
I
i

i
The Pru;tel concluded that the University's request in terms of sanctions was
reasona;ble and appropriate. The Panel found the case of The University of
1
Torontf and Ms. ~
to be most compelling and wishes to
undersqore the seriousness of the offence ...
i

...The :panel was concerned that [the Student] did implicate both ...the Teaching
Assistaht and [the] Professor ... to a degree by suggesting that they had made up or
posses~ed "bogus" emails. In addition, [the Student's] offence was extremely
serious! and in the words o f ~ ' calculated; no mitigating factors were
presented to the Panel; the act was intentional as contrasted to some of the
plagiar~sm cases brought before this Tribunal; and the degree of planning and
deliberftion was high. Given these factors and [the Student's] history, the Panel
was of ~he view that the order requested was necessary and appropriate, and made
that orC,er on May 2, 2013.

I
Request to Inp-oduce New Evidence on the Appeal

!
j
1

27.

On thi~ appeal, the Student sought to introduce further evidence relating to:
i

I
!

l
1

I

In the matter of[the University of Toronto and ~ -• Case#538, August 14, 2009

:

-9(a)

his immigration to Canada at the age of 18;

(b) the indebtedness of his family, to the extent of approximately $125,000, arising
from the cost of his education at the University;

(c)

his academic achievements before his admission to the University and while
studying at the University. (During high school he was among the top students,
was elected Head Boy, and was a recipient of a number of awards. He was
accepted into a number of universities and while at the University of Toronto
and until the events in issue maintained a 71 % average. Although unable to
pursue graduate work as a result of receiving zero in the Course, he had
previously been accepted for an MSc program in Physics at the University
College of London);

(d)

his involvement in and completion of a further course in the fall of2012 with
the result that he had successfully completed all course work required for the
granting of his degree;

(e)

his employment history prior to the offence;

(t)

that although he understood that by proceeding to a hearing he risked
consequences more severe than a zero in the Course he had no real appreciation
that the penalty could escalate as it had; and

(g)

his explanation of the circumstances of the first three concurrent violations of
the Code.

- 10 28.

Section E.8 of the Code permits this Board to receive fresh evidence in exceptional

circumstances: .

An appeal shall not be a trial de novo, but in the circumstances which it considers
to be e~ceptional, the Discipline Appeals Board may allow the introduction of
further ~vidence on appeal which was not be available or was not adduced at trial,
in such :m anner and upon such terms as the members of the Board hearing the
appeal ~ay direct.

29.

This Bqard has previously noted the criteria associated with the well-established test for

admitting fresh! evidence on appeal, namely whether or not the proposed evidence:

(a) • was available at the time of the hearing with the exercise of due diligence;

(b) · is relevant to a potentially decisive issue at first instance;

( c)

is credible; and

( d) / could, if believed and taken together with the rest of the evidence reasonably to

'
be expected to have affected the initial decision.

30.

As this :Board said in the -

ase2, it is not necessary in every case that a party seeking

to adduce fresij evidence on an appeal satisfy all of these criteria to be successful. In the first
j

place, section Jp.8 of the Code appears to contemplate a greater level of discretion in the
;
i

introduction o( new evidence that exists in other forums. As well, the Supreme Court of Canada
has determined that it may not always be necessary to show that the evidence was not available

2

In the matter o/'the University of Toronto DAB and. · • Case#543, April 14, 2011

- 11 at the time of the hearing by the exercise of due diligence, particularly where there is a
reasonable explanation for the failure to adduce the evidence. 3
31.

As in the

-4, case, though, we do think it appropriate to consider these for criteria in

deciding whe~er to admit the new evidence.
i

32.

All of the evidence the Student proposes to introduce on appeal was available to him at
i

the time of the hearing on sanction and his affidavit does not explain why he did not leave the
evidence at theisanctioning phase of the hearing.
33.

It is tru~, as his counsel submits, that he was unrepresented by counsel at the hearing, but

he had been represented until shortly before the hearing and was accompanied by his former
counsel to the first portion of the hearing on liability. Moreover, the Panel went to great lengths
I

to explain the ~rocess to the Student and to invite him to call any evidence relevant to sanction.
i

34.

Studen~s have the right to be represented by counsel at Tribunal hearings. However,
!

where a studen;t makes a tactical or strategic decision to appear without counsel, that decision
should not be used as the basis for the introduction of new evidence on an appeal. Indeed, to do
so would create an incentive for a student to appear unrepresented at the Tribunal in order to
preserve broad~r rights on a subsequent appeal.
35.

As to pptential relevance, for the purposes of this decision, we accept the University's

admission that!the evidence might have been found by the Tribunal below to be relevant and

!

therefore admif sible.

3

I
I

R. v. J.A.A., 20 1!1 S.C.C. 17

- 12 36.

Finally, we assume for purposes of this issue that the evidence the Student seeks to admit

is generally credible.

37.

However, we do not consider that the evidence could or should, when taken with the rest

of the evidence. reasonably be expected to have affected the final decision.
38.

The Student's status as an immigrant is an irrelevant factor to the question of sanction.

We agree with the University that it would be an error in principle to impose either a lesser or
more severe sanction based on a student's immigration status.
39.

Equally, the expense associated with attending the University, and the Student's source of

funding for that attendance is not an appropriate factor on which to base a sanctioning decision.

40.

While the proposed new evidence indicates a history of academic achievement before

admission to the University, that alone is not sufficient to affect sanction. Indeed in general the
students gain admission to the University by virtue of such strong academic performance.
41.

The evidence of the Student's employment history merely indicates that he was employed

for approximately a year and a half as a Hardware Qualification Engineer. It says nothing about
his working standards, ethics or achievements and is a bare record of employment. We do not
consider that it could reasonably be expected to affect the sanctioning outcome at the hearing
below.
I

42.

The Sn/tdent proposes as new evidence his failure to appreciate that by withdrawing his
i

admission of ~ilt and seeking a hearing he might be subject to a drastic escalation in penalty
such as that which occurred. However, this must be taken in light of his acknowledgement on
'

this appeal tha~ he understood he risked a more serious penalty. Moreover, the Provost's

- 13 -

Guidelines on Sanctions, which form part of the Code, while noting that the circumstances of
each case will be taken into account also contain as "suggested guidelines"

''3. Where a student has been previously convicted under the Code
and commits another offence, the recommended sanction shall be
from suspension for two years to expulsion from the University .
. . . .6. For impersonating, or having an individual personate on a
test or examination, the recommended sanction shall be expulsion
from the University"
43.

It is important to emphasize that these are only guidelines, and that the sanction imposed

in any particular case will be made by the panel hearing the case and will depend upon the
circumstances of that case. However, the Guidelines were a clear indication to the Student the
more serious sanction that might result. Even if the Student hoped otherwise or failed to
anticipate that he would in fact be subject to such serious sanction, we do not consider that that
by itself wouldi be a basis upon which the hearing below would have come to a different
conclusion.
44.

The Student's evidence with respect to his three prior violations of the Code does not

detract from the fact that he did in fact violate the Code. Moreover, although because of the
circumstances they were treated as only one offence, his attention was drawn to the existence of
the Code and its importance, and to the seriousness of any future violation of the Code.
Importantly, oi;ie of the reasons for the sanction imposed on that first offence was the Student's
assurance that ~ violation of the Code would never be repeated. In the circumstances, we cannot
conclude that tpe Student's evidence respecting the circumstances of this prior offence could
reasonably be ~xpected to have change the sanction imposed.

- 14-

45.

Finally, the only additional evidence proposed by the student with respect to his academic

achievements during university that was not before the Panel below is the transcript record of his
completion of a further academic course in the fall of 2012, evidencing the completion of all of
the course requirements for graduation. While it does appear that the transcript that evidenced
the completion of that final course was before the Panel below, it is evident from their reasons
with respect to sanction that they proceeded on the basis of the student's assertion that he had
completed all of the course requirements and would otherwise be eligible for his degree. In the
circumstances, we cannot conclude that the addition of the transcript itself would have affected
the decision below.

46.

For all of these reasons, we do not consider that it is appropriate that any of the evidence

described shoufd be considered on the appeal, or that it would influence the result of the appeal if
it were.

Standard of Jlieview on Appeal

47.

Section E.4 of the Code provides the right of appeal from a sanction decision of a Panel

to the Discipline Appeals Board.

48.

The Di~cipline Appeals Board has wide powers to modify a sanction imposed and may

impose any s~ction that it sees fit that the Panel below could have imposed. Section E. 7
provides that 4e Board shall have the power to "affirm, reverse, quash, vary or modify the
I

verdict, penalty or sanction appealed from and substitute any verdict, penalty or sanction that

I
could have be~n given or imposed at trial".

- 15 -

49.

Thus, a~though the appeal does not proceed as a hearing de novo, the Appeals Board has a

very broadjuri~diction. Indeed, decisions of the Board over several years have recognized that
the Appeals Board has very broad powers and little obligation to show deference to the decision
of the Panel below.
i

50.

~

. a 1976 decision of the Appeals Board recognized as the leading decision on

sentencing principles, holds that it is appropriate for an Appeals Board panel to vary a sanction if
it believes the sanction imposed below to be wrong. Other Appeals Board decisions have held
that a panel ha~ authority to quash or modify a Tribunal decision where there are errors of law
and significant ,errors of fact 5
51.

Importantly, in the application of these principles, is a concern to ensure that there is

some order of 4onsistency in sanction, that like penalties are opposed for like offences, and that
direction is givpn in that respect. As the Board said in - -• it would modify a sanction if it
"concluded th3:t the sanction imposed in this case is materially inconsistent with the weight of
other Tribunal and appeal decisions".6
!

The Sanction ~mposed
i

52.

The prilnary guidelines with respect to determining penalty are well established and set
'i

forth in the •

case:
f

(a)

!the character of the person charged;
!

i

(b)
4

/the likelihood of repetition of the offence;
I

In the matter o~the University o/Toronto and ~
In the matter ofthe University of Toronto and~
6,
_
I
...... para.4~.
!
5

, Case#1976/77-3, November 5, 1976, p. 3.
, Case #45 1, August 24, 2007

- 16 (c)

the nature of the offence committed;

(d)

~y extenuating circumstances;

(e)

the detriment to the University occasioned by the offence; and
the need to deter others from committing a similar offence.7

(f)

53.

.i .

There ate a number of aspects of the offence in this case which indicate that it is both

very serious and detrimental to the University. In the first place, this is a second offence,
committed by a student who has previously assured the University that he would never again
violate the Code. It was a planned and deliberate offence which required persistence in its
execution from the acquisition and falsification of the original test through the written and oral
communicatio*s with both the Teaching Assistant and the Professor. Finally, the offence was
committed by ~ fourth year student who is expected to have acquired a solid understanding of
and commitment to the academic integrity of the institution in which he has studied and who is
pursuing a degree in a profession with standards of integrity that he is expected to be cognizant
of. That he wtjuld commit this level of dishonest conduct at that stage of his academic career for

i

a paper worth $ percent of the final mark is also troubling.
I

;

54.

Howe~er, in this case, unlike in most others that come before the Tribunal, the University
i

had engaged irl. a serious examination of the appropriate penalty for the offence of this
i
i
seriousness, atj.d had committed to what that was -- a mark of zero in the Course. There is no

i
question that i~ making this assessment the University ·has access to, and should have regard to,
I

f

the sanctions ihiposed in previous cases including decided by the Tribunal.
I
i
!

7

'

~

, p.12.

- 17 55.

Becaus1 of the foregoing, the issue in this case is not whether the seriousness of the

offence as augtjlented
by the Student's conduct at the hearing warrants expulsion, but the
I
narrower and nfore difficult question of whether the Student's refusal to acknowledge the
;
I

offence and hisjconduct at the hearing warrants an escalation from the zero in the Course the
;

University was\previously prepared to impose for an offence of this seriousness. Our answer is
to the latter qu4stion, not the former, and it is that we do not think that it does.
i

56.

It is well established in the Tribunal's jurisprudence, and the Student in this case was

advised that penalties imposed at the decanal level when a student admits an offence, are more
lenient than those imposed after a contested hearing at the Tribunal. There are sound reasons for
this. A studen~ who acknowledges his or her fault and accepts the penalty reflects significantly
on the assessment of the student's character, remorse and the likelihood of repetition of the
offence. In otlier words, the more serious penalties imposed are a result of the application of the

~ factors, lnot as an arbitrary penalty for the Student seeking a hearing.
57.

Howevh, it is important that the sanction imposed upon conviction at the end of a

contested hearing bear a rational relationship to the sanction previously established for an
I
I
!

admission oftle offence having regard to the impact of the conduct of the hearing on the factors
i
l

that legitimately affect the sanctioning process. In noting this, we are not deferring to the

I

decision at theldecanal level, but holding the University to a consistent position in its dealings
i

with the Studeht and in its assessment of the nature of the offence he committed.
!

58.

In this ~ase, since the seriousness of the offence and the detriment to the University (as

I'

assessed by thi University at the decanal level) was met by a sanction of zero in the Course, the
issue raised in ~his case (and which did not arise in most other cases to which the parties referred)
!

- 18 i

is whether the #gnificant escalation in the sentence imposed by the Panel below is explicable in
terms of the fac;tors is appropriate on the basis of the remaining ~ factors. The nature of the
I

offence and its seriousness did not change as a result of the Student going to a hearing, although
!

the impact oft}te Student' s conduct at the hearing had a marked impact on the assessment of the
i
i

other ~ faf tors.
59.

We agr~e that as a result of the hearing a significant escalation in penalty was warranted.
!

There was no ~Yidence before the Panel: that the Student was of good character; of any
extenuating cirpumstances that would support a mitigated or reduced sanction; or to suggest that
he had any insight into his acts of academic misconduct or any remorse for those acts. There
;
I

was no indication of a basis upon which the Panel could conclude that the likelihood of repetition
I

i

of the offence was small, other than the assertion that the Student had completed the courses
I
!

!

required for his degree.
l
i

60.

We agrpe that in weighing t h e ~ factors it was appropriate for the Panel to have
I

I

regard to the student's conduct at the hearing, including his evidence denying the actions that

!
gave rise to th~ conviction, his allegations against others and his dishonesty. We do not differ
i

from the Pane1·on either their assessment of these actions, or their seriousness. We also agree
with the Panel ,s assessment that in all of these circumstances the application of t h e ~

I

factors warranted a very serious sanction, and one that is very significantly more serious than the
!

penalty that ]wuld have been imposed at the decanal level.
61.

We a 1ee therefore that for all of these reasons, a serious escalation in the sanction,
i

beyond simplJ a zero in the Course, was appropriate.

- 19 62.

Where ;Ve part company from the Panel is on the question of whether these factors as
;

they played ou~in the conduct of this hearing justify the escalation from a mark of zero to a
recommendatidn of expulsion. In most cases, where expulsion has been recommended by the
Tribunal, a substantial factor in the assessment of the appropriate sanction has been the
seriousness of ~be offence and the detriment to the University-- quite apart from the Student's
conduct at the ~earing. Here, those factors have been adequately addressed, in the University's
first assessmen~, by a mark of zero. The Panel below did not specifically address whether the
remaining -

factors alone justified the escalation in penalty. Indeed, in "underscoring the
;

seriousness of the offence" as part of their decision to recommend expulsion, they appear to have
;

overlooked thejfact that the University had already determined the appropriate sanction for an
offence of this seriousness was a mark of zero.

63 .

We

hal

specifically addressed this point, and indeed given it anxious consideration.

Our conclusion is that the Student's conduct and testimony at the hearing below does warrant a
serious escalation in the sanction to be imposed for this offence. We do not consider, though,
that it rises to iarranting a recommendation for expulsion.

'
64.

In coming to this conclusion we have considered the ~ case relied upon by the Panel.
li

However, •

was not a case where the University had already determined that a sanction less

than expulsio~would appropriately address the seriousness of the offence. Indeed, in that case
i

!

the seriousnes~I of the offence was one of the reasons specifically relied upon as justifying

i
expulsion. Mdreover, in that case the student had repeatedly acted to obstruct the Tribunal's

l

proceedings, i~cluding by insisting on a long adjournment on the basis that she was out of the
I

1

country when ~he was not, and then by falsely and repeatedly representing that the Skype

- 20connection thrdugh which she was participating in the hearing had ceased to function. We
I

I

consider that ttjese, amongst other factors, make the ~ case distinguishable.
I
i

65.

We thetefore conclude as follows:
i

(a)

the Student's completely unacceptable conduct at the hearing requires that the
penalty imposed be significantly more serious than the University was prepared to
impose had he admitted to.the offence at the decanal level; but
!

(b)

~he requirement for a rational connection between the penalty the University had
I

~nitially determined was appropriate for this offence and the penalty ultimately
j

bposed for the very same offence as influenced by the conduct at the hearing

1

~recludes a penalty of expulsion.
66.

In the r~sult, we accordingly allow the appeal to the extent that it relates to the

recommendati~n for expulsion, with the result that the following sanctions are imposed:

Ii
(a)

(b)

I

ia final grade of zero in the Course;

i

'a suspension from the University for a period of five years from the date of the
Panel's order, such suspension to be permanently recorded on the student's

i
!academic record; and

i

!

(c)

!that the case be reported to the Provost, with the Student's name withheld, for
publication of a noted decision of the Tribunal and the sanction imposed.

- 21 -

67.

We are grateful to counsel for their valuable assistance in this difficult matter.

r-

1

DISSENT
1.

I have had the opportunity to review the Reasons for Decision of the Senior Chair. For

the reasons that follow I do not agree with her conclusion or proposed disposition of the appeal.

2.

The Senior Chair asks whether the Student's refusal to acknowledge the offence and his

conduct at the hearing warrants an escalation from a zero in the Course to an expulsion. I believe
it does for the following reasons:

3.

Because of the very broad jurisdiction of the Appeals Board, it has little obligation to

show deference to the Tribunal below. Arguably, therefore, it has even less obligation to show
deference to decisions made at a decanal level. Relying so heavily on a decision made at the
decanal level could set an unfortunate precedent whereby overly lenient, or overly harsh,
penalties made at the decanal level could unduly influence the decision-making at both the level
of the Tribunal and the Appeals Board.

4.

fn

Z..-,the relationship between the Appeals Board and the Tribunal is further

clarified in the following paragraph: "The Appeals Board has :frequently described its function as
including a supervisory role over the Trial Division, designed to ensure principled and consistent .
decision-making, that like cases will result in like penalties and there will be transparency and

unifom1ity in the application of sentencing principles to the particular facts of any given case."
The key point of responsibility in this regard for the Appeals Board, therefore, is consistency in
sanction with previous cases. The Appeals Board, given its broad oversight and access to

1

[n the matter ofthe University o/Toronto and

C:\Users\smcintos\Desktop\Dissent.docx

4 ~ Case#606, February 4, 20 12

-2-

info1mation regarding previous sanctions has the wide-ranging perspective, not readily available
at the decanal level, to ensure this kind of consistency. Therefore, little weight should be given

to decanal decisions.

5.

Mr. ~

s case has similarities with ~ i n which Mr. ~ falsified an

academic record, lied about petitioning to have papers remarked, did not come to the hearing and
tried to implicate an innocent person. The letter to Mr. ~ stated, "By trying to implicate this
innocent person you could have destroyed her career. Trus makes your offence particularly
egregious and is an indication of your character." The Panel recommended expulsion. Mr.
~ implicated several innocent people, including Professor Aitchison, Mr. Wong, Mr.

Munir, and the University itself, demonstrating his lack of honesty, extreme self-interest, and
lack of remorse.

6.

The Senior Chair has argued that the -

case is distinguishable because the

University had not "already determined that a sanction less than expulsion would appropriately
address the seriousness of the offence." Again, this factor should hold little weight and only
arose in Mr. ~

7.

s case because Mr. ~ first admitted to the offence and later recanted.

In addition, the Senior Chair also argued that ~

was distinguishable because "in that

case the student had repeatedly acted to obstruct and delay the Tribunal's proceedings." While it
is true, that Mr. ~ did not obstruct or delay the proceedings, his behaviour, like ~

s,

demonstrated a lack of regard for the university's processes and a lack of credibility. Mr. ~

3,.
2

In the matter ofthe University ofToronto and- ~, Case#768, May 20, 2005

C:\Users\smcintos\Desktop\Dissentdocx

-3in his .initial meeting with Professor Aitchison and Professor Carter, the Dean's Designate,
admitted to the offense simply ' to get hover with" and "out of the way". During the Tribunal
Mr. ~ demonstrated a complete lack of credibility. He was dishonest throughout and
denied the offense under oath. The transcripts indicate that he needed to be redirected :frequently,
perhaps as result of his inexperience in such matters, or perhaps as a result of his lack of regard
for the proceedings.

8.

Strictly speaking the credibility of the evidence presented by Mr. ~

is not at issue,

because all members of the Tribunal and the Appeals Board believe it to be false. Nevertheless,
because the Tribunal had the oppo1iunity to witness Mr. ~

s behaviour first hand during

the Trial, their judgment of his character and credibility is most reliable. In ~

' the

relationship between the Tribunal and the Appeals Board in this regard is described well in the
following: ''the Appeals Board, notwithstanding its broad jurisdiction, does give deference to a

tJ.ial panel over credibility issues, where these arise in a trial setting and where the trial panel of
course has the opportunity to observe the witnesses giving evidence and draw conclusions from
this first hand exposure to the demeanour and quality of evidence of a witness or witnesses."
The Tribunal witnessed Mr. ~

s behaviour firsthand during the February and May hearings

of2013 and rightly concluded that "he was dishonest and would be dishonest to obtain an
advantage for himself, that he was not afraid to point fingers and implicate others, and that he
made serious, unfounded allegations again the University in closing submissions."

C:\Userslsmcintos\Desktop\Disscntdocx

-49.

With respect to the remaining ~

factors, th.e nature of the offense was also serious

given that "it was planned and deliberate.'' Since this was his second offence, with the first
offence consisting of three concurrent offences, the likelihood of repetition is high. He showed
no remorse and there were no extenuating circumstances provided that would warrant a more
lenient sanction.

10.

For these reasons I would dismiss the appeal.

Elizabeth Peter, Faculty Panel Member

C:\Users\smcintos\De.~ktop\Dissentdocx

