Report 365

DATE:

   January 31, 2013

PARTIES:

   Mr. C.B. (the Student) v. UTM

Hearing Date(s):

   November 19, 2012

Committee Members:

   Mr. Tad Brown, Chair
   Professor Steven Thorpe
   Mr. Andrew Girgis

Secretary:

   Ms. Natalie Ramtahal, Coordinator, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty
   Grievances

Appearances:

For the Student Appellant:

   Mr. C.B., the Appellant (âthe Studentâ)

For UTM:

   Professor Kelly Hannah-Moffat, Vice Dean, Undergraduate Programs,
   Teaching and Learning, UTM
   Ms. Michelle Daley, Assistant Registrar, UTM

   Request for late withdrawal without academic penalty for two courses.
   The Student appealed on medical and compassionate grounds. The Student
   first enrolled at UTSG on a letter of permission, where he was
   registered with the Accessibility Services office and provided with
   accommodations to compensate for disabilities relating to a serious
   head injury. The Student then enrolled as a visiting student at UTM,
   where he enrolled in the Courses at issue. The Student also experienced
   a number of family challenges at the relevant time. The previous
   decisions of UTMâs Committee on Standing and Academic Appeals Board
   denied the Studentâs appeal, noting that the Student decided to
   withdraw from one course before the drop date and to remain in the two
   courses that were the subject of the appeal. The Student provided
   additional evidence to the Committee in relation to the worsening
   impact of his brain injury on his studies during the relevant period.
   The Committee also took into consideration evidence that the full
   background information and documentation of the Studentâs
   accommodations needs with Accessibilities Services at UTSG was not
   properly forwarded to UTMâs AccessAbility Resource Centre, and the
   Student was not appropriately accommodated. The Committee also
   considered evidence that the options presented to the Student in
   relation to his academic and financial options were limited, leading
   the Student to feel that he had little choice but to continue with the
   Courses despite his recognition of family and medical difficulties. The
   Committee emphasized that the remedy of late withdrawal without
   academic penalty is an extraordinary remedy, reserved for rare
   situations where unexpected and unforeseeable circumstances occur after
   the drop date, where already existing circumstances become
   unpredictably worse, or where already existing circumstances do not
   reasonably resolve. The Committee concluded that the cumulative impact
   of the Studentâs unpredictably worsening disability and unpredictably
   increased volume of family responsibilities, the incomplete
   communication between the Universityâs accessibility centres, and the
   incomplete list of financial and academic options presented to the
   Student warranted granting the extraordinary remedy. Appeal allowed.
   [1]View Report

References

   1. file:///media/12675
