THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
THE GOVERNING COUNCIL

Report #3 65 of the Academic Appeals Committee
January 31, 2013

To the Academic Board
University of Toronto
Your Committee reports that it held a hearing on November 19, 2012 at 8:45 a.m. at
which the following members were present:
Mr. Tad Brown, Chair
Professor Steven Thorpe, Faculty Member of the Academic Board, Governing
Council
Mr. Andrew Girgis, Student Member of Academic Board, Governing Council
Secretary: Ms. Natalie Ramtahal, Coordinator, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty
Grievances
Appearances:
The Student Appellant

Mr. ~ ~'the Student Appellant
For the University of Toronto Mississauga (UTM):

Prof. Kelly Hannah-Moffat, Vice Dean, Undergraduate Programs, Teaching and
Learning, UTM
Ms. Michelle Daley, Assistant Registrar, UTM

I. Appeal

The Student is appealing a decision of the Academic Appeals Board ofUTM (the
"AAB") dated July 4, 20 12. The decision of the AAB dismissed an appeal by the
student for late withdrawal without academic penalty for two courses taken in the
2009/2010 Fall/Winter Session at UTM, namely ANT241 YSY (Aboriginal Peoples of
North America) and PHL105Y5Y (Introduction to Philosophy) (collectively the
"Courses"). The Student is appealing on medical and compassionate grounds. The

Student is seeking a remedy that would allow him to be granted late withdrawal without
academic penalty from the Courses.

II. Facts
The Student is pursuing a Bachelor of Education at Brock University and was taking
courses at the University of Toronto on a letter of permission. The Student first enrolled
at the University of Toronto as a non-degree student at Woodsworth College for the 2008
Summer Session and completed 1.5 credits by the end of that session. In April 2009 the
Student was involved in a serious automobile accident in which he sustained a head
injury. The Student provided medical documentation confirming the diagnosis of
acquired brain injury and was registered with the Accessibility Services office on St.
George. The Student was provided with accommodations to compensate for the impact
of his disability upon his academic performance including: (i) extra time on all
tests/exams/quizzes, (ii) 10 minute breaks per hour during tests/exams/quizzes, (iii) use
of Test Centre, and (iv) peer note-taker. The Student's next term of enrollment was as a
non-degree student at Woodsworth College for the 2009 Summer Session and he
completed 1.5 credits by the end of that session.
The Student was then enrolled as a non-degree visiting student at UTM for the 2009-2010
Fall/Winter Session. The Student registered for ANT241 Y5Y (Aboriginal Peoples of
North America) and PHL105Y5Y (Introduction to Philosophy) as well as LIN200H5
(Introduction to Language). The Student withdrew from LIN200H5 (Introduction to
Language) before the required deadline.
In addition to his disability, the Student also experienced a number of family challenges
during the 2009-2010 Fall/Winter Session. The Student was a single parent responsible
for 5 children and took on primary responsibility as Power of Attorney for his terminally
ill brother who subsequently passed away.

III. Previous Decision
In August 2011, the Student petitioned to UTM's Committee on Standing for late
withdrawal without academic penalty from the Courses. This petition was denied by
UTM's Committee on Standing on September 6, 2011. The Student appealed this
decision to UTM's Academic Appeals Board on May 24, 2012. The decision ofUTM's
Academic Appeals Board to deny the appeal and uphold the decision ofUTM's
Committee on Standing was delivered on July 4, 2012. In the decision ofUTM's
Academic Appeals Board, the following comments were included:
1. On the basis of your presentation at the meeting and your overall academic
record, the members of the Board decided that you did not have a compelling case
for an exemption from the University regulations that apply to all students.
2. While the Board recognized that you had compelling medical and personal
circumstances, it was noted that during this same time period, you made the

decision to withdraw from LIN200H5 (Introduction to Language), while choosing
to remain in the two courses that are the subject of your appeal.

IV. Decision
The Student provided additional evidence to your Committee which was not presented to
UTM's Academic Appeals Board. In particular, the Student provided additional
information on the impact of his acquired brain injury on his studies during this period.
The Student testified that the disability affected his decision making abilities,
concentration, and his ability to attend classes due to physical limitations. The Student
also testified that his conditions worsened over the course of the term. In the course of
the hearing, it became apparent that the level of transparency and completeness of
disclosure of information between the St. George campus and the Mississauga campus
with respect to the extent of the Student's disability was lacking. The Student was
assessed and provided his medical documentation to the Accessibility Services office on
the St. George campus as that was his initial campus of registration. When the Student
transferred to the Mississauga campus, the disability accommodation plan was forwarded
to the AccessAbility Resource Centre at UTM. However, the full background
information and documentation was not provided to UTM. As a result, all of the
necessary information required for a full and informed decision on how best to
accommodate the Student's situation was not available.
The only medical evidence that was presented before the UTM' s Academic Appeals
Board was a doctor's note confirming that the Student had sought medical attention in
late March 2010 for severe symptoms pertaining to his neck, right shoulder and back.
The Student had assumed that medical documentation provided to the University related
to his acquired brain injury would be shared between offices. The Student had visited his
doctor several times over the course of the2009-2010 Fall/Winter Session in dealing with
the effects of his recent disability including fear of driving and falling in the winter
conditions which made it difficult for him to attend classes. At the end of the term, the
Student did seek counseling from UTM on July 7, 2010 and the notes from the counselor
indicated that the Student was "completely overwhelmed" which is consistent with and
supportive of the Students claims on the effect of his disability and family circumstances
on his academic performance during that period.
In addition, the Student gave evidence that he knew that he was experiencing real
difficulties in managing his courses due to his disability and family issues. He had
sought academic counseling at the time that he withdrew from the third course
LIN200H5 (Introduction to Language). The advice that he was given was that although
he could withdraw from the Courses, it was not possible for him to recover any of his
tuition fees. In the hearing, it became clear that there was a lack of coordination between
academic and financial decision making functions of the registrar's office and, as a result,
the options presented to the Student were limited. As a result, the Student felt that, due to
his strained financial circumstances, he had little choice but to continue with the Courses
despite his recognition of his family and medical difficulties.

Your Committee has on a number of occasions dealt with petitions for late withdrawal
from a course without academic penalty and has consistently stressed that this remedy
will not be lightly granted. The remedy of late withdrawal without academic penalty is
an extraordinary remedy, reserved for unusual and unique situations. The idea of "drop
dates" indicates that the University expects that a student will make a decision whether to
continue in a course by a set date in the term. But by the drop date, a student is expected
to have assessed his or her situation and made a decision. Once the drop date passes, the
implication is that the student has decided to continue on in the course. Exceptions to
this policy are rare, but could include situations where unexpected and unforeseeable
circumstances occur after the drop date, where already existing circumstances become
unpredictably worse, or where already existing circumstances do not reasonably resolve.
The Student was an extremely credible and forthright witness. Your Committee accepts
the testimony and evidence presented by the Student on the effect of his medical and
family conditions upon his academic performance in the Courses. There was no dispute
from UTM on the evidence presented by the Student. Moreover, UTM acknowledged
that there was additional information presented at this hearing which was not available to
the earlier decision making bodies ofUTM's Committee on Standing and UTM's
Academic Appeals Board which may have had an impact on those decisions. There was
evidence to support the impact that the Student's medical and family circumstances had
on his academic performance that would justify allowing this extraordinary remedy in
accordance with the parameters set out above. In particulm:, the conditions related to the
Student's recently acquired disability continued to worsen unpredictably as did the
volume of his family responsibilities. In addition, through no fault of the Student, the full
history and background on the Student's disability was not made available to the
AccessAbility Resource Centre at UTM which would have permitted a more fulsome
accommodation of his situation. Lastly, when the Student did seek academic counseling,
it appears that he was not presented with a complete list of his academic and financial
options given the circumstances. While each of these factors taken individually may not
give rise to the level required for granting of the requested remedy, when taken
cumulatively it is the view of your Committee that the threshold has been met.
Therefore your Committee has unanimously determined that this case is one which
justifies the extraordinary remedy of granting late withdrawal from the Courses without
academic penalty.
The appeal is granted.

