Case 841 - Appeal

   [1]Case 841

DATE:

   October 31, 2017

PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v. L.S. (âthe Studentâ)

Hearing Date(s):

   October 16, 2017

Panel Members:

   Mr. Ronald G. Slaght, Chair
   Professor Elizabeth Peter, Faculty Panel Member
   Mr. Sean McGowan, Student Panel Member
   Ms. Alena Zelinka, Student Panel Member

Appearances:

   Ms. Tina Lie, Counsel for the Appellant, the University of Toronto
   Mr. Robert Sniderman, Counsel for the Respondent, the Student

In Attendance:

   The Student
   Ms. Lucy Gaspini, Manager, Academic Success & Integrity, Office of the
   Dean, UTM
   Ms. Alexandra Di Blasio, Academic Integrity Assistant, UTM
   DAB Decision.
   NOTE: See the [2]Tribunal decision for detailed facts.
   Appeal by the Provost from a Tribunal decision in which the majority of
   the Tribunal acquitted the Student of charges of plagiarism contrary to
   s. B.i.1(b), s. B.i.1(d) and s. B.i.3(b) of the Code . The Provost
   asked the Appeals Board to set the decision aside because the Tribunal
   erred by considering the evidence in a piecemeal fashion and not as a
   whole, that there were fundamental mischaracterizations of the
   evidence, and that the Tribunal had held the Provost to a higher
   standard of proof.
   The Board began by noting that it had very broad powers to review
   errors of law and significant errors of fact and that it need not show
   deference to the Tribunalâs decisions. However, over the years, the
   Board has recognized that deference is owed on findings of credibility
   as well, that the Board should not substitute the decision it would
   have made on the evidence, for that of the panel below.
   The Board found that there were no significant errors in fact finding
   or in law in the manner in which the Tribunal approached the assessment
   of the evidence. The Tribunalâs approach in analyzing the evidence
   mirrored the way the evidence and argument were presented by the
   Provost during the hearing. The Board further noted that it was
   unlikely that approaching the evidence as a whole, as opposed to
   analyzing individual similarities between the two essays, would have
   caused the Tribunal to reach a different result on whether or not the
   Student committed the offence of plagiarism.
   The Board further found that the Tribunalâs reference to the Provostâs
   reliance on circumstantial evidence was not a reflection of applying a
   different standard of proof to the Provostâs case, rather that it was
   common practice to describe the nature of the evidence at some point in
   the course ofÂ  giving reasons as circumstantial in order to serves as
   a reminder that the burden of proof rests on the Provost in these cases
   and that the standard is to meet a reasonable level of clear cogent
   evidence. In this case there was no direct evidence (i.e. the texts
   that were under consideration, testimony from other students involved
   in the peer review process), so a decision would have to result from
   inferences from the evidence.
   The Provostâs final ground of appeal involved the Tribunalâs assessment
   of the credibility of one of the witnesses, an argument that the Board
   rejected because they were in no position to substitute their own views
   for the Tribunalâs with regards to assessing credibility or the
   relative weight to be given to the evidence of witnesses. It was open
   to the Tribunal to assess that witnessâs evidence in the overall
   context of the case, which it did in the present case.
   Appeal dismissed.
   [3]View Case

References

   1. https://live-the-office-of-the-governing-council.pantheonsite.io/media/12932
   2. file:///Assets/ADFG+Digital+Assets/Case+$!23841.pdf
   3. file:///media/13043
