Case 1212

   DATE: November 3, 2021
   PARTIES: University of Toronto v. I.S. ("the Student")

   HEARING DATE: September 2, 2021, via Zoom

   Panel Members:
   Ms. Cynthia Kuehl, Chair
   Professor Ken Derry, Faculty Panel Member
   Ms. Alena Zelinka, Student Panel Member

   Appearances:
   Mr. Robert Centa, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland
   Rosenberg Rothstein LLP
   Ms. Janette Clough-Jones, Counsel for the Student, Coghiels &
   Associates
   The Student

   Hearing Secretary:
   Ms. Nadia Bruno, Special Projects Officer, Office of Appeals,
   Discipline and Faculty Grievances

   Theâ¯Studentâ¯was chargedÂ under s. B.i.1(d) of theÂ Code
   ofÂ BehaviourÂ and Academic Matters, 1995Â (the âCodeâ)Â on the basis
   thatÂ sheÂ knowingly represented as her own an idea or an expression of
   an idea and/or the work of another in a final paper.Â In the
   alternative, theâ¯Studentâ¯was charged under s.â¯B.i.3(b) of
   theâ¯Codeâ¯on the basis that theâ¯Studentâ¯knowingly engaged in a form
   of cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct,Â fraudÂ or
   misrepresentationâ¯in order toâ¯obtain academic credit or other
   academic advantageÂ inÂ connection with a final paper.

   The Student attended the hearing and was represented by counsel. The
   Student and the University submitted an Agreed Statement of Fact
   (âASFâ).Â The Panel noted that the ASF outlined that the
   StudentÂ acknowledgedÂ that she had knowingly represented the ideas of
   another person,Â the expression of the ideas of another person and the
   work of another person as her own, thereby knowingly committing
   plagiarism contrary to section B.i.1(d) of the Code in respect of the
   final paper she submittedÂ for academic credit.Â The ASF further
   outlinedÂ that upon review of the paper, the Professor who taught the
   course for which the final paper was submittedÂ noticed that
   almostÂ all ofÂ the paperÂ was taken verbatim or nearly verbatim from
   an outside source.Â The Student did not cite this source.Â The Panel
   notedÂ thatÂ the Student met with the Deanâs DesignateÂ andÂ admitted
   she knowingly plagiarized the final paper.Â In light ofÂ the ASF and
   submissions of counsel, the Panel found that the StudentÂ represented
   as her own an idea and/or work of another in the final paper, contrary
   toÂ s. B.i.1(d) of the Code.Â Based on the Panelâs finding, the
   University withdrew the alternative charge.

   In determining sanction,â¯theâ¯PanelÂ consideredÂ an Agreed Statement
   of Facts on Penalty and a Joint Submission on Penalty (âJSPâ).Â The
   Agreed Statement of Facts on Penalty outlined that the Student
   hadÂ been sanctioned on four previous occasions for academic
   offences.Â The Panel noted that in each of these cases the Student
   received a sanction at the Department or Deanâs Designate level, and
   accordingly there was no referral to the Tribunal.Â The Panel heard
   submissions regarding the appropriateness of the penalty and reviewed
   the relevant decisions of the Tribunal submitted by the parties.Â The
   Panel noted that it ought not to impose a different penalty than agreed
   to by the parties unless to do so would bring the
   administrationÂ ofÂ the TribunalÂ into disrepute or be contrary to the
   public interest.Â In drawing this conclusion, the Panel referenced the
   Discipline Appeals Boardâs decision inÂ University of Toronto and
   M.A.Â (Case No. 837, dated December 22, 2016).Â Furthermore, the Panel
   carefully considered the factors set out in theÂ University of Toronto
   and Mr. C.Â (Case No. 1976/77-3, November 5, 1976)Â (âMr. C.
   factorsâ).Â Â The multiple instances of plagiarism were of concern to
   theÂ Panel. BothÂ counselÂ noted that the Student had demonstrated
   insight and remorse since the beginning of this process.Â The
   PanelÂ noted that this remorse and the prospect of rehabilitation
   mitigated against a more severe penalty.Â Regarding the likelihood of
   the repetition of the offence, the Panel noted that theÂ Student had
   four priorÂ academic offences.Â Although the Student showed great
   remorse,Â thereÂ remainsÂ a concern about possible repetition,
   therefore aÂ significant period of suspension was appropriate to guard
   against the likelihood of repetitionÂ The Panel also considered the
   nature of the offence.Â Plagiarism is a very significant academic
   offence and one that the PanelÂ found to beÂ very deliberateÂ in
   nature, given the extensive duplication ofÂ an outside source.Â The
   Panel further noted that the University must be able to trust that
   students complete research and work on their own or provide proper
   citations as part of the Universityâs accreditation process.Â The Panel
   considered theÂ detriment to the University and the need to deter
   others from committing similar offences.Â The integrity of the
   University, and the values of the degrees it confers, is affected when
   students engage in academic misconduct. This has potential impacts on
   the Universityâs reputation in the community and on the other students
   who graduate from it.Â There is a need for specific deterrence in this
   case given the gravity and the repeat nature of the
   offence.Â HavingÂ regard to the cases presented by counsel, the
   submissions of the parties, andÂ in light ofÂ theÂ consideration of the
   Mr. C. factors, the Panel agreed that the JSP was appropriate in the
   circumstances.Â The Panel also found that the JSPÂ would not bring the
   administration into disrepute nor be contrary to the public
   interest.Â The Panel imposed the following sanctions: final grade of
   zero in the course;Â five-year suspension;Â six-year notation on
   transcript; and a report to the Provost for publication.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/30082
