Case #578 & 583

   DATE: December 16, 2010
   PARTIES: University of Toronto v. D. W. andÂ Â  H.L.
   Hearing Date(s): November 23, 2010
   Panel Members:
   Paul Schabas, Chair
   Professor Nick Cheng, Faculty Member
   Elena Kuzmin, Student Member
   Appearances:
   Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel for the University
   Daniel Goldbloom, DLS for the Student
   In Attendance:
   Professor Eleanor Irwin, Deanâs Designate
   Trial Division â s. B.I.1.(c); s. B.I.1(a); s. B.I.1(d); s. B.I.3(b) of
   Code â impersonating another Student â male impersonating female
   studentÂ  â forged Ontario driverâs licence â falsified University of
   Toronto student card â possession of unauthorized aidsÂ  â Agreed
   Statement of Factsâ guilty pleaÂ  - acceptance of guilt by Panel â
   Joint Submission on PenaltyÂ  â no mitigating factors â premeditation â
   likelihood to reoffend â high degree of planningÂ  â Joint Submission
   on Penalty Accepted â grade assignment of zero for courses; five-year
   suspension; recommendation to the President that the Student(s) be
   expelled; and report to Provost
   D.W. initially charged with five offences under s. B.I.1.(c), s.
   B.I.1(a), and s. B.I.3(b) of the Code. D.W. further charged with nine
   additional offences under s. B.I.1(c), s. B.I.1(b), s. B.I.1(d), and s.
   B.I.3(b) of the Code. H.L. initially charged with three offences under
   s. B.I.1(c), s. B.I.3(a), and s. B.I.3(b) and further charged with
   thirteen offences under s. B.I.1(c), s. B.I.1(b), s. B.I.1(d), and s.
   B.I.3(b) of the Code. The charges relate to the allegations that D.W.
   attended a final examination misrepresenting himself as H.L., obtained
   a University of Toronto student identification under H.L.âs name using
   a forged Ontario driverâs license. Further charges include allegations
   that D.W. and H.L. impersonated each other on two other occasions, that
   the students used unauthorized aids in the form of external sources and
   prewritten answers, and that the students had identical answers in
   previous exams in other courses. The matter proceeded on an Agreed
   Statement of Facts. D.W. pled guilty to ten of the charges. H.L. pled
   guilty to ten of the charges. The guilty plea was accepted by the Panel
   and convictions of guilt registered. The University withdrew the
   remaining charges. A Joint Submission on Penalty was presented for each
   accused. The Panel heard the severity of the academic misconduct,
   noting that the case affected seven courses for H.L. and three courses
   for D.W. The misconduct required a high degree of planning, involving
   forging student identification and a Government of Ontario driverâs
   license. Discipline Counsel noted that the students cheated extensively
   even after they were caught demonstrating a likelihood of repetition.
   No extenuating circumstances were put forward. The Panel noted a
   pattern of complete disregard for academic honesty and deliberate
   disregard based on careful planning and premeditation. The Joint
   Submission on Penalty was accepted. The Panel imposed a final grade of
   zero in seven courses, a five-year suspension, a recommendation of
   expulsion to the President of the University, and that a report to the
   Provost be issued for H.L. The Panel imposed a final grade of zero in
   three courses, a five-year suspension, a recommendation of expulsion to
   the President of the University, and that a report to the Provost be
   issued for D.W.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12765
