Case #998

   DATE: January 22, 2019
   PARTIES: University of Toronto v. A.N.
   Hearing Date:Â  Â December 12, 2018
   Panel Members:
   Mr. Bernard Fishbein, Chair
   Prof. Margaret MacNeill, Faculty Member
   Ms. Julie Farmer, Student Member
   Appearances:
   Ms. Tina Lie, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg
   Rothstein LLP
   Mr. Abu Sadat Mohammad Nurunnabi, the Student
   Mr. Hatim Kheir, Representative for the Student, Downtown legal
   Services
   In Attendance:
   Ms. Krista Osbourne, Administrative Clerk & Hearing Secretary, Appeals,
   Discipline and Faculty Grievances
   Trial Division â s. B.I.1(d) of Code â plagiarism â Student submitted a
   final paper in each of two courses containing the work of others
   represented as his own â Agreed Statement of Facts â guilty plea â
   Joint Submission on Penalty accepted â prior academic offence - grade
   assignment of zero for both courses; temporary suspension; temporary
   notation on academic record; publication of notice of decision and
   sanction, with Studentâs name withheld.
   The University Tribunal convened on December 12, 2018 to hear charges
   of academic misconduct laid by the Provost against the Student under
   the Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters , 1995 (the â Code â). The
   Student was charged with two offences under s. B.I.1(d) of the Code for
   knowingly representing the work of another as his own in two final
   papers submitted in two bioethics courses, respectively. The Student
   was charged in the alternative with two academic offences under s.
   B.I.1(b) of the Code (unauthorized assistance) and, in the further
   alternative, with two academic offences under s. B.I.3(b) of the Code
   (cheating for academic advantage). The Student attended the hearing
   with a legal representative.
   The Student pleaded guilty to the charges and the parties submitted an
   Agreed Statement of Facts (âASFâ) to the Panel.Â  In view of the ASF
   and the Studentâs admissions, the Panel found the Student had violated
   s. B.I.1(d) of the Code with respect to both courses.Â  The University
   withdrew the alternative charges.
   The parties also submitted a Joint Statement on Penalty (âJSPâ) setting
   out the particulars of one prior academic offence of plagiarism. The
   Panel accepted the JSP, noting that it struck an appropriate balance
   between the seriousness of the offence, and the prior misconduct of the
   Student (albeit not as serious as the latest charges) and the fact that
   the Student now appeared to recognize this and be remorseful by both
   agreeing to the facts of the misconduct and the degree of penalty to be
   imposed.Â  The Panel imposed the following sanctions: a final grade
   assignment of zero for both courses; a suspension from the University
   until August 31, 2021; a notation of the sanction on the Studentâs
   academic record and transcript until one year after the Studentâs
   graduation, withdrawal or program termination; and publication by the
   Provost of a notice of the decision and sanction imposed, with the name
   of the Student withheld.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/13050
