Case No.: 998
THE UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO

IN THE MATTER OF charges of academic dishonesty made on August 29, 2018
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic
Affairs, 1995 (the "Code")
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Act, 1971, S.O. 1971, c. 56 as
amended S.O. 1978, c.88

BETWEEN:
UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO

-and-

Date of Hearing:

December 12, 2018

Members of the Panel:

Mr. Bernard Fishbein, Chair
Professor Margaret MacNeill, Faculty Panel Member
Ms. Julie Farmer, Student Panel Member
Appearances:
Ms. Tina Lie, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland, Barristers
Mr. Hatim Kheir, Law-Student, Legal Representative for the Student, Downtown Legal
ServicesMr. N_
, the Student
In Attendance:
Professor Charmaine Williams, Acting Vice-Dean School of Graduate Studies,
University of Toronto
Hearing Secretary:
Krista Osbourne, Administrative Clerk & Hearing Secretary, Appeals, Discipline and
Faculty Grievances, University of Toronto

-2-

1.

This panel of the University Tribunal ("the Tribunal") convened on December

12, 2018 to deal with this charges against -

N-

("the

Student") under the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic Affairs,
11
):

1995 (the "Code

1. On or about April 20, 2018, you knowingly represented as your
own an idea or expression of an idea or work of another in an
assignment you submitted in CHL3003Y, contrary to section
B.l.1(d) of the Code.
2. In the alternative, on or about April 20, 2018, you knowingly
obtained unauthorized assistance in connection with an
assignment that you submitted in CHL3003Y, contrary to
section B.I.1(b) of the Code.
3. In the further alternative, on or about April 20, 2018, you
knowingly engaged in a form of cheating, academic dishonesty
or misconduct, fraud or misrepresentation not otherwise
described in the Code in order to obtain academic credit or other
academic advantage of any kind in connection with an
assignment you submitted in CHL3003Y, contrary to section
B.l.3(b) of the Code.
4. On or about April 26, 2018, you knowingly represented as your
own an idea or expression of an idea or work of another in a
paper you submitted in CHL3001 Y, contrary to section B.1.1 (d)
of the Code.
5. In the alternative, on or about April 26, 2018, you knowing ly
obtained unauthorized assistance in connection with a paper
that you submitted in CHL3001Y, contrary to section B.l.1(b) of
the Code.
6. In the further alternative, on or about April 26, 2018, you
knowingly engaged in a form of cheating , academic dishonesty
or misconduct, fraud or misrepresentation not otherwise
described in the Code in order to obtain academic credit or other
academic advantage of any kind in connection with a paper you
submitted in CHL3001Y, contrary to section B.l.3(b) of the
Code.

-3-

Particulars of the offences charged are as follows:

1. At all material times you were a student enrolled at the
University of Toronto School of Graduate Studies in the Master
of Health Science program.
CHL3003

2. In Fall 201 7 and Winter 2018, you enrolled in CHL3003Y
(Empirical Approaches in Bioethics) ("CHL3003") which was
taught by Dr. Daniel Buchman and Dr. Nancy Ondrusek.
3. On or about April 20, 2018, you submitted your final assignment
in CHL3003, entitled "Empirical Study Design", which was worth
50% of your final grade (the "CHL3003 Assignment").
4. You submitted the CHL3003 Assignment:
(a) to obtain academic credit;
(b) knowing that it contained ideas, expressions of ideas or
work which were not your own, but were the ideas,
expressions of ideas or work of others, including the authors
of:
(i) "Moral distress in critical care nurses: a phenomenological
study", by Kwisoon Choe, Youngmi Kang and Youngrye
Park, published in Journal of Advanced Nursing 71 (7),
1684-1693; and
(ii) "Nursing profession in Iran: An overview of opportunities
and challenges", by Zahra Farsi, Nahid Dehghan-Nayeri,
Reza Negarandeh and Soheila Broomand, published in
Japan Journal of Nursing Science (2010) 7, 9-18;
(collectively, the "CHL3003 Sources"); and
(c) knowing that you did not properly reference the ideas,
expressions of ideas or work that you drew from the
CHL3003 Sources.
5. You knowingly obtained unauthorized assistance from the
CHL3003 Sources.
6. You knowingly submitted the CHL3003 Assignment with the
intention that the University of Toronto rely on it as containing
your own ideas or work in considering the appropriate academic
credit to be assigned to your work.

-4-

CHL3001

7. In Winter 2018, you enrolled in CHL3001Y (Core Topics in
Bioethics) ("CHL3001 ") which was taught by Dr. Eoin Connolly
and Dr. Rosalind Abdool.
8. On or about April 26, 2018, you submitted your final paper in
CHL3001, entitled "Should surrogates be allowed to be paid for
carrying a fetus?", which was worth 50% of your final grade in
CHL3001 (the "CHL3001 Paper").
9. You submitted the CHL3001 Paper:
(a) to obtain academic credit;
(b) knowing that it contained ideas, expressions of ideas or
work which were not your own, but were the ideas,
expressions of ideas or work of others, including the authors
of:
(i) "Reasonable Regulation of Surrogate Motherhood", by
Bonnie
Steinbock
(on line
at
https://www.thehastingscenter.org/reasonable-regulationof-s urrog ate-motherhood/);
(ii) "A new model for professionalised surrogacy proposed",
by Thomas Manch (online at https://www.stuff.co.nz/lifestyle/parenting/baby/96272303/a-new-model-forprofessionalised-surrogacy-proposed);
(iii) "Childless couples win the right to pay surrogate mothers",
by Martin Beckford and Tim Ross (online at https://
www.telegraph.co.uk/news/health/children/8190131/Child
less-couples-win-the-right-to-pay-surrogate-mothers. htm I
); and
(iv) "The ethics of surrogacy: women's reproductive labour",
by Anton van Niekerk and Liezl van Zyl, published in
Journal of medical ethics, 1995; 21 : 345-349
(collectively, the "CHL3001 Sources"); and
(c) knowing that you did not properly reference the ideas,
expressions of ideas or work that you drew from the
CHL3001 Sources.
10.You knowingly obtained unauthorized assistance from the
CHL3001 Sources.

-5-

11 .You knowingly submitted the CHL3001 Paper with the intention
that the University of Toronto rely on it as containing your own
ideas or work in considering the appropriate academic credit to
be assigned to your work.

2.

Prior to the Tribunal convening , the parties had entered into an Agreed

Statement of Facts as follows:

1. This matter arises out of charges of academic misconduct filed
on August 29, 2018 (the "Charges") by the Provost of the
University of Toronto (the "Provost") under the Code of
Behaviour on Academic Matters ("Code"). The Provost and,.
~ (the "Student") have prepared
th is Agreed Statement of Facts ("ASF") and a Joint Book of
Documents ("JBD"). The Provost and the Student agree that:
(a) each document contained in the JBD may be admitted into
evidence for all purposes, including for the truth of the
document's contents , without further need to prove the
document; and
(b) if a document indicates that it was sent or received by
someone, that is prima facie proof that the document was
sent and received as indicated.
A. Charges

2. The Student admits that he received a copy of the Charges,
which are included in the JBD at Tab 1.
3. The Student admits that he received a copy of the Notice of
Hearing and that he has received reasonable notice of the
hearing on December 12, 2018 at 9:00 am. A copy of the Notice
of Hearing is included in the JBD at Tab 2.
4. The Student waives the reading of the Charges filed against him
and pleads guilty to all charges .
5. The Provost agrees that if the Tribunal convicts the Student on
charges #1 and #4 of the Charges, the Provost will withdraw
charges #2, #3, #5 and #6 of the Charges.
6. At all material times, the Student was a registered student at the
University of Toronto School of Graduate Studies ("SGS") in the

-6-

Master of Health Science program. A copy of the Student's
current academic record is included in the JBD at Tab 3.

B. CHL3003Y
7. In Fall 2017, the Student enrolled in CHL3003Y (Empirical
Approaches in Bioethics) ("CHL3003"), which was taught by Dr.
Daniel Z. Buchman and Dr. Nancy Ondrusek. A copy of the
course syllabus for CHL3003 is included in the JBD at Tab 4.
8. The Student was aware of the University's expectations
respecting academic integrity, and in particular, the need to
avoid plagiarism and to reference appropriately any sources
used in the assignments that he submitted in CHL3003
(including through the use of quotations and in-text citations).
9. Students in CHL3003 were required to submit an empirical
study design assignment, worth 50% of their final grades, by
April 13, 2018.
1a.The Student sought and obtained an extension for the
submission of his empirical study design assignment.
11.On April 20, 2018, the Student submitted his empirical study
design assignment, entitled "Moral distress among critical care
nurses of Bangladesh: a pilot study" (the "CHL3003
Assignment"). A copy of the CHL3003 Assignment, with
highlighting and annotations, is included in the JBD at Tab 5.
12.Upon review, Dr. Buchman and Dr. Ondrusek determined that
there were passages in the CHL3003 Assignment that were
taken verbatim or nearly verbatim from two sources without
appropriate attribution:
(a) "Moral distress in critical care nurses: a phenomenological
study" by K. Choe, Y. Kang and Y. Park (the "Choe Paper"),
a highlighted and annotated copy of which is included in the
JBD at Tab SA; and
(b) "Nursing profession in Iran: An overview of opportunities
and challenges" by Z. Farsi, N. Dehghan-Nayeri, R.
Negarandeh and S. Broomand (the "Farsi Paper''), a
highlighted and annotated copy of which is included in the
JBD at Tab 58
(collectively, the "CHL3003 Sources").
13.The Farsi Paper was cited in the list of references in the
CHL3003 Assignment but was not referenced appropriately in

-7-

the text of the assignment (including through the use of
quotations and in-text citations). The Choe Paper was not cited
in the CHL3003 Assignment at all.
14.The highlighting and annotations in the CHL3003 Assignment
at Tab 5 of the JBD indicate the text that was taken verbatim or
nearly verbatim from the CHL3003 Sources at Tabs 5A and 58
of the JBD. The highlighting in the CHL3003 Assignment at Tab
5 of the JBD corresponds to the highlighting in the CHL3003
Sources at Tabs 5A and 58 of the JBD.
15.On May 15, 2018, the Student met with Dr. Buchman and Dr.
Ondrusek to discuss the alleged academic misconduct in the
CHL3003 Assignment.
C. CHL3001Y

16.ln Fall 2017, the Student also enrolled in CHL3001Y (Core
Topics in Bioethics) ("CHL3001"), which was taught by Dr. Eoin
Connolly and Dr. Rosalind Abdool. A copy of the course
syllabus for CHL3001 is included in the JBD at Tab 6.
17 .The Student was aware of the University's expectations
respecting academic integrity, and in particular, the need to
avoid plagiarism and to reference appropriately any sources
used in the assignments that he submitted in CHL3001
(including through the use of quotations and in-text citations).
18.ln addition, the course syllabus for CHL3001 provided as
follows with respect to plagiarism (on page 17):
Reminder about plagiarism:

Plagiarism is a serious academic offence.
Please review the document "How Not to Plagiarize" that is
available at:
http://www.writing.utoronto.ca/advice/using-sources/how-notto-plagiarize
19.Students in CHL3001 were required to submit a final paper,
worth 50% of their final grades, by April 20, 2018. Copies of the
instructions and the grading rubric for the final paper, which
were provided to students, are included in the JBD at Tabs 7
and 8, respectively.
20.Students were cautioned about the importance of referencing
materials correctly in the final paper a number of times. On page
16 of the course syllabus (at Tab 6 of the JBD), students were
told to "reference material correctly" in the final paper. This

-8-

caution also appeared in the instructions for the final paper (at
Tab 7 of the JBD) and students' proficiency with referencing
sources was included as part of the grading rubric for the final
paper (at Tab 8 of the JBD). Before the deadline, students were
also reminded orally in class to cite and reference material
properly due to the importance of academic integrity.
21.The Student sought and obtained an extension for the
submission of his final paper.
22.On April 26, 2018, the Student submitted his final paper entitled
"Should surrogates be allowed to be paid for carrying a fetus?"
(the "CHL3001 Paper"). Although students were required to
submit their final papers electronically to Turnitin.com (which is
a service that compares the submitted work with works
contained in the Turnitin.com database and available online),
because the deadline to submit assignments through the
software had expired, the Student emailed a copy of the
CHL3001 Paper to Dr. Connolly and Dr. Abdool. A copy of the
CHL3001 Paper that the Student submitted, with highlighting
and notations, is included in the JBD at Tab 9.
23.Upon review, Dr. Connolly and Dr. Abdool determined that
there were passages in the CHL3001 Paper that were taken
verbatim or nearly verbatim from four sources without
attribution:
(a) "Reasonable Regulation of Surrogate Motherhood" by
Bonnie Steinbock, a highlighted and annotated copy of
which is included in the JBD at Tab 9A;
(b) "A new model for professionalised surrogacy proposed" by
Thomas Manch, a highlighted and annotated copy of which
is included in the JBD at Tab 98;
(c) "Childless couples win the right to pay surrogate mothers"
by Martin Beckford and Tim Ross, a highlighted and
annotated copy of which is included in the JBD at Tab 9C;
and
(d) "The ethics of surrogacy: women's reproductive labour" by
Anton van Niekerk and Liezl van Zyl, a highlighted and
annotated copy of which is included in the JBD at Tab 9D
(collectively, the "CHL3001 Sources").
24.The CHL3001 Sources were cited in the list of references in the
CHL3001 Paper but they were not referenced appropriately in

-9-

the text of the paper (including through the use of quotations
and in-text citations).
25.The highlighting and annotations in the CHL3001 Paper at Tab
9 of the JBD indicate the text that was taken verbatim or nearly
verbatim from the CHL3001 Sources at Tabs 9A to 9D of the
JBD. The highlighting in the CHL3001 Paper at Tab 9 of the
JBD corresponds to the highlighting in the CHL3001 Sources at
Tabs 9A to 9D of the JBD.
26.On May 15, 2018, the Student met with Dr. Connolly and Dr.
Abdool to discuss the alleged academic misconduct in the
CHL3001 Paper.
D. Dean's Meeting

27.On June 13, 2018, the Student met with Charmaine Williams,
Acting Vice-Dean, Students at SGS, together with Dr. Ondrusek
and Dr. Abdool, to discuss the allegations of academic
misconduct in CHL3003 and CHL3001. Vice-Dean Williams
gave the Student the warning that is required to be given under
the Code. During the meeting , the Student explained that he
had struggled since starting at the University because his
previous degree did not involve writing papers. While writing the
two assignments in issue, his cousin went to the hospital
suddenly and his mother was waiting to hear back about her
own medical issues (she has since been diagnosed with breast
cancer). He knew he could request additional extensions on his
assignments, but decided instead to hand in what he had written
because his mother had asked him to return home. The Student
admitted to committing plagiarism in both the CHL3003
Assignment and the CHL3001 Paper.
28.A copy of the meeting notes prepared by a note taker at SGS
who was present at the meeting is included in the JBD at Tab
10. The parties agree that the meeting notes accurately reflect
the discussions that occurred during the meeting.

E. Admissions and Acknowledgements

29.With respect to the CHL3003 Assignment, the Student admits
that he knowingly:
(a) included verbatim or nearly verbatim passages from the
CHL3003 Sources without appropriate attribution;

- IO-

(b) represented the ideas, expression of ideas or work of
another, including the authors of the CHL3003 Sources, as
his own; and
(c) committed plagiarism , contrary to section B.l.1(d) of the
Code;
30.With respect to the CHL3001 Paper, the Student admits that he
knowingly:
(a) included verbatim or nearly verbatim passages from the
CHL3001 Sources without appropriate attribution;
(b) represented the ideas, expression of ideas or work of
another, including the authors of the CHL3001 Sources, as
his own; and
(c) committed plagiarism, contrary to section B.1.1 (d) of the
Code;
31. The Student acknowledges that:
(a) the Provost has advised him of his right to obtain legal
counsel and that he has done so; and
(b) he is signing this ASF freely and voluntarily, knowing of the
potential consequences he faces.
3.

In view of the Agreed Statement of Facts and the admissions, the Tribunal

unanimously finds the Student has violated Section B.1.1 (d) of the Code, with respect
to both the courses in CHL3001Y and CHL3003Y. In accordance with its agreement,
the University then withdrew its charges with respect to other violations of the Code.

4.

The parties then presented the Tribunal with an Agreed Statement of Facts

on Penalty:

1. This matter arises out of charges of academic misconduct filed
on August 29, 2018 (the "Charges") by the Provost of the
University of Toronto (the "Provost") under the Code of
Behaviour on Academic Matters ("Code"). For the purpose of
~ p h a s e of this hearing, the Provost and , _
. . . . . ~ (the "Student") have prepared this

- 11 -

Agreed Statement of Facts on Penalty ("ASF on Penalty"). The
Provost and the Student agree that:
(a) each document attached to this ASF on Penalty may be
admitted into evidence for all purposes, including for the
truth of the document's contents, without further need to
prove the document; and
(b) if a document indicates that it was sent or received by
someone, that is prima facie proof that the document was
sent and received as indicated.
A. Prior Offence - CHL3005

2. The Student has one prior academic offence.
3. In Fall 2017, the Student enrolled in CHL3005HF ("CHL3005")
(Legal Approaches to Bioethics, September-December 2017),
which was taught by Maria McDonald. A copy of the course
syllabus for CHL3005 is attached at Tab 1.
4. On or about October 20, 2017, the Student submitted a short
paper entitled "Assignment-1 ", which was worth 25% of his final
grade (the "First Assignment"). Students were expected to
complete the short paper independently and to use appropriate
citations and references when relying on outside sources.
5. In accordance with the course policy, the Student submitted the
First Assignment to Turnitin.com, which is an online database
that compares the submitted work with the works contained in
the Turnitin.com database and online. The Turnitin.com report
for the First Assignment indicated a 34% similarity index with
sources in its database and online. A copy of the Turnitin.com
report for the First Assignment, with highlighting and
handwritten notations, is attached at Tab 2.
6. On review, Ms. McDonald determined that there were several
passages in the First Assignment that were taken verbatim or
nearly verbatim from three online sources without appropriate
attribution. Copies of these on line sources, with highlighting, are
attached at Tabs 2A, 28 and 2C. The highlighting in the First
Assignment at Tab 2 corresponds to the highlighting in the
online sources at Tabs 2A, 2B and 2C.
7. Ms. McDonald spoke to the Student following the First
Assignment to discuss proper citation practices. She asked the
Student to rewrite the First Assignment and pay particular
attention to avoiding plagiarism, which the Student submitted

- 12 -

on December 17, 2017. A copy of the Turnitin.com report for the
Student's resubmission is attached at Tab 3. There were no
further allegations of plagiarism in respect of the First
Assignment and the Student was not sanctioned for any alleged
academic misconduct in connection with the First Assignment.
8. On or about December 18, 2017, the Student submitted a long
paper entitled "Final Assignment-~
", which was worth
55% of his final grade (the "Final Assignment"). Students were
expected to complete the long paper independently and to use
appropriate citations and references when relying on outside
sources.
9. In accordance with the course policy, the Student submitted the
Final Assignment to Turnitin.com. The Turnitin .com report for
the Final Assignment indicated a 41% similarity index with
sources in its database and onl ine. A copy of the Turnitin.com
report for the Final Assignment, with highlighting and
handwritten notations, is attached at Tab 4.
10.On review, Ms. McDonald determined that there were several
passages in the Final Assignment that were taken verbatim or
nearly verbatim from four online sources without appropriate
attribution . Copies of these on line sources, with highlighting and
handwritten notations, are attached at Tabs 4A, 48, 4C and
4D. The highlighting in the Final Assignment at Tab 4
corresponds to the highlighting in the sources at Tabs 4A, 4B,
4C and 40.
11.On January 17, 2018, Ms. McDonald met with the Student to
discuss the alleged academic misconduct in the Final
Assignment.
(3) Dean's Designate Meeting

12.On March 20, 2018, the Student met with Professor Luc De Nil,
Dean's Designate for Academic Offences, to discuss the
allegations of academic misconduct in CHL3005. Professor De
Nil gave the Student the warning that is required to be given
under the Code.
13.At the meeting with Professor De Nil, the Student admitted to
comm itting plagiarism in the Final Assignment. A copy of the
meeting notes prepared by a note taker at SGS who was
present at the meeting is included at Tab 5. The parties agree
that the meeting notes accurately reflect the discussions that
occurred during the meeting.

- 13 -

14.On March 22, 2018, Professor De Nil wrote to the Student
imposing the following sanctions in connection with the offence
committed in CHL3005:
(a) a grade of zero for the assignment in question;
(b) an annotation on the Student's transcript of "Sanctioned for
Academic Misconduct under the Code of Behaviour on
Academic Matters, effective March 20, 2018" for one year
after the Student's convocation date, withdrawal, or program
termination.
15.Professor De Nil also wrote:
While I trust that you have learned from this experience, I must
warn you that if you commit a second offence while you are a
student at the University of Toronto , it will be treated much more
severely.
A copy of Professor De Nil's letter is attached at Tab 6.
B. Acknowledgements
16.The Student acknowledges that:

(a) the Provost has advised him of his right to obtain legal
counsel and that he has done so; and
(b) he is signing this ASF on Penalty freely and voluntarily,
knowing of the potential consequences he faces.

5.

After filing the Agreed Statement of Facts on Penalty the parties filed a Joint

Submission on Penalty:

1. For the purposes of this hearing under the Code of Behaviour on
Academic Matters ("Code"), the Provost of the University of Toronto (the
"Provost") and (the "Student") have
prepared this Joint Submission on Penalty ("JSP").

r-.-

2. The Provost and the Student submit that, in all the circumstance of his
case , it is appropriate that the University Tribunal impose the following
sanctions on the Student:
(a) a final grade of zero in the course CHL3003Y;

- 14 -

(b) a final grade of zero in the course CHL3001 Y;
(c) a suspension from the University of Toronto from the date
of the Tribunal's order until August 31, 2021; and
(d) a notation of the sanction on his academic record and
transcript from the date of the Tribunal's order until one year
after the Student's graduation, withdrawal or program
termination; and
3. The parties agree that this case shall be reported to the Provost for
publication of a notice of the decision of the Tribunal and the sanction
imposed in the University of Toronto newspapers, with the name of the
Student withheld.

Acknowledgements

4. The Student acknowledges that:
(a) the Provost has advised him of his right to obtain legal
counsel , and he has done so; and
(b) he is signing this JSP freely and voluntarily , knowing of the
potential consequences he faces and knowing that the
Tribunal is not bound by this JSP and has the discretion to
impose a different penalty, including one that is more severe
than the JSP recommends.

6.

The panel, after deliberating, unanimously accepted the joint submission on

Penalty, finding it to be consistent with previous Tribunal decisions referred to by the
University, and fully justifiable in these circumstances. Given the high standard
established by previous Tribunal decisions to depart from an agreed upon joint
submission on penalty the panel saw no reason to do so in this case - the agreed upon
penalty, in our view, struck an appropriate balance between the seriousness of the
offence, and the prior misconduct of the Student (albeit not as serious at these
charges) and the fact that the Student now appeared to recognize this and be
remorseful by both agreeing to the facts of the misconduct and the degree of penalty

- 15 -

to be imposed. In view of the fact that the joint submission on Penalty was accepted,
it was unnecessary for the panel to hear any evidence from the Student who wished
to testify only if this panel rejected the joint submission on Penalty and wished to
impose a greater penalty - which is not the case.

7.

Accordingly, this panel of the Tribunal imposes the following sanctions on

the Student:

(a) a final grade of zero in the course CHL3003Y;
(b) a final grade of zero in the course CHL3001Y;
(c) a suspension from the University of Toronto from the date of
the Tribunal's order until August 31, 2021; and
(d) a notation of the sanction on his academic record and
transcript from the date of the Tribunal's order until one year
after the Student's graduation, withdrawal or program
termination; and
(e) The parties ag ree that this case shall be reported to the
Provost for publication of a notice of the decision of the
Tribunal and the sanction imposed in the University of Toronto
newspapers, with the name of the Student withheld.

l"'L

Dated at Toronto th is12 day of J .(..fu~i:y-o1s

Mr. Bernard Fishbein, Co-Chair

