Report 269

DATE:

   October 25, 2002

PARTIES:

   Ms. Z.S., (âthe Studentâ) v. the School of Graduate Studies

Hearing Date(s):

   September 26, 2002

Committee Members:

   Assistant Dean Jane Kidner, Chair
   Professor Clare Beghtol
   Professor Sherwin Desser
   Professor Luigi Girolametto
   Mr. Mark Braun

Secretary:

   Mr. Paul Holmes, Judicial Affairs Officer

In Attendance:

For the Appellant:

   Ms. Z.S., (âthe Studentâ)
   Mr. Shaun Laubman, representative (Downtown Legal Services)

For the School of Graduate Studies:

   Associate Dean (Physical Sciences) Rashmi Desai
   Professor Shamim Sheikh, Graduate Coordinator, Graduate Department of
   Civil Engineering
   Professor Kim Pressnail, Graduate Department of Civil Engineering

   Request for a finding that the failure in one course did not constitute
   a failure for the purposes of invoking the Departmentâs two-failure
   rule requiring the Student to withdraw from the program; request to
   have theÂ  exam in a second course re-read in accordance with the SGS
   Procedural Guide for Externally Rereading an Examination Written by a
   Graduate Student; request to re-write the make-up exam in a third
   course and use the exam she had already written in a subsequent term as
   the make-up exam; and a request that the original grade of FZ assigned
   to the Student in the third course be removed from her transcript and
   be replaced by the mark she received when she retook the course in a
   subsequent term. On her first attempt the Student failed the first
   course at issue. She reenrolled in the course and passed the course.
   The Student failed the second course at issue. The Student claimed that
   due to her childâs illness and her family responsibilities she was
   unable to concentrate and properly study for the final exam. The
   Student petitioned her FZ grade in the second course and was granted
   the opportunity to re-write the final exam. The Student claimed that,
   based on the Facultyâs promise that she would be permitted to re-write
   the exam in the second course, she prepared and studied for the exam up
   until one week prior to the exam. The Student failed the final exam for
   the third course at issue. The Student claimed that when she met the
   course Professor to discuss the failed exam he was unhelpful, that he
   refused to give her a copy of her exam or answer her questions, and
   that he told her that she was not a good student based on her other
   course marks. The Student wrote a supplemental exam and received a
   grade of FZ.Â  With three grades of FZ on her transcript and one week
   prior to the date of the re-write exam for the second course at issue,
   the offer to re-write was withdrawn and the Student was asked to
   withdraw from the program. Although not enrolled, the Student
   re-attended the second course at issue in a subsequent term. She
   claimed that she received permission from the Professor to write the
   exam even though it would not be marked and she would not receive an
   official grade. The Student wrote the exam but claimed that she did not
   know how she did on it. The Committee found that the Student was under
   pressure due to family circumstances and her situation as a new
   immigrant to the country. With respect to the request that the Student
   be permitted a re-read of her final exam in the third course at issue,
   the Committee found that there was a reasonable apprehension of bias on
   the part of the Student such as to question the objectivity of the mark
   given to the Student in course. The Committee stated that it did not
   want to make any finding that the Professor was biased in his marking,
   but rather that it is reasonable that the Student may have believed
   there to be bias on the part of the Professor. The Committee granted
   the Studentâs request to have her mark in the course re-read subject to
   the SGS Procedural Guide for Externally Rereading an Examination
   Written by a Graduate Student. With respect to the request to re-write
   the make-up exam in the second course at issue, and to use the exam
   which she has already written for that same course as the makeâup exam,
   the Committee found that the Faculty made the Student a promise, which
   the Student relied upon by studying for the exam, and therefore the
   Student ought to be permitted to write that exam. The Committee found
   that since the Student had already re-written the exam, she ought to be
   permitted to have that grade reported on her transcript, in addition to
   the original grade of FZ. With respect to the request for a finding
   that the FZ grade in the first course at issue did not constitute a
   failure for the purposes of invoking the two-failure rule, the
   Committee found that due to irregularities and ambiguities in both the
   wording and the application of the rule, the Studentâs original grade
   of FZ in the course ought not to count toward the rule such as to
   trigger her removal from the program. The two-failure rule as written
   did not clearly state that it would apply to a course which was failed
   and subsequently taken and passed; the policy as it had been applied to
   the Student had not been consistent, creating the potential for
   misunderstanding; the Student was told by the Faculty that the policy
   did not apply in her situation; and the Faculty was uncertain and
   confused as to the proper application of the policy in the situation. A
   minority of the committee found that the Faculty stated the two-failure
   rule to all students and the Student was made aware of the rule when
   she was asked to withdraw from the program prior to her third failed
   course. Appeal allowed. The Committee ordered that the Student be
   permitted to re-write the exam in the second course at issue, and use
   the mark she obtained in the exam she had already written in the course
   in the subsequent term as that makeâup exam. The Student was granted a
   rereading of her final exam in the third course at issue in accordance
   with the SGS Procedural Guide for Externally Rereading an Examination
   Written by a Graduate Student. The FZ grade in the first course at
   issue was not be counted as a failure for the purpose of invoking the
   two-failure rule to remove the Student from the program.
   [1]View Report

References

   1. file:///media/12646
