Case #258

   DATE : December 14, 2001

   PARTIES : A.M. (the ‚Student‚) v. Faculty of Applied Science and
   Engineering

   HEARING DATES : November 8, 2001; November 19, 2001

   Committee Members :
   Professor Emeritus Ralph Scane (Acting Chair)
   Professor Luigi Girolametto
   Professor Gretchen Kerr
   Ms Karen Lewis
   Ms Geeta Yadev

   Appearances:
   For the Student Appellant:
   A.M. (the ‚Student‚)
   Mr. Craig Coughlan, Counsel for the Student

   For the Faculty of Applied Science and Engineering:
   Ms Sari Springer, Counsel for the Faculty of Applied Science and
   Engineering
   Ms Colleen Kerluk, Faculty of Applied Science and Engineering
   Ms Barbara McCann, Faculty of Applied Science and Engineering
   Professor Kim Pressnail, Faculty of Applied Science and Engineering

   The Student appealed a decision of the Ombuds Committee of the Faculty
   of Applied Science and Engineering (the ‚Faculty‚) dismissing an appeal
   from the decision of the Faculty‚s Committee on Examinations regarding
   the Student‚s petition for relief in a course taken in the Fall term of
   2000. The Committee on Examinations ruled that the final examination on
   the course, which the Student did not write, should not be counted in
   computing the final course mark. The mark was calculated by computing
   the average of all of the other grading components in the course,
   including the second of the term tests, which the Student also did not
   write. This test was graded for the purpose of arriving at the final
   course mark as 0/20. On this basis, the Student received an "F" in the
   course. The Student sought the removal of the failure in the course
   from her transcript and its replacement with a permitted late
   withdrawal without academic penalty.

   The Student‚s original petition was for relief on medical grounds. In
   responding to the appeal before the Academic Appeals Committee (the
   ‚AAC‚), however, the Faculty introduced a strong collateral attack
   against the Student personally, arguing that she was not credible, was
   a chronic absentee from classes and was a frequent petitioner for
   special relief during the course of her undergraduate programme. The
   Student gave evidence that the symptoms of which she complained
   commenced shortly before the second term test. The Student attended a
   medical clinic and received a terse medical certificate which the AAC
   noted did little more than corroborate the fact that she had attended a
   doctor on that date. The Student gave evidence that on the date of the
   final examination, she was again very ill and attended another
   physician and obtained a much more detailed medical certificate. The
   AAC noted that the Faculty considered that the medical evidence was
   sufficient to excuse the Student from writing the final examination but
   not the second term test. The AAC stated that the Faculty's attack on
   the Student's credibility was relevant in considering the evidence;
   however, it made its own assessment of the available evidence and
   concluded that it was more probable than not that the Student had been
   seriously affected in advance of the second term test by the same
   illness that was admittedly affecting her at the time of the final
   examination, and that she had valid medical grounds for missing the
   second term test. Accordingly, the AAC determined that that examination
   should not have been included in the calculation of the final course
   mark.

   The AAC then considered the question of what the final course mark
   should have been. The Committee decided that it would be unsafe to
   extrapolate a final course grade from components worth only 40% of the
   total available marks in the course and that as such, the proper remedy
   should be either the granting of aegrotat standing in the course, or
   permitted late withdrawal without academic penalty. The AAC stated that
   the Student's performance did not justify consideration of aegrotat
   standing, and thus if the medical issues were to be considered alone,
   it would allow the appeal and grant the remedy sought. The Committee
   noted, however, that the Faculty had taken the position that the
   Student was not credible and was a chronic absentee from classes, and
   that these factors justified the withholding of relief from the Student
   with regard to the final mark in the course even if the medical grounds
   otherwise justified granting it. The AAC considered whether, as a
   matter of policy, the University should have a discretion to withhold
   relief in the case of a petition based on medical grounds on the basis
   of the factors (other than credibility) indicated. The Committee stated
   that where the University grants relief to a student on medical or
   similar grounds, it does so because it accepts that the student's
   ability to perform to the standards normally demanded was so adversely
   affected that the University cannot rely upon the results obtained, or
   on the failure to undergo an evaluation process, to visit the student
   with the normal consequences of inadequate or missed performance.
   Whether a student has in other respects been academically delinquent is
   irrelevant in determining this issue. The Committee stated that it was
   not asserting that the missing of lectures cannot or should not be
   penalized by the University; rather the Committee stated that the
   University should not attempt to deal with this type of academic
   delinquency through the back door, by withholding otherwise proper
   relief in the case of a petition based on medical or similar grounds.
   Accordingly, the Committee found that it did not have to engage in a
   fact-finding exercise with respect to the charges arising out of the
   ‚collateral‚ issues.

   The AAC also noted that had it come to the opposite conclusion on the
   policy issue, it would have been very uneasy in finding against the
   Student on the basis of much of the case made against her. The
   Committee noted that a large portion of the evidence against the
   Student was hearsay, or consisted of statements made in reports and
   e-mails, where those making the statements did not appear before the
   Committee. Where a party decides to lead evidence intended to bring
   about a finding of fact that impugns the character of a student, a
   member of the University or anyone else, the AAC stated, the witnesses
   from whence that evidence emanates should be present to be confronted
   and cross- examined. If a tribunal's proceedings are thereby
   protracted, the AAC stated, so be it.

   The AAC also noted that neither of the Faculty Committees published any
   reasons for their decisions. The Committee stated that elementary
   fairness to a student seeking relief requires that a tribunal publish
   at least a summary of the reasons for its decision. Published written
   reasons for a decision not only make the process more transparent, and
   therefore more credible, but may guide the student and the division
   with regard to future matters.

   The AAC allowed the appeal, vacated the grade of ‚F‚ awarded to the
   Student in the course and ruled that the Student be deemed to have been
   permitted to withdraw from that course without academic penalty.
   [1]View Report

References

   1. file:///media/12680
