Case 1088

   DATE: April 28, 2021
   PARTIES: University of Toronto v. C.E.B.

   HEARING DATE: March 26, 2021, via Zoom

   Panel Members:
   Ms. Sana Halwani, Chair
   Professor Michael Saini, Faculty Panel Member
   Ms. Parsa Mahmud, Student Panel Member

   Appearances:
   Ms. Tina Lie, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg
   Rothstein LLP

   In Attendance:
   Ms. Krista Kennedy, Administrative Clerk & Hearing Secretary, Appeals,
   Discipline and Faculty Grievances

   Not in Attendance:
   The Student

   The Student was charged underâ¯ss. B.i.1(d)Â and B.i.1(a)Â of theâ¯Code
   of Behaviour on Academic Matters, 1995â¯(the âCodeâ) on the basis
   thatÂ the Studentâ¯knowingly represented an idea or expression of an
   idea or work of another asâ¯theirâ¯own in aÂ termÂ paper submitted for
   academic credit.Â The Student wasÂ alsoÂ chargedÂ with two counts
   ofÂ knowingly forged or in any other way altered or falsified a
   document or evidence required by the University, or uttered, circulated
   or made use of such forged, altered or falsified document, namely a
   paper and a screenshot.

   Neither the Student nor a legal representative of
   theÂ StudentÂ appeared at the hearing. TheÂ University
   providedÂ evidence that theÂ StudentÂ had been served on their
   ROSI-listed email address with the charges and the notice of hearing.
   Further, there was evidence before the Panel that
   theÂ StudentÂ hadÂ requested an adjournment for theÂ originally
   scheduled hearing date. TheÂ StudentâsÂ adjournment request
   wasÂ granted,Â andÂ theÂ StudentÂ was provided a deadline to provide
   her availability. TheÂ StudentÂ failed to respond, and a new hearing
   date was set.Â The University provided evidence of their efforts to
   contact theÂ StudentÂ as well as evidenceÂ indicating that
   theÂ StudentâsÂ emailÂ accountÂ was accessedÂ after theÂ direction from
   the Chair for the Student to provide her availability for
   aÂ newÂ hearing date.Â The Panel noted that although the evidence does
   not indicate that theÂ StudentÂ received theÂ notice of hearing, it
   does indicate that theÂ StudentÂ was aware of the proposed date for the
   hearing and failed to communicate with the Tribunal or
   UniversityâsÂ Counsel regarding the proposed date.Â On review of the
   evidence, and considering theÂ Statutory Powers and Procedures Act,
   Rules 9(b), 13, 14, and 17 of theÂ University TribunalâsÂ Rules of
   Practice and Procedure, and the UniversityâsÂ Policy on Official
   Correspondence with Students, theÂ PanelÂ decided to proceed with the
   hearingÂ in theÂ StudentâsÂ absence asÂ itÂ found that reasonable
   notice had been provided to theÂ Student.

   Regarding the chargesÂ laid underÂ ss. B.i.1(d)Â and B.i.1(a)Â of
   theÂ Code, the PanelÂ considered the affidavitÂ evidence ofâ¯the
   Professor who taughtâ¯the course for which theÂ paperÂ in question was
   submittedÂ and the Deanâs Designate.Â It was theÂ evidence of the
   Professor thatÂ the paper contained passages that were verbatim,Â or
   near verbatim,Â excerpts from three online sourcesÂ which were not
   cited in the paper.Â The ProfessorÂ spoke to theÂ StudentÂ about the
   paper and after their discussion theÂ StudentÂ submitted a second
   paperÂ which she purported to be the one she intended to submit as her
   final paper. Once the Professor received the purported final paper, he
   reviewed it and determined thatÂ there were substantial changes from
   the original paper.Â Along with the purported final
   paper,Â theÂ StudentÂ submitted a screenshotÂ to show that the paper
   was last modified on a date before she submitted the original
   paper.Â The ProfessorÂ provided further evidence thatÂ the tracked
   changes showed that theÂ StudentÂ had made changes to theÂ purported
   final paper on the same day as their meetingÂ as well as evidence that
   the document properties of the purported final paperÂ shows that it was
   last modified on the day of their meeting.Â Â Once this matter was
   referred to theÂ Provost, it was the DeanÂ DesignateâsÂ evidence that
   theÂ StudentÂ advised her that theÂ originalÂ paperÂ did
   includeÂ plagiarism,Â but it was submitted in error and that she
   intended to submitÂ another version of theÂ purported
   finalÂ paper.Â Â It was also the DeanÂ DesignateâsÂ evidence that when
   asked about theÂ edits to the paper as well as the document properties,
   theÂ StudentÂ advised that she made anÂ additional fewÂ editsÂ when she
   realized she submitted the wrong paper.Â She denied modifying the
   document properties but could not explain the discrepancy.Â After
   reviewing the evidence, the PanelÂ concludedÂ Â thatÂ there was clear
   and convincing evidence, on a balance of probabilities,Â that
   theÂ StudentÂ used the words of another without proper attribution in
   theÂ paper, andÂ admitted to the plagiarism in her meeting with the
   Deanâs Designate; altered theÂ purportedÂ finalÂ paper by revising the
   paper substantially after the due date while representing that it was
   completed prior to the due date; and falsified theÂ screenshot by
   representing that it was the screenshot of the Purported Final Paper
   when it was not.Â Therefore, the PanelÂ noted that the charges were
   proven and found theÂ StudentÂ guilty of both charges.

   In determining sanction,â¯the Panel considered the principles and
   factors relevant to sanction discussed inÂ University of Toronto and
   Mr. C. (âMr. C. factorsâ) and determined thatÂ without
   theÂ StudentâsÂ participationÂ at any stage in the process,
   theÂ StudentÂ hadÂ not shown any remorse,Â nor had sheÂ presented any
   character evidence or raised any mitigating or extenuating factors
   thatÂ wouldÂ warrant a more lenient sanction.Â TheÂ StudentÂ has two
   prior plagiarism offencesÂ which did not deterÂ her from re-offending.
   The PanelÂ commentedÂ that plagiarism undermines the teaching and
   learning missions of the UniversityÂ and forgery isÂ atÂ the
   mostÂ seriousÂ end of the spectrumÂ as there is an element of
   deliberateÂ and purposeful dishonesty.Â Upon review of the relevant
   case law and the Mr. C. factors, the Panel accepted the sanction
   proposed by the University. The Panel imposed the following
   sanctions:Â final grade of zero in the course; a suspension for just
   over 57 months; a notation for just overÂ 69Â months or until
   graduation, whichever is later; and report to theÂ ProvostÂ for a
   publication.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/29847
