Report 322

DATE:

   January 29, 2008

PARTIES:

   Ms. E. G. (the Student) v. Faculty of Applied Science and Engineering

Hearing Date(s):

   January 15, 2008

Committee Members:

   Professor Emeritus Ralph Scane (Senior Chair)
   Professor Clare Beghtol
   Ms Saswati Deb (Student)
   Professor William Gough
   Professor Ronald Kluger

Judicial Affairs Officer:

   Ms. Nancy Smart

Appearances:

For the Student Appellant:

   Mr. Eric Polten (Counsel)
   Ms. Amy Mitchell (Counsel)
   Ms. E. G. (âthe Studentâ)

For the Faculty of Applied Science and Engineering:

   Ms. Lily Harmer (Counsel)
   Mr. Danny Kastner (Counsel)
   Ms. Barbara McCann
   Ms. Ella Lund-Thomson
   Professor Kim Pressnail

   Request to withdraw late without academic penalty from one course for
   health reasons. The Student failed the course and as a result failed
   the relevant term.Â  The Student did not retain credit for courses
   which she had passed. The Student requested the remedy of allowing her
   to retain credit for courses passed in the relevant term if she
   accepted the failure in the course. The Student had earlier petitioned
   the results of a term mark in the course, on grounds of illness. The
   Faculty submitted that the Student withdrew the petition. The Student
   denied that assertion. On the petition at appeal, the Faculty had
   accepted the validity of the Studentâs grounds for seeking relief and
   applied the remedy of assessing a grade. As the term mark in question
   was very low, its inclusion operated to reduce the final assessed mark.
   The Committee had no basis upon which to decide whether the term mark
   petition was or was not withdrawn and could not determine whether the
   Studentâs overall result in the course would be affected had the
   petition been considered, as it had no evidence as to the totality of
   the term marks employed in the calculation. The Committee rejected a
   continuance of the hearing because it would create undue hardship to
   the Student. The Faculty informed the Committee that if the Student was
   permitted to withdraw without penalty from the course, her sessional
   average would have been sufficiently high to permit her to proceed to
   the next session, retaining credit for the other courses taken in the
   session. The Committee found that giving the benefit of the doubt to
   the Student on the matter of the term examination by permitting
   withdrawal from the course in question would not compromise the
   Facultyâs standards, while the repetition of the session, coupled with
   the undergoing of an unusually long period of enforced absence from her
   studies, would be an unduly harsh consequence of the result in one
   course pulling down her sessional average below the ordinarily
   permitted level. Appeal allowed. The Committee ordered that the grade
   in the course be vacated and replaced with the nonâgrade report WDR.
   [1]View Report

References

   1. file:///media/12665
