UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
GOVERNING COUNCIL
Report #322 of the Academic Appeals Committee
January 29, 2008

To:

The Academic Board,
University of Toronto

Your Committee reports that it held a hearing on Tuesday January 15, 2008, at which the following
were present:
Professor Emeritus Ralph Scane (Senior Chair)
Professor Clare Beghtol
Ms Saswati Deb (Student)
Professor William Gough
Professor Ronald Kluger
Ms. Nancy Smart, Judicial Affairs Officer
Appearances:
For the Student Appellant:
Mr. Eric Polten (Counsel)
Ms. Amy Mitchell (Counsel)
Ms. E. G. (“the Student”)
For the Faculty of Applied Science and Engineering:
Ms. Lily Harmer (Counsel)
Mr. Danny Kastner (Counsel)
Ms. Barbara McCann
Ms. Ella Lund-Thomson
Professor Kim Pressnail
The Appeal
This is an appeal from the decision of the Examinations Committee of the Faculty of Applied
Science and Engineering (the Faculty), dated October 25, 2007, acting upon the recommendation of
the Ombuds Committee of the Faculty, to deny the Student permission to withdraw without
academic penalty from the course ECE221H1, taken in the Winter term of 2007, and for which a
failing grade was assessed. Following upon this decision, the Student was found to have failed that
term, and is required to repeat it. In the circumstances of her failure, the Student does not retain
credit for courses taken in that term that she passed, and must repeat those courses. It is this
requirement that these courses be repeated that is really what this appeal is about. At the hearing,
the Student expressed willingness to accept the failure in ECE221H1 if she could retain credit for
courses passed in the term in question.

46980

Facts
The Student entered the B.A.Sc. program in the Department of Electrical and Computer
Engineering in the Faculty in the Fall session of 2005. Her progress until the Winter session of 2007
had academic difficulties which it is not necessary to discuss in detail here, except to state that she
entered the Winter term of 2007 as a student in the Second Year program of the Faculty with the
status of being on previous probation. This status determined the minimum requirements that she
was required to fulfill to proceed to the next session of instruction.
In the Winter session of 2007, the Student took six subjects. In the course in question, the
Student received an original final grade of 43%. In one other course, ECE243H1, she received an
original final grade of 50%. In the remaining courses, she received original final grades of 60% or
slightly better. Overall, her original weighted sessional average was 56%. Under the Faculty’s rules,
this result would place a student upon “repeat probation”, and require that the student repeat the
session at the next opportunity. The Faculty operates on a “session” basis, rather than on a “course”
basis, as some other divisions do, so that a student required to repeat a Winter session, for example,
would normally have to sit out until the next Winter session arrived, in order to repeat the courses
taught within that session.
With respect to the course ECE221H1, the Student failed a term test written on February 5,
2007. After a second term test failed to improve her average, she consulted an instructor, who
advised her to petition, even though the time for petitioning for relief from a course mark had long
passed. The Student did petition the results of the term test, on grounds of illness, on April 11, 2007.
This date was more than one week after the Student’s return to classes, which is the Faculty
deadline for such petitions. The Faculty submits that the Student withdrew the petition on or about
April 30, 2007, an assertion that the Student’s submission denies. The submissions of neither
Faculty nor Student reveal any formal disposition of this petition. The Student alleges that her
anxiety stemming from her lack of knowledge regarding the results of this petition contributed
significantly to the health problems which affected her final examination in ECE221H1.
The Student did poorly on the final examination in ECE221H1. She petitioned for
permission to withdraw from this course, and from the course ECE243H1, without academic
penalty, for health reasons. At the hearing before your Committee, the Faculty acknowledged that
its committees reviewing these petitions had accepted the validity of the Student’s grounds for
seeking relief, and accepted the validity of those grounds for the purpose of this hearing.
Accordingly, your Committee did not hear evidence on this issue, and proceeded on the basis that
the Student had established this element of her case.
However, under the Faculty’s regulations, establishment of sufficient grounds for relief will
not necessarily get a student out of academic difficulty. Although the Examinations Committee has
jurisdiction to grant withdrawal without academic penalty, it did not consider that this was an
appropriate situation to award that remedy, given the restricted circumstances in which your
Committee has previously held this remedy to be available, and given that it was being applied for
after the final results of the term had been released. Instead, the Examinations Committee applied
the remedy of assessing a grade, which is the usual procedure within the Faculty when a student
misses a final examination or establishes that the examination has been adversely affected by
outside events beyond the student’s control. “Assessing a grade” involves the application of a
mathematical formula: the student’s closely supervised term grade times the class examination
average, divided by the closely supervised class average. Under this formula, the better the student’s
1

term work, the higher the assessed grade, which will become the course mark, will be. The assessed
grade is compared to the actual grade, and the higher of the two becomes the course grade.
In this case, while the assessment process brought the Student’s grade in ECE243H1 from
50% to 61%, it would have lowered the grade in ECE221H1 from 43% to 40 %. Under the
Faculty’s regulations, in such a case, the higher original grade was allowed to stand.
As noted above, the Faculty operates on a “session” basis, and bases promotion decisions
upon a student’s sessional average. Using the Student’s course marks as revised by the assessment
process, her revised sessional average moved from 56% to 57.8%. However, a student on past
probation, as in this case, who obtains a sessional average of less than 60% fails the session and
must repeat it. Under the Faculty’s regulations, a student does not retain credit for courses taken in
the session that must be repeated in which a final mark of less than 70% was awarded. As all of the
grades obtained by the Student in courses taken in the term in question were less than 70%, she was
denied credit for all of them.
Subject to one matter that troubled your Committee, the Faculty’s application of its
regulations to the Student, following its acceptance of the validity of the Student’s petition for relief
from the course in question, was unexceptionable. The Student was treated as any other student in
the Faculty would have been.
The troubling matter is the term test taken in ECE221H1 on February 5, 2007, which was
petitioned by the Student. Frankly, your Committee did not appreciate the possible significance of
this matter until the hearing had concluded and it was considering its decision. This was largely the
result of a coincidence. At the beginning of the hearing, it appeared that counsel on both sides were
under a misapprehension as to your Committee’s usual process. Your Committee normally proceeds
by a de novo hearing, that is, it hears evidence and cross-examination thereon, including evidence
that may have been before lower appeal tribunals, and reaches its own conclusions on that evidence.
It does not restrict itself, as counsel stated that they had assumed, to a review of the record of the
material before the lower tribunals, and a consideration, based upon that review, of the
reasonableness of the conclusions drawn by the tribunals below. As counsel on both sides indicated
that they had not prepared to introduce oral evidence, or to cross-examine the other party’s
witnesses, and as the Faculty acknowledged the validity of the Student’s grounds for petitioning the
results of her final examinations, as described above, the Committee attempted to adapt its
procedure to the type of hearing counsel had prepared for. As a result, the evidentiary stage, which
in the normal course might well have highlighted this matter as an important issue, was almost nonexistent, and did not do so.
Your Committee was troubled because the term test, which was the subject of a petition for
illness, supplied a component of the mathematical formula used to assess the final mark in
ECE221H1. If the term mark was unreliable, due to the Student’s illness, the assessment must
correspondingly lack reliability. As the term mark in question was very low, its inclusion would
operate to reduce the final assessed mark. Your Committee has no basis upon which to decide
whether the term mark petition was or was not withdrawn, a matter in dispute in the written
submissions. The petition does not appear to have been formally addressed and decided by the
Faculty. It may well have been dismissed for lateness if it had been heard, but there is no evidence
whether this preliminary issue was considered by the Faculty either. Even if the petition were
allowed and the term mark in question was removed from the equation, or was itself assessed from
2

the remaining marks, whatever was the usual procedure in such cases, your Committee cannot
determine whether the overall result would be affected, as it has no evidence as to the totality of the
term marks in this course employed in the calculation.
Your Committee could have recalled the parties to a continuation of the hearing, whenever
this could be arranged given the number of persons involved, to resolve these undetermined issues.
However, your Committee thought that this would create undue hardship to the parties, especially to
the Student. The Student indicated at the hearing that, due to uncertainty as to her status at the
beginning of the current term, and the realization that she would lose some valuable time which she
could not afford to lose at the beginning of the session, until her status was resolved, she would
voluntarily sit out this term. Observing her record to date, your Committee felt this to be a wise
decision on her part. Your Committee notes that it was originally scheduled to hear this appeal on
December 20, 2007. Had this hearing proceeded, it is very possible that your Committee could
have given a decision prior to the opening of the Winter term, 2008. Your Committee has been
informed by the Judicial Affairs Officer that the hearing was adjourned from this date at the request
of the University. Accordingly, by the time a new hearing date could be arranged, it was impossible
for your Committee to deliver a decision until after the Winter 2008 session had commenced. As a
result, because of the sessional structure of the Faculty’s courses, the Student cannot resume her
studies until the Fall session of 2008, if she were to succeed on her appeal, or the Winter session of
2009, if she fails to succeed. Your Committee also was informed by the Faculty that, on the
hypothesis that the Student were permitted to withdraw without penalty from ECE221H1, her
sessional average for the Winter session, 2007 would have been sufficiently high to permit her to
proceed to the next session, still on probation, carrying the course, but retaining credit for the other
courses taken in the session. Your Committee notes that granting a grade of WDR is a permitted
remedy under the Faculty’s rules, although the granting of such a remedy at this stage is an
extraordinary exercise of your Committee’s discretion. Giving the benefit of the doubt to the
Student on the matter of the term examination by permitting withdrawal from the course in question
will not compromise the Faculty’s standards. The Student will still be on probation, and will still
have to retake the course in her next term or as the Faculty may determine. However, repetition of
the session, coupled with the undergoing of this unusually long period of enforced absence from her
studies, is an unduly harsh consequence of an obviously terrible result in one course pulling down
her sessional average below the ordinarily permitted level.
Accordingly, your Committee believes that the most just result, given all that has transpired,
is to allow the appeal, and direct that the grade in ECE121H1 be vacated and replaced with the nongrade report WDR. Your Committee orders accordingly.

3

