Case 1215

   DATE: January 13, 2022
   PARTIES: University of Toronto v. S.E.C. ("the Student")

   HEARING DATE: November 12, 2021, via Zoom

   Panel Members:
   Mr. Christopher Wirth, Chair
   Professor Glen Jones, Faculty Panel Member
   Mr. Yazan Zamel, Student Panel Member

   Appearances:
   Ms. Tina Lie, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg
   Rothstein LLP
   The Student

   Hearing Secretary:
   Ms. Nadia Bruno, Special Projects Officer, Office of Appeals,
   Discipline & Faculty Grievances

   NOTE: Case being appealed.

   The Student was charged under s. B.i.1(b) of the‚ØCode of Behaviour on
   Academic Matters, 1995‚Ø(the ‚Code‚) on the basis that the Student
   knowingly used or possessed an unauthorized aid or obtained
   unauthorized assistance in connection with a test. In the alternative,
   the Student was charged under s. B.i.1(d) of the Code on the basis that
   the Student knowingly represented as her own an idea or expression of
   an idea or work of another in a test. In the further alternative, the
   Student was charged under s. B.i.3(b) of the Code on the basis that the
   Student knowingly engaged in a form of cheating, academic dishonesty or
   misconduct, fraud or misrepresentation not otherwise described in the
   Code in order to obtain academic credit or other academic advantage of
   any kind in connection with a test.

   The Student attended the hearing and denied the charges. As a result,
   the hearing proceeded on the basis that the University bore the burden
   of proving the charges on the balance of probabilities. The University
   tendered evidence of four witnesses who provided their evidence by way
   of affidavit, which was accepted by the Panel pursuant to Rule 61 of
   the University Tribunal‚s Rules of Practice and Procedure. The Student
   testified on her own behalf.

   The Panel considered the evidence of the Assistant Professor who was
   the course coordinator for the course in which the test in question was
   submitted. The Panel noted that a student notified the Assistant
   Professor that several questions from the test had been posted to
   Chegg.com during the time period allotted for the test. The University
   requested information from Chegg.com to investigate the matter. The
   data obtained by Chegg.com outlined that a subscriber from the
   University of Toronto with an email address that contained the last and
   first name of the Student had accessed a question that was on the test.
   The Panel examined the evidence of the Dean‚s Designate. The affidavit
   of the Dean‚s Designate outlined that she met with the Student
   regarding the alleged academic misconduct. At the meeting, the Student
   denied that the email address belonged to her, denied that she
   committed an academic offence, and also denied that her IP address
   could match those used to access Chegg.com. The Student admitted that
   she had a Chegg.com account but explained that her account was not
   associated with the email address that contained her last and first
   name, and that she used her Chegg.com account mainly for homework.

   The Panel reviewed the evidence of the former Director of Faculty
   Governance (‚Former Director‚). The Former Director‚s affidavit
   outlined that the Chegg.com‚s Honor Code Team provided an Excel
   spreadsheet which outlined that a ‚viewer‚ from the University with an
   email address that contained the last and first name of the Student
   accessed the answer to a question on the test and it further outlined
   the IP address that accessed that question on the day of the test. The
   Panel examined the affidavit and testimonial evidence of the Director
   of Academic & Collective Technologies in Information Technology
   Services (‚Director‚). The Director‚s affidavit outlined that at the
   request of Assistant Discipline Counsel his team pulled the Quercus
   Application Page View reports for the Student‚s user id. The Student‚s
   Quercus Application Page View report showed that the user id
   exclusively assigned to a UTORid with the Student‚s last name and first
   initial, accessed the course, including the quiz tool for the test at
   various times from a computer with a particular IP address. To clarify
   his affidavit, the Director testified that there are two types of IP
   addresses, a public and a private one. In response to the Student and
   Panel‚s questions, the Director stated that he had no way of assessing
   the likelihood of one IP address being assigned to more than one device
   while using the same router and that each device would have its own
   private IP address, but it is possible that several devices sharing a
   common router could have the same public IP address.

   The Student testified that the IP address for her on Quercus when she
   wrote the test is shown as having been from a Macintosh computer, but
   she did not own one at that time. Furthermore, the email address shown
   as the one being used to access the answers on Chegg.com was not hers
   and that email addresses can be created by anyone. The Student
   furthered by advising the Panel that she lived in a communal house with
   an unsecured network and given the evidence on how IP addresses work it
   could have been anyone in that house. She denied accessing the answer
   on Chegg.com. In cross-examination, the Student testified that the
   Director‚s affidavit accurately set out her University of Toronto user
   id and email address. She further confirmed that she used her
   University of Toronto ID and password to write the test and no one else
   had access to that password. The Student indicated that she is a
   subscriber to Chegg.com. The Student further confirmed that the Quercus
   information in the Director‚s affidavit shows that someone used her
   user ID to view the quiz page and the Student has no evidence that
   Quercus was in any way tampered with. The Panel noted that the Student
   testified that she had not contacted Chegg.com herself once she was
   aware of these issues. Based on the evidence and the submissions by
   Assistant Discipline Counsel and the Student, the Panel considered it
   to be highly improbable that another University of Toronto student
   taking the same course as the Student and writing the same test, living
   with her in the same house and using the same internet, would have
   created an email address in her name and use that email address to
   access the answer to the test on Chegg.com and for the IP address which
   the Student wrote the test to be identical to the IP address to that
   which accessed Chegg.com to obtain the answer. Accordingly, on a
   balance of probabilities based upon the clear and convincing evidence,
   the Panel was satisfied that the Student accessed the answer to the
   test on Chegg.com and used it to complete the test and thereby
   committed the academic offence of knowingly using or possessing an
   unauthorized aid or obtaining unauthorized assistance in connection
   with the test contrary to s. B.i.1(b) of the Code. Given this finding,
   the University withdrew the alternative charges.

   During the sanction phase of the hearing, the Student submitted a
   letter from a doctor which was entered into evidence. She was then
   cross-examined. She testified that she never provided the letter to the
   University and stated that when she spoke to the Dean‚s Designate, she
   felt that it was pointless to do so. Furthermore, she did not tell the
   Dean‚s Designate that this matter was impacting her mental health or
   that she was under the care of a doctor. The Student further testified
   that she wanted to enter this letter into evidence now to show that the
   University needs to improve matters and she was not using it for the
   purpose of obtaining a lesser sanction, but rather to demonstrate how
   these matters can have an impact on mental health. The University had
   no reply evidence on sanction. The University made submissions on the
   appropriate sanction. The Student left the hearing during the
   University‚s submissions and therefore, did not provide her own
   submissions on the appropriate sanction. The Panel considered the
   factors and principles relevant to sanction as set out by this Tribunal
   in The University of Toronto and Mr. C. (Case no. 1976/77-3, November
   5, 1976). In addition to these factors, the Panel considered other
   decisions of this Tribunal involving similar misconduct. However, the
   Panel remained cognizant of the fact that no two cases are identical
   and that it is not bound by past decisions of this Tribunal, but the
   Tribunal does try to develop a consistent body of cases so that
   students are treated fairly and consistently. The Panel noted that the
   Student‚s adamant denial of the allegations and her refusal to accept
   responsibility for her conduct was troubling in the context of
   accessing her character. The Panel was further concerned that there was
   a real likelihood that the Student would potentially commit a
   repetition of the offence. The Panel noted that by cheating on the
   test, the Student undermined the grades-based system of evaluation and
   broke the honour code that is essential to modern learning.
   Furthermore, any sanction must denounce cheating on tests and deter
   others in to protect the academic integrity of the University. Students
   must understand that this kind of misconduct will have serious
   repercussions to that they will be deterred from cheating. The Panel
   accepted the University‚s submission that by using Chegg.com, a paid
   commercial subscription service, the Student committed a more serious
   form of academic misconduct, and that while normally the sanction for
   the first offence would be a two-year suspension, the Panel was
   satisfied that the circumstances of this case combined with this
   aggravating factor, a three year suspension of the Student from the
   University was appropriate. The Panel imposed the following sanctions:
   a final grade of zero in the course; a three-year suspension; a
   four-year notation on the transcript; and a report to the Provost for
   publication.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/30176
