Case 1259

   DATE:

   July 14, 2022

   PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v. Y.Y. ("the Student")

   HEARING DATE:

   April 21, 2022, via Zoom

   PANEL MEMBERS:

   Mr. Simon Clements, Chair
   Professor Georges Farhat, Faculty Panel Member
   Ms. Megan Campbell, Student Panel Member

   APPEARANCES:

   Ms. Tina Lie, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg
   Rothstein LLP

   NOT IN ATTENDANCE:

   The Student

   HEARING SECRETARY:

   Ms. Krista Kennedy, Administrative Clerk & Hearing Secretary, Office of
   Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances

   The Student was charged with three counts of knowingly forging or in
   any other way altering or falsifying an academic record, or uttering,
   circulating or making use of such forged, altered or falsified record
   contrary to s. B.i.3(a) of the‚ØCode of Behaviour on Academic Matters,
   1995‚Ø(the ‚Code‚).

   Neither the Student nor a representative for the Student appeared at
   the hearing. The University requested that the Panel proceed with the
   hearing in the absence of the Student. The Panel noted that s. 6 of the
   Statutory Powers Procedure Act (‚SPPA‚) outlines that the parties to a
   proceeding shall be given reasonable notice of the hearing by the
   tribunal. Furthermore, s. 7(3) of the SPPA states that where reasonable
   notice of a hearing has been given to a party to a proceeding and the
   party does not participate in accordance with the notice, the tribunal
   may proceed without the party‚s participation and the party is not
   entitled to any further notice in the proceeding. The Panel further
   noted that Rule 17 of the Rules of Practice and Procedure (‚Rules‚)
   mirrors the provision in s. 7(3) of the SPPA. The University filed
   evidence that the Student had been served with the charges, the Notice
   of Electronic Hearing, and hearing materials to the email address for
   the Student as recorded in the Repository of Student Information
   (‚ROSI‚). The University also filed evidence that Assistant Discipline
   Counsel attempted to reach the Student at an alternative email address
   that the Student had used in correspondence with the University, and
   forwarded an additional copy of the Notice of Electronic Hearing and
   the materials in which the University intended to reply upon at the
   hearing. The Panel noted that Assistant Discipline Counsel‚s office
   also attempted to reach the Student via telephone at the telephone
   number listed in ROSI, but they were unable to reach the Student. The
   University filed further evidence that the last time someone accessed
   the Student‚s email account was after the charges and Notice of
   Electronic Hearing were sent to the Student. The Panel noted that the
   University‚s Policy on Official Correspondence with Students expressly
   states that students are responsible for maintaining a current and
   valid postal address and email account in ROSI, and they are expected
   to monitor and retrieve all mail, including emails, on a frequent and
   consistent basis. Rule 9 of the Rules provides that students may be
   served by various means, including emailing a copy of the document to
   the student‚s email address in ROSI. The Panel noted that the evidence
   showed that multiple attempts were made to contact the Student at two
   different email addresses and by telephone. The Student did not respond
   to any of the attempts to contact them. Based on this evidence, the
   Panel determined it would proceed with the hearing in the absence of
   the Student.

   Regarding the charges under s. B.i.3(a) of the Code, the Panel received
   affidavit evidence of an Intelligence Officer with Canada Border
   Services Agency (‚CBSA‚). The Panel noted that the Intelligence Officer
   affirmed that in 2019 the Student had a study permit to study at the
   University. The Designated Learning Institution verification process
   revealed that the Student‚s status at the University was ‚academic
   suspension.‚ The Intelligence Officer also affirmed that in mid-2019
   the Student submitted an online application to the Immigration,
   Refugees and Citizenship Canada (‚IRCC‚) which included a letter
   purportedly from a Registration and Financial Aid Assistant with the
   University of Toronto Scarborough which purportedly confirmed that the
   Student was registered full time for the next academic session (the
   ‚Purported UTSC Letter‚). In September 2019, the Student submitted
   another online application to IRCC which included the Purported UTSC
   Letter and a document purporting to be a University of Toronto
   Transcript of Consolidated Academic Record (the ‚Purported
   Transcript‚). The Intelligence Officer affirmed that the CBSA was given
   access to the applications and supporting documentation for the purpose
   of administering and enforcing the Act. Upon review of the application
   and supporting documentation, the Intelligence Officer sent an email to
   the University Registrar seeking to verify the authenticity of the
   documents. The Panel heard testimony of the Registrar and Director of
   Enrolment Management at the Office of the Registrar, University of
   Toronto Scarborough (the ‚Registrar and Director‚). The Registrar and
   Director testified that the author of the Purported UTSC Letter held
   the position of Registration and Financial Aid Assistant in the Office
   of the Registrar until April 2021 and has since retired from the
   University. The Registrar and Director‚s office keeps a record of all
   confirmation of enrolment letters that are issued, and there is not a
   copy of the Purported UTSC Letter in the Student‚s file. Furthermore,
   the information in the Purported UTSC letter does not match what is
   contained in the Student‚s record at the University. The Panel noted
   that it was the Registrar and Director‚s evidence that the Purported
   UTSC Letter was a forgery. Furthermore, upon review of the Purported
   Transcript, the Registrar and Director stated that it did not reflect
   the Student‚s academic record at the University. Furthermore, the
   Student has not been enrolled in any courses since Fall 2019 and the
   Student‚s study permit expired in July 2020.

   The Panel noted that the Purported UTSC Letter and Purported Transcript
   are clearly and skilfully forged, and an unsuspecting recipient and
   would not know either document was a forgery at first glance. The Panel
   outlined that the University does not have to prove that the Student
   created the forgeries instead it must prove, on a balance of
   probabilities, that the Student used the forged documents. The Panel
   noted that the Student was the only person who would have had an
   interest in submitting the documents to the IRCC in order to extend
   their study permit. Therefore, the only reasonable explanation would be
   that the Student used the forged documents to obtain an advantage with
   respect to their immigration status. The Panel found that the Student
   guilty on all three counts of making use of forged, altered or
   falsified records, contrary to s. B.i.3(a) of the Code.

   The Panel received evidence outlining that the Student has one prior
   academic offence of unauthorized assistance in connection with an
   assignment. In determining sanction, the Panel noted that a student who
   makes use of forged document is just as culpable as a student who
   forges the document themselves. The culpability lies in the plan to
   obtain and use the forged document. The Panel was asked to consider the
   factors outlined in the University of Toronto and Mr. C. (Case No.
   1976/77-3, November 5, 1976). In considering the aforementioned
   factors, the Panel noted that there was a serious risk that the Student
   would offend again and that forgery of an academic record is an offence
   of the utmost seriousness that undermines the credibility of the
   University. Furthermore, the University must send a strong message to
   the university community that this conduct will not be tolerated and
   that there be deterrence of this conduct. The Panel imposed the
   following sanctions: immediate suspension from the University for a
   period of up to five years or until Governing Council makes its
   decision on expulsion; a corresponding notation on the transcript; a
   recommendation that the Student be expelled, as per s. C.ii(b)(i) of
   Code; and a report to the Provost for publication.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/30615
