Case 1081

   DATE: May 3, 2021
   PARTIES: University of Toronto v. J.W.X.

   HEARING DATE: February 1, 2021, via Zoom

   Panel Members:
   Ms. Johanna Braden, Chair
   Professor Paul Kingston, Faculty Panel Member
   Mr. Alex Erickson, Student Panel Member

   Appearances:
   Ms. Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg
   Rothstein LLP

   In Attendance:
   Ms. Krista Kennedy, Administrative Clerk & Hearing Secretary, Appeals,
   Discipline and Faculty Grievances

   Not in Attendance: The Student

   The Student was charged under s. B.i.3(a)Â of theâ¯Code of Behaviour on
   Academic Matters, 1995â¯(the âCodeâ) on the basis thatÂ the
   StudentÂ knowinglyÂ forged,Â or in any other way altered,Â or falsified
   a document or evidence required by the University of Toronto, or
   uttered, circulated or made use of such forged, altered or falsified
   document.Â In the alternative, the Student was chargedÂ with two counts
   ofÂ knowingly engagingÂ in a form of cheating, academic dishonesty or
   misconduct, fraud or misrepresentation in order to obtain academic
   credit or other academic advantageÂ contrary toÂ s. B.i.3(b)Â of
   theÂ Code.

   Neither the Student nor a legal representative of
   theâ¯Studentâ¯appeared at the hearing.â¯The matter was set to begin at
   9:45AM, however, the Panel stood the matter down until 2:00PM. At this
   time, the University requested that theÂ Panel proceed with the hearing
   in the Studentâs absence.Â The University submitted evidence regarding
   service of the charges and noticeÂ ofÂ electronicÂ hearing.Â The Panel
   received evidenceÂ that the StudentÂ hadÂ not been enrolled in any
   classes at the University for the last four yearsÂ and that the last
   time the Student accessed his ROSI-listed email address wasÂ three
   years ago.Â The incident that gives rise to the charges occurred in
   2019 and since that time the University, the Tribunal and Assistant
   Discipline Counsel have attempted to communicate with the Student on
   various occasions, without any reply from the Student.Â The Panel
   received evidence thatÂ Assistant Discipline Counselâs office attempted
   to reach the Student at the telephone number listed in ROSI, however,
   their office received an automated message advising the caller that
   this number cannot accept phone calls. The evidence indicates that the
   Student has not received any emails from the University about the
   incident, he has not received notice of the charges nor the notice
   ofÂ electronicÂ hearing.Â Furthermore, he has not received actual
   notice of the charges,Â or the disclosure, or the notice of electronic
   hearing, however, the Rules do not require actual notice.Â The
   Universityâsâ¯Policy on Official Correspondence with StudentsÂ makes it
   clear thatÂ a student is responsible for maintainingÂ a current and
   valid University-issued email account. Students are also expected to
   monitor and retrieve their email on a frequent and consistent
   basis.Â Taking into considerationÂ rulesÂ 9, 16, andÂ 17Â of
   theâ¯RulesÂ of Practice and ProcedureÂ of the University
   TribunalÂ coupled together with ss.Â 6Â andÂ 7 of theÂ Statutory Powers
   and Procedures Act, the Panel foundÂ the Student had been given
   reasonable notice of the hearingÂ andÂ itÂ decided to hearÂ the
   caseÂ on its merits in the absence of the Student.

   Regarding the chargesÂ laid under s.Â B.i.3(a)Â of the Code,
   theÂ PanelÂ receivedÂ evidenceÂ from the Assistant Director of the
   Office of ConvocationÂ (âAssistantÂ Directorâ)Â andÂ the Associate
   Registrar, Records, Registration and Graduation at University of
   Toronto MississaugaÂ (âAssociate Registrarâ).Â The
   AssistantÂ DirectorÂ provided evidence thatÂ the Office of Convocation
   received a Confirmation of Degree requestÂ from a third-party education
   verification service. Their request was for aÂ student with the name
   and date of birth (month and day only) of the Student in question. The
   Assistant Director located only one student that was a match with the
   name and date of birth. She also noted that the University had not
   granted the Student any kind of degree at any point in time. The
   Assistant Director proceeded to advise the third-party companyÂ of her
   findings in relation to the Student. The third-party company responded
   by providing a copy of theÂ degree which purported that the Student had
   been awarded a Bachelor of Business Administration by the University of
   Toronto. The Assistant Director again searchedÂ the Universityâs
   electronic records and did not find any evidence that a degree had been
   awarded to the Student.Â The Panel received evidence from the Associate
   Registrar that theÂ Student had been placed on academic probation in
   2016 andÂ aÂ one-yearÂ suspension in 2017 after which he did
   notÂ register or return for more classes. The Panel further received
   evidence that the Student had not graduated from the University and
   that he also did a search of the Universityâs recordsÂ which confirmed
   that the degree was not an authentic document issued by the
   University.Â The Panel noted thatÂ theÂ degree certificate meets the
   definition of an âacademic recordâÂ as set out in Appendix A of the
   Code, and the degree was clearly a fabrication.Â There was no evidence
   about how the degree certificate wasÂ forged or created, therefore the
   Panel could not make a findingÂ against the Student in that regard.
   However, the Panel concluded that it was more likely than not that the
   Student circulated, uttered and/or made use of the degree
   certificate.Â Upon review of the evidence, the Panel found the Student
   guilty ofÂ uttering, circulating, and making use of a forged academic
   recordÂ contraryÂ to s. B.i.3(a) of the Code.Â Given the Panelâs
   findings, the University withdrew the alternative chargeÂ under s.
   B.i.3(b) of the Code.

   In determining sanction, the Panel considered the principles and
   factors relevant to sanction discussed inÂ University of Toronto and
   Mr. C.Â (âMr. C. factorsâ).Â ItÂ determinedÂ that this offence was an
   act of flagrant andÂ deliberate dishonesty,Â a profoundly serious
   offenceÂ which requires a severe sanction in order toÂ deter other
   students from committing the same offence. The Panel further found
   thatÂ without the Studentâs participation there was no evidence of any
   extenuating circumstances, however, the Panel did not hold the
   Studentâs absence against him since he had no actual notice of the
   hearing.Â The Panel noted that although they are not bound by previous
   cases of this Tribunal, it is useful for like cases to be treated alike
   so thatÂ all parties understand what kind of penalty they can expect
   based on the findings.Â Upon review of the relevant case law and the
   Mr. C. factors, the Panel accepted the sanction proposed by the
   University. The Panel imposed the following sanctions:Â a five-year
   suspension; recommendation that the Student be expelled, as per
   s.Â C.ii.(b)(i) of Code; and a report to the Provost for a publication.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/29856
