Case #558

   DATE: January 21, 2010
   PARTIES: University of Toronto v. S.J.
   Hearing Date(s): June 9, 2009
   Panel Members:
   Jane Pepino, Chair
   Kathi Wilson, Faculty Member
   Liang Yuan, Student Member
   Appearances:
   Robert Centa, Assistant Discipline Counsel for the University
   Elesha Shore, Assisting Robert Centa
   In Attendance:
   Dr. Helen Slade, Office of Student Life
   The Student

   Trial Division â s.B.i.1(b) of CodeÂ â unauthorized aid â giving
   questions and receiving answers over the phone during a final
   examination â agreed statement of facts - finding of guilt â guilty of
   two charges of unauthorized aid â two prior convictions for
   unauthorized aid joint submission on penalty accepted - Panel imposed:
   1) a final grade of zero in the course; 2) a four year suspension; 3) a
   transcript notation until graduation; and 4) a report to the Provost.

   The Student was charged under s.B.i.1(b) of the Code , and,
   alternatively, s.B.i.3(b) of the Code . The charges stemmed from
   allegations that the Student made and received several telephone calls
   during a final examination which he wrote in a private study carrel at
   Accessibility Services, before the examination time for other students,
   reading questions to another student and receiving answers from that
   student. An Agreed Statement of Facts was submitted in which the
   Student admitted that he taped an earpiece taped to his arm and body,
   and that he hid the cell phone in his shoe in order to sneak it into
   the private examination room. The Student was found guilty of one count
   of obtaining an unauthorized aid and one count of providing
   unauthorized assistance. The Panel, noting the seriousness of the
   offence, the Studentâs two prior convictions for using unauthorized
   aids, as well as mitigating circumstances, accepted the joint
   submission on penalty and imposed: 1) a final grade of zero in the
   course; 2) a four year suspension; 3) a transcript notation until
   graduation; and 4) a report to the Provost.

   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12749
