Case #534

   DATE: April 23, 2010
   PARTIES: University of Toronto v. J.J.
   Hearing Date(s): December 2, 2009
   Panel Members:
   Andrew Pinto, Chair
   Professor Markus Bussman, Faculty Member
   Adil DâSousa, Student Member
   Appearances:
   Robert Centa, Assistant Discipline Counsel for the University
   Julie Wilkes, DLS for the Student
   In Attendance:
   Professor John Britton, Deanâs Designate, Office of Academic Integrity
   Trial Division â s. B.I.1(d); s. B.I.1(f); and s. B.I.3(b) of Code â
   plagiarism â concocted sources â hearing not attended â Agreed
   Statement of Facts â finding of guilt â Joint Submission on Penalty â
   Joint Submission on Penalty acceptedÂ  -Â  grade assignment of zero for
   course; five-and-a-half-year suspension; five-year notation on
   transcript; and report to Provost
   Student charged with three offences under s. B.I.1(d), s. B.I.1(f), and
   s. B.I.3(b) of the Code. Charges relate to the allegations that the
   Student plagiarized significant portions of an essay and had knowingly
   submitted work which contained concocted sources. The Panel was
   provided with an Agreed Statement of Facts signed by the Student and
   counsel for the University. In the Agreed Statement of Facts, the
   Student admitted to committing the academic offences under s. B.I.1(d)
   and s. B.I.1(f) of the Code. Based on the Agreed Statement of Facts,
   the University withdrew the charge under s. B.I.3(b) of the Code. The
   Panel accepted the Joint Submission on Penalty, noting that the Joint
   Submission on Penalty was not the sole consideration for the sanctions
   imposed and the sanctions reflected the consensus view of the Panel.Â
   The Panel imposed a grade assignment of zero for the course, a
   five-and-a-half-year suspension to begin at the date of the Studentâs
   last registration at the University, a five-year notation on the
   Studentâs transcript and that a report to the Provost be issued.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12753
