THE UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO

IN THE MATTER OF charges of academic dishonesty made on September 15, 2008;
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour 011 Academic
Matters, 1995;
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Act, 1971, S.O. 1971, c. 56 as
amended S,O, 1978, c. 88

BETWEEN:
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
- and J.

J

Hem-Ing Date: December 2, 2009

Members of the Panel:
•
•
•

Mr. Andrew Pinto, Barrister and Solicitor, Chair
Professor Markus Bussman, Faculty Panel Member
Mr. Adil D 'Sousa, Student Panel Member

Appearances:
•
•

Mr. Robert Centa, Assistant Discipline Counsel for the University, Paliare Roland
Barristers
Ms. Julie Wilkes, Student-at-Law for the Student, Downtown Legal Services

In Attendance:
•
•

•

Professor John Britton, Office of Student Academic Integrity, Department of Atis and
Science
Mr. Christopher Lang, Director, Appeals Discipline and Faculty Grievances, Office
of the Governing Council
Mr,J

J

, the Student, not in attendance

Preliminary

[ 1] The Trial Division of the University Tribunal was convened on December 2, 2009 to
consider charges under the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour 011 Academic
Matters, 1995 (the "Code") laid against the Student by letter dated September 15, 2008
from Professor Edith Hillan, Vice-Provost, Academic.

[2] On November 26, 2009 the Student signed a Consent agreeing that the University
had provided him with reasonable notice of the hearing being scheduled for December 2,
2009. He also agreed to be represented by a representative of Downtown Legal Services
and that the hearing could proceed in his absence. Also on November 26, 2009, the
Student and the University signed an Agreed Statement of Facts ("ASF") and an Agreed
Statement of Facts and Joint Submission on Penalty ("JSP").

Notice of Hearing and Charges

[3] The Notice ofHearing, dated November 27, 2009, informed the Student that a
hearing before the Trial Division of the University Tribunal was scheduled for
Wednesday, December 2, 2009.
[4) The charges are as follows:
l. On or about June 20, 2008, you knowingly represented as your own, an idea or
expression of an idea, and/or work of another in connection with a form of
academic work, namely, your final essay assignment ("Essay"), which you
submitted to fulfil the course requirements of POL33H, Politics and Morality (the
"Course"), contrary to section B.I.l(d) of the Code a/Behaviour 011 Academic
Conduct (the "Code").
2. On or about June 20, 2008, you knowingly submitted academic work, the Essay,
which contained references to a source or sources which had been concocted,
contrary to section B.I.l(f) of the Code.
3. In the alternative, on or about June 20, 2008, you knowingly engaged in a form of
cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or misrepresentation in order
to obtain academic credit or other academic advantage of any kind by submitting
the Essay, which you submitted to fulfil course requirements in the Course,
contrary to Section B.I.3(b) of the Code.

[5] Particulars of the charges are as follows:
4. You were, at all material times, a student in the Course, which was taught by
Professor Mihaela Mihai.
5,

On or about June 20, 2008, you submitted the Essay to fulfil partially the Course
requirements.

6. The Essay contained verbatim and nearly verbatim passages from various sources
and you did not properly attribute these passages, using quotation marks and
appropriate references.

7. The Essay contained references to academic work that did not accurately reflect
the content of the referenced work. The references were concocted.

Agreed Statement of Facts
[6] The panel was provided with an ASF, signed by the Student and counsel for the
University. In summary, the Student admitted that he committed the academic offence of
plagiarism as set out in charge #1; and that he knowingly submitted academic work, the
Essay, which contained references to a source or sources which had been concocted, as
set out in charge 2. The ASF is attached as Appendix 1.

Decision of the Tribunal
[7] Based on the ASF, the Tribunal found the Student guilty ofcharges #1 and #2. The
University withdrew charge #3.

Sanction and Reasons
(8] The University presented to the panel a JSP, signed by the Student, which submitted
that the appropriate penalty is:
a)

A final grade of zero in the course POL330HIF;

b)

A suspension from the University from September I, 2009, until
December 31, 2013;

c)

A notation of the sanction on his academic record and transcript from
the date of the Order until the later of December 31, 2015, or the date
he graduates; and

ct)

This case shall be repo1ted to the Provost for publication of a notice of
the decision of the Tribmrnl and the sanction or sanctions imposed in
the University newspapers, with the name of the student withheld.

The JSP is attached as Appendix 2.
(9) In its submissions on penalty, the University reminded the panel of the comts'
directives on joint submissions, namely that adjudicators should be loathe not to accept
the joint submission and sho11ld do so only if the administration of justice would come
into disrepute following acceptance of a joint submission. 1n that context, the University
strongly encouraged the panel to accept the joint submission on penalty.
[1 OJ The University explained that the sanctions sought in this case were determined in
accordance with previous Tribunal decisions. Recognizing that the panel is not bound by
precedent, discipline counsel underscored the necessity of consistency in the application
of justice.
[11) The Student's representative did not take issue with the University counsel's
submissions.
[ I 2) The Tribunal accepted the Joint Submission on Penalty, including for the reason
that it would not be contrary to the public interest, nor would it bring the administration
of justice into disrepute. However, the Joint Submission on Penalty was not the sole
consideration for the sanction imposed. The sanction decision was necessarily a
reflection of the consensus view of the panel.
( 13] The Tribunal noted that the student had voluntarily chosen not to register at the
University since September 1st, 2008. As a consequence, the impact of the Tribunal's
sanction, and suspension in particular, will be that the student cannot register for a course
for five and a half years from September 2008. The Tribunal considered this sufficient
specific and general detenence in the circumstances of this case. The agreed-upon
sanction also fell within the range of appropriate sanctions consistent with similar cases.
[14] By agreeing with the Statement of Facts on Penalty and by specifically
acknowledging that he committed the academic offences as charged, the student had
significantly cooperated with and facilitated the academic discipline process, which was
properly taken into account by the Tribunal.
( 15] Accordingly, the panel imposed the following sanctions:
a)

A final grade of zero in the comse POL330HIF;

b)

A suspension from the University from September 1, 2009, until
December 31, 2013;

c)

A notation of the sanction on his academic record and transcript from
the date of the Order until the later of December 31, 2015, or the date
he graduates; and

d)

This case shall be reported to the Provost for publication of a notice of
the decision of the Tribunal and the sanction or sanction imposed in the
University newspapers, with the name of the student withheld.

DATED at Toronto this 23,J day of April, 2010.

Andrew Pinto, Chair

APPENDIX 1

0
THE UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL

THE UNIVERS!TV TRTSU.Mt~t
UNIVERSITY OF TQ;::;ONTC

THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO

AND

T _·7-

···········'················ ····•1>• '' .. ·•• •• •••·••• , ••••

IN THE MATTER OF charges of academic dishonesty made on Septembenlbfis, E!IJ.!il8it isrproduced by
L!i11V.,: (.ff1u cf' / ()luii-z7
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Codethj{,.£0J;iallioil(,,Gri,Acadamic............... ..

this

Matters, 1995,

J11d day of /_,'J;CJ'/?iL,;:r
1

AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Act, 1971, S.O. 1971, c. 56 as.

amended S.O. 1978, c. 88

f.. -J.,

................................... ....

BETWEEN:
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO

- and-

J

J

Agreed Statement of Facts

1.

For the purposes of this hearing under the Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters

("Code"), the Provost of the University of Toronto (the "Provost") and J

J-

J

· ("Mr.

") have prepared this Agreed Statement of Facts ("ASF') and a joint book of documents

("JBD"). The Provost and Mr. J

(a)

agree that:

each document contained in the JBD may be admitled into evidence before the
Tribunal for all purposes, including for the truth of the document's contents,
without further need to prove the document; and

(b)

if a document indicates that ii was sent or received by someone, that is prime

facie proof that the document was sent and received as indicated.
2.

This hearing arises out of charges of academic misconduct filed by the Provost under

the Code. A copy of the charges, which were filed on September 15, 2008, is Included in the
JBD at Tab 1 ("Charges"). Mr. J

741461-1

, 20 ,Q.o/..

acknowledges that he received a copy of the Charges.

2

waives the reading of the Charges and hereby pleads guilty lo charge #1

Mr. J

3.

and #2 of the Charges.
The Notice of Hearing into the Charges is included in the JBD al Tab 2. Mr. J:

4.

acknowledges that he has received reasonable notice of !his hearing. Mr. J

does not

wish to attend the hearing before the Tribunal and requests that the hearing proceed in his
absence.
5.

Mr. J

first registered as a student at the University of Toronto in the Faculty of

Arts & Science, in Fall 2001.
University. A copy of Mr. J

At all material times, Mr. J

remained enrolled at the

's academic record dated November 25, 2009, is included In

the JBD at Tab 3.

6.

In Summer 2008, Mr. J

enrolled in POL 330H 1F - Politics and Morality - Faces

of Justice: Liberalism and its Critics, which was taught by Mihaela Mihal, a Ph.D. candidate In
Political Science ("Course"). A copy of the syllabus for the Course is included in the JBD at Tab
4. Mr. J

7.

admits that he received a copy of the syllabus for the Course.

Students in the Course were also given additional documents to assist them to complete

their written assignments in an appropriate fashion. Students in Course received: How Nol to
Plagiarize, Standard Documentation Formals, and Writing Centres: How we work and how lo
work with us. Copies of these documents are included in the JBD at Tab 5.
8.

One of the Course assignments was to complete a final essay, which was worth 40% of

the final grade in the Course. A copy of the suggested essay topics for the final essay, which
Mr. J

9.

admits that he received, is included in the JBD at Tab 6.
On June 20, 2008, Mr. J

submitted his final essay for academic credit and in

partial completion of the Course requirements ("Essay"). A copy of the Essay is included in the
JBD at Tab 7.
10.

Mr. J

admits that he knew or ought to have known that he had included in the

Essay verbatim, nearly verbatim, and/or too closely paraphrased excerpts from many sources,
including, but not limited to:

741461-1

3

(a)

Eric J. Mitnick, Individual Vulnerability and Cultural Transformation, Michigan
Law Review; May 2003, 101, 6, Paul Godfrey 1635. An excerpt from which is

found in the JBD at Tab 8;
(b)

Avigail Eiserberg and Jeff Spinner-Halev (eds.), Miniorities within Minorities:
Equality, Rights and Diversity. An excerpt from which is found in the JBD at Tab

9;
(c)

Seyla Benhabib, The Claims of Culture: Equality and Diversity in the Global Era,
An excerpt from which is found in the JBD at Tab 10;

(d)

Monique Deveaux, "A deliberative approach to conflicts of culture" in Avigail
Eiserberg and Jeff Spinner-Halev (eds.), Miniorit/es within Minorities: Equality,
Rights and Diversity. An excerpt from which is found in the JBD at Tab 11.

(e)

Gurpreet Mahajan, "Can intra-group equality co-exist with cultural diversity? Reexamining multicultural frameworks of accommodation" in Avigail Eiserberg and
Jeff Spinner-Halev (eds.), Miniorities within Minorities: Equality, Rights and
Diversity.

(f)

An excerpt from which is found in the JBD at Tab 12;

Jacob T. Levy, "Sexual orientation and refuge" in in Avigail Eiserberg and Jeff
Spinner-Halev (eds.), Miniorities within Minorities: Equality, Rights and Diversity.
An excerpt from which is found in the JBD at Tab 13;

(g)

Jorge M. Valadez, Deliberative Democracy, Political Legitimacy, and SelfDetermination in Multlcu/tural Societies An excerpt from which is found in the

JBD at Tab 14;
(h)

David Weinstock, in Avigail Eiserberg and Jeff Spinner-Halev (eds.), Miniorities
within Minorities: Equality, Rights and Diversity.

An excerpt from which is found

in the JBD at Tab 15 (collectively the "Sources").
11.

Mr. J

admits that he knew that he did not use quotation marks or any other

appropriate method to indicate that he had included lengthy verbatim or nearly verbatim
passages from the Sources in his Essay. He also admits that he ought to have done so.

741461-1

4

12.

Mr. J

admils that he knowingly failed to include some of the Sources in his list of

references at the end of the Essay, and that he ought to have done so.

13.

Mr. J

admits that, in the Essay, he knowingly represented the work and

expressions of others as his own.

14.

Mr. J

admits that he committed the academic offence of plagiarism as set out In

charge #1 of the Charges, which are Included In the JBD at Tab 1.

15.

Mr. J

admits that he knowingly concocted certain references that he Included in

the thesis to conceal his acts of plagiarism. For example, on pages 9 and 10 of the Essay, Mr.
J

admits that the references he provided to the work of Deveaux were concocted. Mr.

J.

actually plagiarized the passages from the work of Deveaux found in the JBD at Tab

10, not Deveaux's 2000 book.

16.

Mr. J

admits that he knowingly committed the academic offence described in

charge #2 of the Charges, which are included in the JBD at Tab 2.

17.

Mr. J

acknowledges that the Provost has advised him to obtain Independent legal

advice before signing this ASF. He acknowledges that has done so.

Signed Ion November.)(, 2009.

J

J

Signed In Toronto on November~&, 2009.

Robert A. Genta
Assistant Discipline Counsel
University of Toronto

741461-1

APPENDIX2

University of Toronto and J

-Agreed Statement of Facts and Joint Submission on Penalty

1

THE UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
IN THE MATTER OF charges of academic dishonesty made on September 15, O!"n'll'r-/_J-,---,

No'.
-:t
on Acade ·c

AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code of Behavlo
Matters, 1995,

THE UNIVERSITY TRIBUl\!P Ii..

AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Act, 1971, St)N1W3R<SMfc!SOF TORONT(
amended S.O. 1978, c. 88
,_ :~
_
AND
i
---r. . .
--~-'
,J
...................... ' ... --- . -·u.·-- -' .. , ' ... '.' .....
BETWEEN:
This Exhibit Is prod~ by _J_

U11v;1-\1 -I-a
c/~' I C/7-i/
IZJ .
y...............
,...........

THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTOthe ................-....
-and-

J

this

d,t.,ci dayol /J((P1?1l:tr ,20.Q.7,

J

e.;.r!.: ...................

........

Agreed Statement of Facts and Joint Submission on Penalty

1.

For the purposes of the sanction phase of this hearing under the Code of Behaviour on

Academic Matters ("Code"), the University of Toronto (the "University'') and J

J

J

") have prepared this Agreed Statement of Facts and Joint Submission on Penalty.

2.

Mr. J.

("Mr.

acknowledges that he has admitted to committing three previous academic

offences.

3,

First, in September 2003, he admitted that he committed plagiarism in an essay that he

submitted for academic credit in the course HPS 202H. The Dean's Designate in the Faculty of
Arts & Science Imposed a sanction of a final grade of zero In the course, and a two-year
notation on his academic record and transcript.

4.

Second, in March 2004, he admitted that he committed plagiarism in an essay that he

submitted for academic credit In the course !NI 115Y. The Provost acknowledges that the
plagiarism committed was relatively minor. The Dean's Designate In the Faculty of Arts &
Science imposed a written reprimand on Mr. J

741457-1

University ofToronto and J

5.

J

-Agreed Statement of Facts and Joint Submission on Penally

2

Third, in April 2005, he admitted that he committed plagiarism in an essay that he

submitted for academic credit in the course ECO 342Y1Y. The Dean's Designate in the Faculty
of Arts & Science Imposed a sanction of a final grade of zero in the course, a one-year
suspension, and a notation on his academic record and transcript until he graduated from the
University.

6.

Mr. J

has voluntarily chosen not to register in courses at the University since

September 1, 2008. The Provost has taken his absence from the University Into consideration in
making this joint submission.

7.

The Provost and Mr. J

submit that the appropriate penally in all the

circumstances of the case Is that the University Tribunal impose the following sanctions on Mr.

J
a) a final grade of zero In the course POL330H1 F
b) a suspension from the University from September 1, 2009, until December 31,
2013;
c) a notation of the sanction on his academic record and transcript from the date of
the Order until the later of December 31, 2015, or the date he graduates.
d) this case shall be reported to the Provost for publication of a notice of the
decision of the Tribunal and the sanction or sanction imposed in the University
newspapers, with the name of the student withheld.

8.

Mr. J

acknowledges that the Provost of the University of Toronto has advised him

to obtain independent legal advice before signing this document and that he has done so.

Signed in.l;,1,,· ,t

on November JI , 2009.

Signed In Toronto on November<?\~ 2009.

J

J '

~--~

RobertA.~'
Assistant Discipline Counsel

741457-1

