Case #958

   DATE: April 17, 2018
   PARTIES: University of Toronto v. Z.Z. (âthe Studentâ)
   Hearing Date(s): March 21, 2018
   Panel Members:
   Mr. R. Seumas M. Woods, Barrister and Solicitor, Chair
   Dr. Maria Rozakis, Faculty Panel Member
   Mr. Sean McGowan, Student Panel Member
   Appearances:
   Ms. Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Banisters
   In Attendance:
   Mr. Christopher Lang, Director, Office of Appeals, Discipline and
   Faculty Grievances
   Ms. Lucy Gaspini, Manager, Academic Success & Integrity, Office of the
   Dean, UTM
   Ms. Alexandra Di Blasio, Academic Integrity Assistant, Office of the
   Dean, UTM
   Mr. Sean Lourim, IT Support, Office of the Governing Council
   Not in Attendance
   The Student
   Trial Division - s. B.i.3(a) â forged or falsifying documents â
   falsified transcript used in an application for admission âÂ  hearing
   not attended âÂ  reasonable notice provided â recommendation of
   expulsion, five-year suspension pending expulsion, permanent notation
   on transcript, report to the Provost with the Studentâs name withheld.
   The Student was charged with falsifying or forging an academic record
   contrary to s. B.i.3(a) of the Code , or in the alternative academic
   dishonesty not otherwise described contrary to s.B.i.3(b) of the Code
   .Â  The charge related to a forged academic transcript that the Student
   submitted in an application to transfer from SFU to UTM.
   The Student did not attend the hearing. The Panel found that reasonable
   notice of the hearing had been provided to the Student based on
   affidavit evidence that the University had: (1) sent a copy of the
   notice of hearing to the Studentâs email address on ROSI, which had not
   âbounced backâ and had been accessed since the charges had been laid;
   (2) made two unsuccessful attempts to send notice by courier; and (3)
   called the Student, but was informed they had the wrong number.
   The Panel considered affidavit evidence from the University
   administrator who had asked SFU to authenticate the Studentâs
   transcript. The affidavit contained SFUâs emailed response to her
   request, that the transcripts lacked a number of the hallmarks of
   authenticity and that the Student had never been enrolled at SFU. Based
   on this evidence, the Panel found the Student to be guilty of forging
   an academic record contrary to s.B.i.3(a) of the Code . Upon the
   Panelâs finding of guilt, the University withdrew the alternative
   charge of academic dishonesty not otherwise described contrary to
   s.B.i.3(b) of the Code.
   The University requested the penalty that: (1) the Panel recommend that
   the Student be expelled; (2) a suspension of up to five years pending
   the decision on expulsion; (3) a notation be placed on the Studentâs
   transcript corresponding to the suspension and, once granted, a
   permanent notation as to the expulsion; and (4) the decision be
   published with the Studentâs name withheld. In determining the
   appropriateness of the proposed penalty, the Panel referred to the case
   University of Toronto v. J.Z. [Case No. 928, June 5, 2017] which spoke
   to the seriousness of the offence of forgery and the harm done to the
   reputation of the University. The Panel noted that, without any
   evidence from the Student, it had no evidence of the Student's
   character, no explanation for the Student's conduct, and no evidence of
   any mitigating circumstances. The Panel ordered: (a) a recommendation
   to the President of the University that the Student be expelled; (b) a
   suspension of a period of up to five years effective immediately
   pending expulsion; (c) a notation on the Studentâs transcript
   corresponding to the suspension and, if granted, a permanent notation
   on the Studentâs transcript; and (d) that the matter be reported to the
   Provost for publication.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12965
