THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
THE GOVERNING COUNCIL
Report #338 of the Academic Appeals Committee
January 12, 2010
Your Committee reports that it held a hearing on Thursday October 29, 2009 at
which the following members were present:
Mr. Tad Brown, Chair
Mr. Adam Heller
Professor Doug McDougall
Professor Elizabeth Smyth
Dr. Sarita Verma
Secretary: Mr. Christopher Lang

Appearances:

Hll\t\.llKIII and his counsel Mr. Jordan Giurlanda

The Student Appellant (Mr.
from Downtown Legal Services

For the University of Toronto Scarborough (UTS):
Professor John Sch erk, Vice Dean of UTS
I.

The Appeal

The Student is appealing a decision of the Subcommittee on Academic Appeals
(SM) at the University of Toronto Scarborough dated March 31, 2008. The
decision of the SM dismissed an appeal by the student for late withdrawal without
academic penalty for three courses taken in the Winter Session 2007, namely ECM
A06H3 (Introduction to Macroeconomics: A Mathematical Approach), EES A10H3
(Human Health and the Environment) and PSY A02H3 (Introduction to Psychology
Part II) ( collectively the "Courses"). The Student is appealing on medical and
compassionate grounds. The Student is seeking a remedy that would allow him to
be granted late withdrawal without academic penalty from the Courses or, in the
alternative, that he be granted Aegrotat standing in the Courses.
II

Facts

The Student first enrolled atthe University of Toronto Scarborough in the 2005 Fall
Session in Honours Bachelor of Arts and completed 1.5 credits by the end of that
session. The Student registered for 2.0 credits in the 2006 Winter Session and

completed 1.5 credits by the end of that session. At that time, his status was
assessed as "on academic probation".
The Student next registered for three half-credit courses during the 2 007 Winter
Session (the Courses). The Student failed all three Courses. The Student failed EES
A10H3 (Human Health and the Environment) and PSY A02H3 (Introduction to
Psychology Part II) after writing the final examinations. On April 26, 2 007 the
Student petitioned to write a deferred examination in the course ECM A06H3
(Introduction to Macroeconomics: A Mathematical Approach). This petition was
granted on medical grounds based on a Student Medical Certificate indicating acute
headache, malaise, fever, nausea and dizziness. The deferred examination for ECM
A06H3 was scheduled for August 16, 2007. This examination was to be worth 100%
of the grade as the Student did not write the mid-term examination. The Student did
not sit the examination on August 16, 2007. The Student obtained a medical note on
August 20, 2007 indicating that the Student has been suffering from abdominal
problems. The Student did not contact anyone or seek a medical note between
August 16th and August 20 th as he indicated that he was too ill to leave his house.
The Student petitioned to write a second deferred examination which was denied by
the University on August 29, 2007.
In September 2007, the Student petitioned the Office of the Registrar for late
withdrawal from the Courses citing "psychological illness". In support.of the
petition, the Student provided a medical certificate from his doctor which stated
that the Student was suffering from "depression-major affective disorder". The
medical certificate described the Student's problem as "progressive onset and
deterioration, depressive disorder since July 2006 to present". On October 23, 2007,
the Student's initial petition was denied. In the decision, the Office of the Registrar
stated "We are sympathetic to your illness. However, you have been aware of your
illness since July 2006. As a student on academic probation, you should have
assessed your situation carefully and withdrawn from your courses by the
appropriate deadline (March 25, 2007)".

III

Previous Decision

The Student appealed this decision to the Subcommittee on Academic Appeals (the
"SAA") of the University of Toronto Scarborough in January 2008 and cited
depression as the reason for his failure of the Courses. The Student described the
two causes of his depression being the death of his closest friend in February 2007
and the fact that his parents returned to Korea in April 2006 and that his father had
subsequently developed worsening heart conditions. The SAA denied the appeal in
a decision date March 31, 2008. The SAA concluded that "The committee agreed
that you had experienced several difficulties which might well have impacted your
studies. Unfortunately, you did not provide evidence that might show how these
conditions had caused the crisis in your studies during the Winter and Summer
Sessions 2007". In addition, the SAA noted that the Student had been diagnosed

with depression by his doctor as early as July 2006 but had not been treated
medically for this condition nor had he consulted with a specialist. The SAA urged
the Student to consult with a doctor about ways to deal with his depression and to
consult with an Academic Advisor about managing his academic load.

IV

Decision

The Student provided additional evidence to your Committee which was not
presented to the SAA. In particular, the Student provided additional supporting
documents in the form of an affidavit and a medical note to substantiate his claims
of the death of his close friend and the heart problems of his father, respectively.
Your Committee accepts that these events did in fact take place.
The Student also took the advice of the SAA and sought additional medical help.
Shortly after receiving the decision of the SAA, the Student received a referral to a
psychiatrist. After numerous meetings, the psychiatrist in a report dated June 8,
2008 diagnosed the Student as having been "suffering from bipolar II disorder,
generalized anxiety disorder, attention deficit disorder-adult type and social phobia
for more than two years". The Student is now taking medication and undergoing
regular counseling sessions with his psychiatrist.
The Student has also taken the advice of the "SAA and sought advice from academic
advisors which has been beneficial to his studies.
Your Committee commends the Student for taking these actions and is pleased to
see that his academic performance has improved. Your Committee is also
sympathetic to the situation in which the Student found himself in the Winter and
Summer Sessions 2007.
However, your Committee agrees with the SAA that the Student was aware of his
depression as of July 2006 at the latest. Your Committee also agrees with the SAA
that, as the Student was on academic probation, he should have sought academic
counseling if he was struggling with his academic load. The drop date for the
Courses was March 25, 2007 which provided the Student with ample time to have
assessed his situation and to withdraw from the Courses without academic penalty.
The Student has confirmed that he did not seek any academic counseling during the
Winter and Summer Sessions 2007.
Your Committee has on a number of occasions dealt with petitions for late
withdrawal from a course without academic penalty and has consistently stressed
that this remedy will not be lightly granted. The remedy of late withdrawal without
academic penalty is an extraordinary remedy, reserved for unusual and unique
situations. The idea of "drop dates" indicates that the University expects that a
student will make a decision whether to continue in a course by a set date in the
term. But by the drop date, a student is expected to have assessed his or her

situation and made a decision. Once the drop date passes, the implication is that the
student has decided to continue on in the course. Exceptions to this policy are rare,
but could include situations where unexpected and unforeseeable circumstances
occur after the drop date, vvhere already existing circumstances become
unpredictably worse, or where already existing circumstances do not reasonably
resolve.
While your Committee accepts that the death of the Student's friend and his father's
ill health were challenging for the Student, there was not enough evidence to
support the impact that these events had on the Student's academic performance
that would justify allowing this extraordinary remedy in accordance with the
parameters set out above. In particular, both of these situations had presented
themselves well before the required drop date.
Again your Committee commends the Student for seeking further medical attention
after the decision of the SAA and is pleased that the Student's current mental health
has been assessed and that he is receiving required medical treatment and
counseling. However, the diagnosis of the Student's mental health issues of bipolar
II disorder, generalized anxiety disorder, attention deficit disorder-adult type and
social phobia was not made until June 2008. This diagnosis is one year after the
examination period in question for the Courses. Your Committee is unanimously of
the view that there was insufficient evidence presented of the Student's medical
condition during the Winter and Summer Sessions 2007 and the impact that the
Student's mental health at that time had on his ability either (i) to write the
examinations or (ii) to seek academic counseling and withdraw from the Courses by
the required drop date. Therefore your Committee has determined that this case is
not one which justifies the extraordinary remedy of granting late withdrawal from
the Courses without academic penalty.
While it does not affect the outcome of this appeal, Your Committee would also like
to express its views on two additional matters raised in the context of this appeal.
First, the SAA in its decision stated that "The committee noted that your primary
stated concern in the hearing was to raise your grade point average in order to enter
the Specialist program in Management. We appreciate that many students would
like to remove courses in which they obtained poor marks from their transcript, but
the University of Toronto is generally unsympathetic to this sort of cosmetic
change". This position was reiterated in the context of the submissions made by
UTS in this appeal. Your Committee strongly endorses the view that there is nothing
improper about a student's desire to improve his or her academic record in order to
gain entry into a program of choice. There must be actual circumstances and
evidence which supports and justifies a change to the student's academic record in
each specific case beyond the motivation for entry into a particular program.
However, if and only if those circumstances exist, the motivation of a student to
launch an appeal based on his or her desire to open the opportunity to gain entrance
into further academic programs is entirely reasonable.

Second, your Committee notes that the Student filed his Statement of Appeal with
the University of Toronto Governing Council on July 2, 2008. The University of
Toronto Scarborough filed submissions responding to the Statement of Appeal on
March 13, 2009. No meaningful explanation was provided by the University of
Toronto Scarborough for the delay of over eight months in responding. Your
Committee is of the view that the University should implement formal guidelines
which set out specific time deadlines for filing of the various documents required in
a student academic appeal so as to prevent these types of delays in the future.
The appeal is dismissed.

