Report #338

   DATE: January 12, 2010
   PARTIES: Mr. H. W. K.Â  (the Student) v. UTSC
   Hearing Date(s): October 29, 2009
   Committee Members:
   Tad Brown, Chair
   Adam Heller
   Professor Doug McDougall
   Professor Elizabeth Smyth
   Dr. Sarita Verma
   Appearances:
   For the Student Appellant:
   H.W.K. (the Student)
   Jordan Giurlanda, DLS for the Student
   For the University of Toronto at Scarborough:
   Vice-Dean Professor John Scherk
   UTSC â late withdrawal without academic penalty â three courses â
   medical grounds â compassionate grounds â Aegrotat standing â
   psychological illness â academic probation â depression â death of
   friend â family health problems â awareness of illness before drop date
   â extraordinary remedy of late withdrawal without academic penalty â
   diagnosis after drop date â nine month period between initial diagnosis
   and drop date â lack of evidence â lack of evidence of impact of mental
   health â motive of the Student â gain entry into a Specialist program â
   irrelevancy of motive â delay in Universityâs submissions of materials
   â no meaningful explanation of delay â appeal dismissed
   Appeal of a decision to dismiss an appeal by the Student for late
   withdrawal without academic penalty for three courses. The Student
   appealed on medical and compassionate grounds. The Student sought a
   remedy that would allow him to be granted late withdrawal without
   academic penalty or, in alternative, aegrotat standing in the courses.
   The Student had previously petitioned the Registrar for late withdrawal
   for the courses in question citing psychological illness. The Student
   provided a medical certificate from his doctor stating the Student was
   suffering from depression-major affective disorder. The initial
   petition was denied with the registrar stating that, since the Student
   had been aware of his illness for nine months and because he was on
   academic probation, he should have assessed his situation carefully and
   withdrawn from the courses by the appropriate deadline. The
   Subcommittee on Academic Appeals of UTSC denied the Studentâs
   subsequent appeal noting the Student did not provide evidence that
   showed how adverse personal conditions had caused the crisis that led
   to the Student needing late withdrawals. The Subcommittee noted the
   Student had been diagnosed with depression for nine months before the
   withdrawal period but had not been treated medically or seen a
   specialist. The Subcommittee then urged the Student to consult with a
   doctor and an Academic Advisor further. Before the Academic Appeals
   Committee, the Student provided additional evidence that was not
   presented to the Subcommittee. The Student provided additional
   supporting documents in the form of an affidavit and a medical note to
   substantiate his claims that the death of a close friend occurred and
   that the Studentâs father had heart problems. The Committee accepted
   these events took place. The Committee commended the Studentâs efforts
   in implementing the Subcommitteeâs suggestions in seeking medical and
   academic support. The Committee agreed, though, with the Subcommittee
   that the Student was aware of his depression nine months before the
   drop date for the Courses which provided the Student with enough time
   to have their situation assessed. The Student confirmed that he did not
   seek any academic counselling during this period of time. The Committee
   recognized that petitions for late withdrawal from a course without
   academic penalty are not granted lightly, characterizing the remedy as
   extraordinary and reserved for unusual and unique situations. The
   Committee found there was not enough evidence to justify a late
   withdrawal. The Committee found that the Studentâs mental health issues
   of bipolar disorder, generalized anxiety disorder, attention
   deficit-disorder-adult type and social phobia were not made until June
   2008, one year after the examination period for the courses in
   question. The Committee unanimously agreed that there was insufficient
   evidence of the Studentâs mental condition and the impact of the
   Studentâs mental health on his ability to write the examinations and
   seek academic counselling or withdraw by the required drop date. The
   Committee concluded that the case was not one that justified the
   extraordinary remedy of a late withdrawal. The Committee commented on
   two additional matters that were irrelevant to the outcome of the
   appeal. The Subcommitteeâs decision stated that students looking to
   remove poor marks from their transcripts to gain entry into a
   specialist program are viewed unsympathetically by the University. The
   Committee strongly endorsed the view that there is nothing improper
   about a student trying to improve their academic record. The Committee
   held instead that there must be actual circumstance and evidence which
   supports and justifies a change to an academic record in each case
   beyond the motivation for entry into a particular program. Second, the
   Committee noted the Student filed their Statement of Appeal on July 8,
   2008. The UTSC filed submissions on March 13, 2009 with no meaningful
   explanation for the delay of over eight months. The Committee was of
   the view that the University should implement formal guidelines and set
   out specific deadlines for filing documents required in academic
   appeals to prevent future delays. Appeal dismissed.
   [1]View Report

References

   1. file:///media/12587
