UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
GOVERNING COUNCIL
Report #350 of the Academic Appeals Committee
November 5, 2010

To the Academic Board
University of Toronto
Your Cmmnittee reports that it held a hearing on Thursday, October 7, 2010, at which the
following members were present:
Professor Emeritus Ralph Scane (Chair)
Ms Judith Goldring
Professor Elizabeth Smyth
Professor Wendy Ward
Mr. Gregory West
Secretary: Ms Natalie Ramtahal, Coordinator, Appeals Discipline and Faculty
Grievances

In Attendance:
Nlr. E - S _ , the Student
Mr. Joshua Chan, Law Student, Downtown Legal Services
Mr. Jordan Giurlanda, Law Shident, Downtown Legal Services
Professor Thomas Coyle, Faculty of Applied Science and Engineering
Ms Barbara McCann, Registrar of the Faculty of Applied Science and Engineering
Mr. Khuong Doan, Associate Registrar of the Faculty of Applied Science and
Engineering

1. The Appeal
This is an appeal from the decision, dated August 17, 2010, of the Academic Appeals
Board (the Board) of the Faculty, which denied a petition by the Student to be pe1mitted
to withdraw without academic penalty, after the final date for withdrawal from courses,
from the course APS 105H 1, taken in the Winter Term, 2009. The Shident had previously
petitioned to the Committee on Examinations of the Faculty for relief in this course and
two others. That Committee had granted relief in the fo1m of an assessment of completed
course work, according to the standard formula employed by the Faculty. The assessment

2
raised the course grades in the other two courses to a passing level, but left the grade in
APS105Hl at a failing level.

2. The Background
The Student originally enrolled in the B.A.Sc. program at the Edward S. Rogers Sr.
Department of Electrical & Computer Engineering in the Fall Term of 2007. He
considered that he was making unsatisfactory progress and, upon petition, was granted
leave to withdraw from all courses taken during the term, without academic penalty. He
was readmitted into the first year of the program in the Fall Term of 2008, on academic
probation. His sessional average for that term was insufficient to allow him to proceed
cleanly into the next term, but did permit him to enroll in the Faculty's "T-Program", in
the Winter Term, 2009. This required him to repeat courses in which he had obtained less
than 60%, and, if ce1iain requirements were met, to take a summer term to complete the
required number of first year courses. In the Winter Term, 2009, the Student took five
courses. Two of these were repeated courses and three were new courses, including
APS105Hl.
On January 27, 2009, the Student's father was involved in an automobile accident in the
Student's home country in Europe. The father was seriously i1tjurecl, was in a coma for
several clays, and was in a critical condition for some weeks. The Student continued in his
courses, and \Wote his final examinations at the encl of April and begim1ing of May, 2009.
Unfortunately, during the examination period he developed an acute case of sinusitis, for
which he sought medical treatment.
The Student petitioned the Committee on Examinations for relief from three courses,
including APS 105Hl. His grounds for the request were his medical condition at the time
of his final examinations and the emotional distress he had suffered earlier in the term as
a result of his father's injury.
The Committee granted relief in respect of the three courses requested. We were advised
by Professor Coyle, on behalf of the Faculty, that the relief was granted upon the basis of
the medical evidence. The Committee on Examinations did not consider that a
comparison of the Student's marks on term work following the Father's accident with the
level of marks he had historically been receiving during his time in the Faculty warranted
the conclusion that his marks had been adversely affected by his reaction to the accident.
However, the relief granted was to provide that the three courses be re-assessed in
accordance with the Faculty's standard practice, which applies a given formula (the
Boocock-Will fo1mula) to assess a final course grade. This fomrnla is based upon a
student's "closely-supervised tenn work" and the class average on the final examination.
The course grade awarded after an assessment is the higher of the grade actually achieved
or the grade cletenninecl by the application of the formula. Although previous panels of
your Committee have expressed unease with this particular remedy, they have not
considered it proper to interfere with its application where it is fairly and consistently
applied in a particular case.

3
On applying the formula to the three courses involved in the original petition, two of
these were upgraded to a passing grade. However, although the mark in APS I OH I was
raised by the formula, it remained a failing grade. The Student did not meet the sessional
average required to remain in the "T-Program", was failed, but pe1111itted to re-apply for
admission to the First Year. In fact, he has not done so, but is pursuing another field of
study at a different university.

3. Decision
The appeal should be dismissed.
The Student has based his appeal both on procedural grounds relating to the proceedings
within the Faculty relating to this appeal, and on grounds relating to his particular
circumstances, which are alleged to have adversely affected his performance. Your
Committee will consider the procedural grounds first.
The first procedural ground raised by the Student is that the decision of the Board lacked
sufficient reasons for its decision. Factually, the allegation is correct. The decision simply
upheld the decision of the Board of Examiners, which itself gave no reasons which were
produced to your Committee. Your Committee is prepared to accept that, if the decision
of the Board had been the final decision of the University in this matter, it would not have
survived judicial review by the comis of this province on this ground alone. Given the
importance of the decision to the Student, the common law requirement of procedural
fairness would likely have mandated some form of relief. Your Committee is aware that
large divisions like the Faculty face an equivalently large number of academic petitions
and appeals, and that they would have difficulty in finding the resources to write the
detailed reasons for decision that smaller divisions might deliver. Nevertheless, your
Committee is also aware that divisional appeal committees of divisions of this University
ofat least equivalent size to that of the Faculty do manage to issue decisions that, while
generally terse, at least reveal the core of the reasoning behind the decision. Your
Committee is not convinced that the bareness of the Board's decision in this case is
excusable on the basis of workload. The Board should make an effort to confo1111 its
decisions to the minimum demands of what the comis refer to as natural justice.
However, whatever the failings of the Board's decision in this respect, they do not
mandate the relief sought by the Student. The injury to a sh1dent is that the student
cannot properly evaluate the next step, if any, that should be taken. But here, the Student
has in fact proceeded to this Committee, where his case has been reheard. He has not
been prejudiced by passing up the remedy of a rehearing. A comi would most likely grant
a remedy by nullifying the decision and remitting it to a rehearing. In the circumstances
of this case, where the Student already has a rehearing under your Committee's
procedures, no fmiher relief upon this ground is warranted.
The second procedural ground argued is that the Student did not personally attend the
hearing by the Board of his appeal, in reliance upon cetiain assurances of a member of
the Faculty's administrative staff. The Student filed his appeal from the Board of

4
Examiners with respect to APS I 05Hl on June 26, 2009, and shortly thereafter left for his
home in Europe. On July 27, 2009, a member of the staff of the Registrar of the Faculty
sent him an e-mail, advising that his appeal would be reviewed on August 11, 2009,
giving the particular time and place, and inviting him to appear. The e-mail warned that,
if the Student failed to appear, the appeal would be considered in his absence. It stated,
"There will be absolutely no rescheduling of a hearing."
On July 30, 2009, the Student replied, explaining that he was out of the country, and it
would be difficult for him to attend. He asked as to how much his absence might affect
the decision, and whether he could answer any questions which the Board might have
through e-mail. The same official replied on July 31, 2009:
"Appearance at the hearing is not required and historically makes no
difference as a rule to the outcome of an appeal."
He also stated that the e-mail interchange suggested by the Student would not be possible.
The Student stated that he relied upon this e-mail as an assurance that his personal
appearance would make no difference to the result of his appeal, and did not return to
Toronto for the hearing. Subsequently, this communication was brought to the attention
of other Faculty representatives through the First Year Counsellor (the FYC) of the
Faculty. They agreed that the e-mail message was "ambiguous" and could mislead the
Student into believing that personal attendance would never make a difference, whereas it
sometimes did. According to the Faculty's submission, the Faculty offered, through a
telephone conversation between the FYC and one of the Student's legal advisors, to hold
a rehearing of the appeal, at which the Student could attend. The Student stated that his
understanding was that if he applied, the Faculty would consider a rehearing. In fact, the
Student decided to proceed with his appeal to your Committee, and not to ask for a
rehearing at the Faculty level.
Your Committee is not prepared to afford the relief asked on the above ground. Whatever
the nature of the offer concerning a rehearing (the memorandum of the FYC concerning
the conversation supports the Faculty's version) the Shident declined an opportunity to
pursue at least the possibility of a rehearing at the Faculty level at which he could attend.
He has had a full opportunity to be heard at this present level. In fact, although he made
some comments during the hearing before your Committee, he was not called as a
witness, although he was made available for cross-examination. Again, if, despite your
Committee's views to the contrary, he is entitled to a remedy on this ground, it would be
nullification of the Board's decision and a directed rehearing, not the non-grade notation
of WDR which he seeks. Again, having sought and obtained a full hearing before your
Committee, he is not entitled to go back before the Board for another rehearing there.
Your Committee notes that this case illustrates a difiiculty that students may face when
appeals are scheduled when a student is legitimately off campus. This situation will often
arise during the summer. The student may be at such a distance from the campus that
returning to pmticipate in an appeal is a significant hardship. If it is not feasible for a

5
division to offer flexibility of hearing dates to students in this position, it may be that
teleconferencing or videoconferencing could be an acceptable substitute. Your
Committee hopes that the University will consider developing a protocol for permitting
and financing such distance hearings.
The third procedural ground of appeal advanced by the Student is that he was unaware of
the exact nature of the Faculty's assessment formula, which is not generally published,
and could not therefore anticipate whether the application of this fomrnla would permit
him to continue in the program. This is coupled with the assertion that, having received
his original results and conferred with his FYC, he was advised to seek the remedy of
assessment for his three courses. The Sh1dent alleges that the FYC was under a duty to
pre-apply the formula to his results and determine whether an assessment would give
results that would permit him to remain in his program. If not, the Student states that he
would have sought some other remedy in the first instance, presumably the remedy he is
seeking here.
Your Committee does not find merit in this ground of appeal. It would be desirable for
the Faculty to make the Boocock-Will formula generally known to its students, ifit
indeed does not do so. Ce1iainly the formula can probably be found in some of the
decisions of your Committee published on its website. However, the formula is the
remedy usually applied in the case of successful petitioners within the Faculty, and the
Student was in no different position than any other petitioning student would have been.
Your Committee does not believe that a person in the position of the FYC is under a duty
to conduct a "pre-appeal" to asce1iain that an appeal he or she is counselling a sh1dent to
undetiake will be successful. The FYC may have assumed that the Committee on
Examinations would, in its usual practice, proceed by way of assessment in the event the
petition was successful (an assumption which would have been correct), but the Student
remains responsible for deciding how to proceed. Your Committee is reluctant to
contribute to the establishment of a policy of permitting students who seek advice,
whether from formal counsellors or infonnally, as from teaching faculty members whom
they consult, to effectively transfer the responsibility of deciding upon important
decisions in their lives to the counsellors. The result of such a policy most likely, over
time, would be to lead persons to refrain from giving counsel, or to confine it as narrowly
as possible. Your Committee does not believe this to be in the best interests of the
University or its student body. There may be situations where the advice given is so
irresponsible that relief should be given, but this is not such a case.
Also, in this particular case, the Student did not in fact follow the FYC's advice to the
extent of limiting himself in his petition to requesting the remedy of assessment. His
actual request was "to re-evaluate my academic standings in [three courses], in such a
way so that the final exam marks for [two of the courses) be not taken into consideration
as well as my overall grade for APS I 05 to be a passing grade." While this request
ce1iainly covers the assessment remedy, it is sufficiently open-ended to cover other
remedies. The remedy achially granted came about because of a decision of the
Committee on Examinations, and subsequently, by the Board, not because the Student,
whether in reliance upon the FYC or not, had natTowed the choice of remedy he was

6
seeking. An appeals committee is not restricted to awarding only remedies which have
been specifically requested by a student. Your Committee does not believe that, had the
Student specifically asked for a WDR remedy, it would have been granted, in the face of
the Committee's view of the facts and its policy against granting this remedy in
individual courses except in the most extraordinary circumstances.
Turning to the grounds for appeal based upon the Student's particular circumstances at
the relevant time, the Student alleges that he is entitled to the remedy of late withdrawal
because of the combination of the emotional effect on his ability to pursue his studies
caused by the injury to his father near the end of January, 2009, and his medical problem
during the end of term final examinations. The latter has been recognized by the Faculty
as affording grounds for relief, although the relief afforded, the application of the formula
to assess a grade, did not remove his failure in APSI0SHI. The Faculty reviews did not
find that the evidence of the possible effect on his studies of his father's injury merited
the conclusion that fmiher relief in the failed course was justified.
As described to your Committee, the Committee on Examinations, having decided that
relief is merited and that the Boocock-Will formula should be employed, relies upon a
"Tenn Work Rep01i" from the course instructor. This shows the maximum marks
available from the final examination, from "closely supervised term work", and from "not
closely supervised term work", the actual total marks achieved by the student under these
three categories, and the class average in each category, as well as the student's total
mark and the total class average. To this data, the formula is applied. Unf01iunately for
your Committee's purposes, the form does not break down the individual components of
the "closely supervised" category which is so crucial to the validity of the formula, and
we understood the Faculty's evidence to be that this breakdown was not sought out by the
Committee on Examinations. As the Student pointed out, if some of these components
are unreliable, for example if some term work is affected by illness or other cause, and
are not removed from the calculation, the result of the application of the formula is to that
extent less reliable. However, in this case, the formula as applied still left the Student five
marks below a passing grade. Without evidence as to what eligible marks included in the
total marks for "closely supervised term work" might reasonably have been deemed
affected by the reaction to the father's injury, and what the result of their removal from
the calculations would have been, your Committee finds that the onus of showing that the
formula as applied in this case brought about an incorrect failing assessment has not been
met. There is no basis for concluding that such evidence was unobtainable. For example,
the course instructor has indicated sympathy towards the Student, and might have
supplied the necessary infonnation if asked. In the absence of a conclusion that the
Faculty's application of its appeal procedures was unfair or unreasonable by the standards
applied to all of its students, there is no basis for substituting the specific relief now
requested by the Student for the result determined by the Board.
The appeal is dismissed.

