Report #350

   DATE: November 5, 2010
   PARTIES: E.S.Â  (the Student) v. University of Toronto, Faculty of
   Applied Sciences and Engineering
   Hearing Date(s): October 7, 2010
   Committee Members:
   Professor Emeritus Ralph Scane, Chair
   Judith Goldring
   Professor Elizabeth Smyth
   Professor Wendy Ward
   Gregory West
   Appearances:
   For the Student Appellant:
   E.S. (the Student)
   Joshua Chan, DLS for the Student
   Jordan Giurlanda, DLS for the Student
   For the University of Toronto, Faculty of Applied Sciences and
   Engineering:
   Professor Thomas Coyle, Faculty of Applied Science and Engineering
   Barbara McCann, Registrar of the Faculty of Applied Science and
   Engineering
   Khuong Doan, Associate Registrar of Faculty of Applied Science of
   Engineering
   University of Toronto, Faculty of Applied Science and Engineering â
   late withdrawal without academic penalty â T-Program â family
   circumstances â automobile accident â Boocock-Will formula â
   reassessment â procedural issues â failure to provide sufficient
   reasons â Student could not attend the hearing â precise nature of the
   Boocock-Will formula â re-evaluation of academic standing â onus of
   showing the formula was incorrectly applied â onus not met â appeal
   dismissed
   Appeal of a decision to deny the Student his petition for a late
   withdrawal without academic penalty. The Student had originally been
   granted leave to withdraw from all courses taken during the Studentâs
   first term. The Student was readmitted into the program the next year
   but did not achieve a sessional average that was sufficient to proceed
   into the next term. The Student then enrolled into the Faculty of
   Applied Science and Engineeringâs âT-Programâ. The Studentâs father was
   soon after involved in a serious automobile accident in the Studentâs
   home country in Europe. The Student continued in his courses and wrote
   his final examinations. The Student developed an acute case of
   sinusitis during the examination period, for which he sought medical
   treatment. The Student petitioned for relief from three courses on the
   grounds of his medical condition and the emotional stress he
   experienced as a result of his fatherâs injury. The Committee granted
   relief upon the basis of the medical evidence. The three courses were
   re-assessed under the Boocock-Will formula. The Committee noted that
   previous committees had expressed unease with the formula, but had not
   considered it proper to interfere with its application. The Committee
   held that the Studentâs submission that the Board lacked sufficient
   reasons for its decision was factually correct. The Committee found,
   though, that the failure of the Board to provide sufficient reasons for
   its decision did not necessitate the relief sought by the Student.
   Since the Student already had the opportunity to be heard again under
   by the existing Committee, the procedural fairness issues were then
   moot and no further relief was warranted. The Committee further found
   that the second procedural ground raised by the Student, that the
   Student could not attend the hearing was insufficient to grant the
   remedy of a late withdrawal without academic penalty. The Committee
   found that the Student declined an opportunity to pursue the
   possibility of a rehearing at the Faculty level at which he could
   attend and that the Student had the opportunity of a full hearing
   before the Committee. The Committee further held that the Studentâs
   submission that he was unaware of the precise nature of the
   Boocock-Will formula and did not wish for it to be used as a remedy was
   insufficient to grant the remedy sought. The Committee held that, since
   the Student did not request an assessment under the formula, but merely
   requested a re-evaluation of academic standing, it was the prerogative
   of the lower committee to apply the formula. The remedy granted in a
   previous appeal came about because of the discretionary decision of the
   Committee on Examinations to apply the formula and not because of any
   request of the Student. The Committee held the Committee on
   Examinations was acting within its powers in that regard. The Committee
   concluded by finding that the onus of showing that the formula was
   incorrectly applied was not met and that there was no basis for
   substituting the specific relief requested by the Student. Appeal
   dismissed.
   [1]View Report

References

   1. file:///media/12594
