THE UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
IN THE MATTER OF charges of academic dishonesty made on
September 16, 2013
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on
Academic Matters, 1995,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Act, 1971, S.O.
1971, c. 56, as amended.

BETWEEN:

THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
-AND-

REASONS FOR DECISION

Hearing Date: Wednesday, January 29, 2014
Panel Members:
Ms. Dena Varah, Barrister and Solicitor, Chair
Professor Ernest Lam, Faculty of Dentistry, Faculty Member
Mr. Blake Chapman, Student Member
Appearances:
Mr. Robert A. Centa, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Barristers
In Attendance
Dr. Kristi Gourlay, Manager, Office of Student Academic Integrity, Faculty of Arts
and Science, University of Toronto
Mr. Christopher Lang, Director, Appeals , Discipline and Faculty Grievances,
Office of the Governing Counsel

REASONS FOR DECISION

1.

The Trial Division of the University of Toronto Tribunal was convened on

January 29, 2014 to consider charges advanced by the University of Toronto (the
"University") against

ca

~ ~ (the "Student") under the Code of

Behaviour on Academic Matters (the "Code").
2.

The Student did not respond to any correspondence from the University.

Discipline Counsel provided an affidavit of service confirming that the Student
was served with the Notice of Hearing at his University-issued email address,
which meets the standard of service pursuant to the University Policy on Official
Correspondence with Students. Discipline Counsel also advised the Panel that
the Student had not registered for a course at the University since December
2012. The Panel waited for 15 minutes after the scheduled start time for the
hearing and then proceeded in the Student's absence.
PART 2 - THE CHARGES

3.

The Student is charged with seven offences under the Code:

(1) On or about April 5, 2012, you knowingly falsified a document or evidence
required by the University of Toronto, or uttered, circulated or made use of
any such falsified document or evidence, by representing that you had
attended Huazhong University of Science and Technology from September
2001 to July 2003 in your application for post-admission transfer credit,
contrary to Section B.1.1 (a) of the Code.

2

(2) On or about April 12, 2012, you knowingly forged or in any other way altered
or falsified an academic record, and/or uttered, circulated or made use of
such forged, altered or falsified record, namely, a document which purported
to be your Undergraduate Academic Record from Huazhong University of
Science and Technology, contrary to Section B.l.3(a) of the Code.
(3) On or about April 12, 2012, you knowingly forged or in any other way altered
or falsified a document or evidence required by the University of Toronto, or
uttered, circulated or made use of any such forged, altered or falsified
document,

namely,

a document that purported

to

be your official

Undergraduate Academic Record from Huazhong University of Science and
Technology, which you submitted in support of your application for postadmission transfer credit, contrary to Section B.1.1 (a) of the Code.
(4) On or about April 12, 2012, you knowingly forged or in any other way altered
or falsified an academic record, and/or uttered, circulated or made use of
such forged, altered or falsified record, namely, a document which purported
to be an English translation of your Undergraduate Academic Record from
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, contrary to Section B.l.3(a)
of the Code.
(5) On or about April 12, 2012, you knowingly forged or in any other way altered
or falsified a document or evidence required by the University of Toronto, or
uttered, circulated or made use of any such forged, altered or falsified
document, namely, a document that purported to be an English translation of
your official Undergraduate Academic Record from Huazhong University of
Science and Technology, which you submitted in support of your application
for post-admission transfer credit, contrary to Section B.1.1 (a) of the Code.
(6) On or about April 27, 2012, you knowingly falsified a document or evidence
required by the University of Toronto, or uttered, circulated or made use of
any such falsified document or evidence, by representing that you had

3

attended Huazhong University of Science and Technology in support of your
application for transfer credit, contrary to Section B.1.1 (a) of the Code.
(7) In the alternative to each of the charges set out above, on the relevant dates
indicated in each charge, you knowingly engaged in a form of cheating,
academic dishonesty or misconduct,

fraud

or misrepresentation

not

otherwise described in order to obtain academic credit or other academic
advantage of any kind, contrary to Section B.1.3(b) of the Code.
4.

Discipline Counsel advised that the University was not proceeding with

charges (2) and (3).
5.

Discipline Counsel further advised that if the Panel found the Student

guilty of any of the other charges then the University withdrew charge (7).
PART 3 - THE FACTS UNDERLYING THE CHARGES

6.

The Student was registered in the Faculty of Arts and Science at the

University commencing in the fall term 2011.
7.

The University filed the Affidavit of Tracy Wood, Assistant Faculty

Registrar in the Transfer Credits office at the Faculty of Arts and Science at the
University. As Ms. Wood was on leave at the time of the hearing, she was not
available to testify. Discipline Counsel submitted that the University Tribunal
Rules of Practice and Procedure permitted affidavit evidence to be filed to prove
the truth of facts and documents. The Panel was satisfied that the facts
contained in and documents attached to Ms. Wood's affidavit were admissible for
the truth of their contents.

4

8.

On April 5, 2012, the Student applied for post-admission transfer credits.

The transfer credit request submitted by the Student indicated that he had
attended Huazhong University of Science and Technology ("HUST"), and that he
was requesting transfer credits because "some of the courses i need to take at
UT are the same as the course i already took at HUST". The student listed eight
courses he already took at HUST and for which he was seeking transfer credits.
9.

In support of the transfer credit request, the Student submitted a copy of a

transcript from HUST along with a course outline providing course descriptions of
the courses purportedly completed by the Student at HUST. The transcript
appeared to have an official stamp, which read "Jiang Hongyang Director of
Archives Huazhong University of Science and Technology." The Student also
submitted with the transcript a certificate of a notary public confirming that the
copy of the transcript was a true copy of the original document.
10.

Ms. Wood was concerned that the transcript indicated that the Student

had completed these courses prior to his registration at the University. The
Student should have applied to transfer these credits at the time he applied for
admission to the University and not as post-admission transfer credits. Ms. Wood
also noted that the Student did not include these post-secondary studies at the
time of his application, which was contrary to his disclosure obligations.
11.

Ms. Wood requested that the Student explain why he failed to disclose this

information during the application process. He responded by letter received April
27, 2012, in which he stated that he did not know that he could transfer his
5

college credits to the University when he first enrolled. He stated that one of his
friends had recently informed him that he could transfer these credits, which is
why he applied for post-admission transfer credits. At the end of his letter he
wrote, "I already had the knowledge I don't want to waste my time to study the
same material again, I want to use the time to learn some new stuff."
12.

Ms. Wood reviewed the Student's records and discovered certain

inconsistencies, including that the dates the Student was allegedly at HUST
overlapped with the time that he was attending high school in Ontario.
13.

As a result, Ms. Wood contacted HUST by email to confirm the information

provided to her by the Student. By email of January 16, 2013, Mr. HE Gang, Vice
Director of the International Exchange Center at HUST advised that the Student's
documents, including the contents and the stamps, were "fake". He followed up
by email of January 17, 2013 that the School of Economics confirmed that there
was no record of a student by the name of the Student in the year 2008. He also
noted that the Academic Record submitted was not consistent with HUST's
curriculum as some of the courses would only be available for second and third
year students.
14.

Ms. Wood met with the Student on February 11, 2013 to discuss her

findings. At this meeting, the Student stated that he attended HUST in 20092010. Ms. Wood showed him the transcript he submitted, which he confirmed
was his transcript from his time at HUST. After being told that the timelines did
not make sense and that Ms. Wood had written to HUST to enquire about these
6

records, the Student admitted that he had not attended HUST. Ms. Wood then
wrote a report to the Office of Student Academic Integrity documenting her
findings and her meeting with the student.
15.

Despite multiple attempts beginning in February 2013, the Office of

Student Academic Integrity was unsuccessful in contacting the Student.
PART 4 - DECISION ON CHARGES

16.

The Panel was satisfied that the facts supported conviction on charges 1,

4, 5 and 6. Charge 7 was therefore withdrawn and the Panel makes no findings
in this regard.
17.

Charge 1 was altered to remove the date the Student represented he had

attended HUST. The Charge stated that he represented that he had attended
there from September 2001 to July 2003. As it was not clear the exact dates
upon which the Student purported to attend HUST, the Panel felt that the charge
was not supportable with the date clause included.
18.

On Charge 1, the facts support that the Student did not attend HUST, and

that he represented that he took eight courses at HUST to the University in his
application for post-admission transfer credits.
19.

On Charges 4 and 5, the facts support that the Student forged the English

translation of his purported Undergraduate Academic Record from HUST. Staff at
HUST confirmed this. The Student submitted this transcript to support his
application for post admission transfer credits.

7

20.

With regard to Charge 6, the Student provided an explanation letter

received by the University on April 27, 2012. The Student reiterated that he
attended college in China, and that he was seeking to transfer those credits. This
was untrue. The facts establish the components of this charge.

PART 5- PENALTY
Submissions on Penalty

21.

Discipline Counsel submitted that the appropriate penalty in this case is a

suspension of five years to come into effect immediately, a recommendation to
the President that he in turn recommend to the Governing Council that the
Student be expelled from the University and the case be reported to the Provost,
with the student's name redacted for publication of the Decision of the Panel and
sanction imposed.
22.

Discipline Counsel outlined the factors the Panel should consider in

determining the appropriate penalty:
(a)

the character of the person charged;

(b)

the likelihood on repetition of the offence;

(c)

the nature of the offence committed;

(d)

any extenuating circumstances surrounding the commission of the
offence;

(e)

the detriment to the University occasioned by the offence; and
8

(f)

the need to deter others from committing a similar offence.

(In the Matter of the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour and an Appeal by
Mr. C, File 1976/77-3)

23.

As the Student had not participated in the process, Discipline Counsel

acknowledged that there is no evidence before the Panel of the character of the
Student or of any mitigating factors on penalty. He also acknowledged that the
offence was not likely to be repeated, as the Student is no longer registered with
the University.
24.

Discipline Counsel submitted that the nature of the offence, the detriment

to the University occasioned by the offence and the need to deter others all
support expulsion in this case. He argued that the offence was extremely serious,
and violated the trust the University places in students in the admissions and
credit transfer process. He noted that the University cannot reasonably verify
every statement and document submitted by students, such that the detriment to
the University occasioned by these offences is substantial. Given the significant
trust placed in the students in these situations, there is a real need for general
deterrence.
25.

Discipline Counsel relied on sixteen precedents in which students had

committed similar offences. In the precedents in which students forged
documents and misrepresented their academic history for transfer credits or
admission, students were expelled the vast majority of the time.

He indicated

9

that he was not aware of a case such of this in which the student declined to
participate in the process and received a penalty less than expulsion.
PART 6 - DECISION ON PENAL TY

26.

The Panel carefully considered the facts of this case, the factors in

deciding penalty and the precedents put before it. It is aware that the prior
Tribunal decisions, are not binding on it. These decisions do, however, offer
guidance for the Panel on the penalties imposed on other students in similar
circumstances. It has determined that the proper penalty in this case is a fiveyear suspension, a recommendation to the President that he recommend to the
Governing Council that the Student be expelled and a publication of this decision
with the Student's name redacted.
27.

The Panel agreed with Discipline Counsel that the most important factors

in this case are the nature of the offences, the detriment to the University
occasioned by the offences and the need for general deterrence.
28.

In University of Toronto and M.K. (Case Number 491; November 5, 2008),

the student applied for post-admission transfer credits for two courses she
claimed to have taken at a university in Ukraine. The student certified that the
information she was providing was true and accurate. She submitted what
purported to be a certified transcript of academic record, a document that
purported to be a certified curriculum for one course and another document
purporting to be a certified syllabus for the other course.

10

29.

In M.K., the student participated in the process and pied guilty to the

central charges. She testified about health issues, including depression, anxiety
and panic attacks, although the evidence established that she was well at the
material time. The panel did not give effect to her submission, noting the
"planned

and

deliberate nature of this

offence"

to

circumvent course

requirements by fraudulently obtaining two half credits. Referencing the need to
protect the integrity of the University community and the need for deterrence, the
panel recommended expulsion. It is of note that the student was only one credit
away from meeting her graduation requirements.
30.

The University of Toronto v. A.K. (Case Number 523; January 14, 2009),

involved false statements in an admissions application as well as forged
transcripts and course descriptions in an application for post-admission transfer
credit, The student pied guilty to the charges and contested penalty. The student
submitted evidence in

support of mitigation,

including letters from

an

endocrinologist and a psychological consultant speaking to the student's physical
and emotional conditions. Although the panel found that the student appeared
genuinely remorseful, it concluded that the evidence did not have a sufficient
nexus to the circumstances to result in a lesser penalty. The panel recommended
expulsion.
31.

These cases are instructive as the offences are very similar to those at

issue here. Although there are some factual differences, the material facts and
the factors considered in determining penalty are all applicable here. In this case,
the Student sought credits for eight courses, courses he would otherwise be
11

required to complete to earn his degree. Had he succeeded in his fraudulent
conduct, he would have the same degree as his peers earned in less time with
fewer credits. This is not only a profound unfairness to his peers, and the
academic community at large, but also a detriment to the integrity of the degree
issued by this institution. The gravity of this offence cannot be overstated.
32.

In addition, the system of permitting post-academic transfer credits is a

benefit to the student body. It permits students to take additional courses at other
institutions and apply those credits to their degree requirements. However, as
Discipline Counsel noted, the system is based on trust in that not every transcript
or syllabus can be verified in the painstaking manner employed in this situation.
The need for general deterrence is high as students must appreciate that this
conduct will be met with the most severe response.
33.

As the Student did not participate in the process, the panel could make no

findings on his character or mitigating factors on penalty.
34.

The panel notes that there were a limited number of precedents before it

in which the students received lesser penalties of suspension, but those cases
did not persuade the panel that a lesser penalty was appropriate in this case. In
each of those cases, the students participated in the process, which permitted
mitigating evidence to be before the panel, including the responsibility they took
for their actions.

In one case, there was compelling character evidence that

persuaded the panel to suspend rather than revoke a degree of a university
graduate convicted of misrepresenting his academic achievements to potential
12

employers. (The University of Toronto and ~ ~ {Case Number 637;
May 1, 2007}).
PART 7 - ORDER
35.

Accordingly, the Panel imposes the following penalty:
(a)

The Student by suspended from the University for a period of 5
years effective immediately;

(b)

A recommendation be made to the President that he recommend to
the Governing Council that the Student be expelled from the
University; and

(c)

This case be reported to the Provost, with the Student's name
withheld, for publication of a notice of the Decision and sanction
imposed.

Dena

13

