Case #761

   DATE: April 16, 2014
   PARTIES: University of Toronto v D.Z.
   Hearing Date(s): January 29, 2014
   Panel Members:
   Dena Varah, Chair
   Ernest Lam, Faculty Member
   Blake Chapman, Student Member
   Appearances:
   Robert Centa, Assistant Discipline Counsel
   In Attendance:
   Kristi Gourlay, Office of Academic Integrity, Faculty of Arts and
   Science
   Christopher Lang, Director, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances
   Trial Division â s. B.i.3(a), s. B.i.3(a) and s. B.i.3(b) of the Code â
   falsified academic records â document purporting to be undergraduate
   transcriptâapplication for credit transfer â witness affidavit âStudent
   did not attend hearing â Student given reasonable notice of Hearing â
   finding of guilt Â â five-year suspension; recommendation that the
   Student be expelled; report to Provost for publication
   The Trial Division of the Tribunal was convened on January 29, 2014 to
   consider charges laid against the Student. The Student did not respond
   to the University who produced an affidavit confirming the Student
   received adequate notice. The Panel waited fifteen minutes before
   proceeding in the Studentâs absence.
   Student charged with three offences under s. B.i.1(a) , one under s.
   B.i.3(a) and, in the alternative, a charge under s. B.i.3(b) of the
   Code . The charges related to allegations that the student had forged
   and falsified several documents including documents purporting to be an
   Undergraduate Academic Record, a translation of that Record and
   required supporting documentation required by the University in an
   application for transfer credits. The University advised that if the
   Student was found guilty on any of the other charges the University
   would withdraw the alternative charge.
   The University filed the affidavit of the Witness who was unable to
   attend the hearing. The Panel was satisfied with its admissibility. The
   Witness is the Â Assistant Faculty Registrar in the Transfer Credits
   Office at the Faculty of Arts and Science who received a transfer
   credit request from the Student for eight courses. The Student
   submitted a copy of his transcript, a course outline and a notary
   public certificate confirming the originality of the transcript. The
   Witness, bothered by inconsistent dates on the transcript, contacted
   the Studentâs undergraduate school. The undergraduate school advised
   that the Studentâs documents were fake. The Witness met with the
   Student who admitted he had not attended that school. Since then the
   University has been unable to contact the Student.
   The Panel was satisfied the facts supported a conviction on all charges
   and the alternative charge was withdrawn. The first charge under s.
   B.i.1(a) was altered to remove dates the Panel felt were unclear
   regarding what the Student had represented.
   The University submitted that the sanction here should include an
   immediate five year suspension, a recommendation of expulsion, and that
   case be reported to the Provost for publication. Discipline Counsel
   cited University of Toronto and Mr. C. (November 5, 1976/77-3)
   outlining the factors the Panel should consider when determining a
   penalty. As the Student had not participated in the process there was
   no evidence on character or extenuating circumstances, though as the
   Student is no longer registered at the University the offence is
   unlikely to be repeated. Discipline Counsel submitted that the
   remaining factors (seriousness of offence, deterrent, and detriment to
   the University) and sixteen similar precedents called for expulsion.
   Discipline Counsel was not aware of a similar case where the Student
   did not participate and received a penalty less than expulsion.
   The University considered two similar cases in which the students were
   involved and expressed remorse but the Panel recommended expulsion. The
   Panel noted the unfairness to the Studentâs peers, the gravity of the
   offence and the need for general deterrence.
   The Panel imposed a five-year immediate suspension, recommended that
   the Student be expelled from the University, and ordered that the case
   be reported to the Provost for publication.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12830
