Report 262

DATE:

   February 11, 2002

PARTIES:

   Ms. P.H., (the appellant) v the Faculty of Arts and Science

Hearing Date(s):

   December 3, 2001

Committee Members:

   Professor Ed Morgan, Acting Chair
   Dr. Alice Dong
   Professor Luigi Girolametto
   Professor Gretchen Kerr
   Ms. Heather Schramm

Judicial Affairs Officer:

   Mr. Paul Holmes

In Attendance:

   Ms. P.H., the appellant
   Ms. Emily Morton, Downtown Legal Services, counsel for the appellant
   Ms. Sari Springer, Cassels Brock, counsel for the Faculty of Applied
   Science and Engineering
   Professor Raymond Kwong, for the Faculty of Applied Science and
   Engineering
   Professor Doug Lavers, for the Faculty of Applied Science and
   Engineering
   Ms. Ella Lund-Thomsen, Undergraduate Counselor, Faculty of Applied
   Science and Engineering
   Ms. Barbara McCann, Faculty Registrar, Faculty of Applied Science and
   Engineering

   Appeal of late withdrawal without academic penalty granted for five
   courses taken in the term and an appeal of a course grade the appellant
   received in the previous term. The Student fell below the required
   sessional term average and was placed on repeat probation. The Student
   petitioned the grades on medical grounds and the Faculty granted her
   late withdrawal without academic penalty for the courses taken in the
   term. The Student claimed that she did not hear about the Facultyâs
   relief until two weeks prior to the final exams in the subsequent term
   and that she believed she was properly registered in that term. The
   Student claimed that conversations with a Professor amounted to an
   agreement that she be allowed to proceed with the subsequent term, and,
   that if she performed adequately in the term, her retroactive
   withdrawal would be revoked. The Committee found that the Professor did
   not have the authority to make the purported agreement with the
   Student, that the Student was aware of this, having pursued the
   appropriate appeal procedures through the Faculty, and that the Student
   did not rely to her detriment on the conversations with the Professor.
   The Committee found that the Student received notice of the Facultyâs
   decisions in a timely manner, and that the decisions were valid even if
   there was a postal mishap. The Student was advised orally that the
   written decisions would be forthcoming, and a tuition fee refund and
   the Studentâs status on ROSI had already effectively notified her of
   the decision. With respect to the appeal of the grade received in the
   previous term, the Student claimed that the course instructor agreed to
   retroactively adjust her mark in consideration of her medical problems.
   The increase in the grade would raise the Studentâs sessional average
   so as to eliminate her probation upon commencing in the subsequent
   year, which would, in turn, eliminate her repeat probation. The
   Committee found that the instructor did not have the authority to
   increase the Studentâs grade for medical reasons, and that the Student
   never properly appealed her grade for that course. Appeal dismissed.
   [1]View Report

References

   1. file:///media/12544
