Case 966

DATE:

   February 27, 2019

PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v B.L.

Hearing Date:

   December 17, 2018

Panel Members:

   Ms. Roslyn M. Tsao, Chair
   Professor Ken Derry, Faculty Member
   Ms. Elizabeth Frangos, Student Member

Appearances:

   Ms. Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel for University, Palaire
   Roland Rosenberg Rothstein LLP
   Ms. Brittany Smith, Counsel for the Student, Bytensky Prutschi Shikhman

In Attendance:

   Christopher Lang, Director, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances

   The Student was charged with five counts of academic misconduct for
   falsifying evidence required by the University contrary to section
   B.i.1(a) of the Code, and for falsifying an academic record and
   engaging in academic dishonesty contrary to sections B.i.3(a) and (b)
   of the Code, respectively. The charges related to the Studentâs
   application for admission to the University and to the Studentâs
   application for an undergraduate research grant.Â  Both applications
   omitted relevant information regarding the Studentâs prior attendance
   at another post-secondary institution and the conferral of a degree
   from that institution. The Student did not attend the hearing, but was
   represented at the hearing by legal counsel.

   The Panel found the Student guilty of violating section B.i.3(a) of the
   Code based on an Agreed Statement of Facts wherein the Student admitted
   to knowingly committing an academic offence by submitting a falsified
   academic record in his application for admission to the University.Â
   The Panel referred to the Universityâs âPolicy on Access to Student
   Academic Recordsâ to confirm that the definition of âacademic recordâ
   includes a studentâs application for admission to the University and
   supporting documents.Â  The University withdrew all remaining charges.

   The parties submitted a Joint Submission on Penalty recommending the
   Student be expelled from the University. In deciding whether to accept
   the Joint Submission on Penalty, the Panel noted that the Student had
   no prior academic misconduct at the University and had pleaded guilty
   at the hearing. However, the Panel found the Studentâs denials prior to
   the hearing, and his âcatch-me-if-you-canâ attitude, mitigated against
   a finding of remorse from his guilty plea at the hearing.Â  While
   assessing the Studentâs character, the Panel highlighted deliberate
   misrepresentations made by the Student in a letter to the Admission
   Committee of the Computer Engineering Department.Â  The Panel stated
   that this letter provided insight into the lengths to which the Student
   went to mislead the University.Â  The Panel described the letter as
   âwholly designedâ to create an impression that the Student was not in
   school when, in fact, he was actively pursuing a degree at another
   institution.Â  The Panel found that the Studentâs application for a
   research grant, filed after admission to the University, was an
   indicator of the Studentâs propensity to re-offend.Â  The Panel
   concluded that the nature of the offence and corresponding detriment to
   the University were significant because the place of another applicant
   had been usurped by the Student through his misleading and falsified
   application. The Panel stated that cases provided by the University
   demonstrated that the requested penalty was in the appropriate range of
   sanctions in similar circumstances. The Panel also stated that the
   threshold for departing from a joint submission on penalty was very
   high and required a finding that the acceptance of same would be
   contrary to the public interest and bring the administration of justice
   into disrepute.Â  No such finding was made in this case.

   The Panel accepted the partiesâ Joint Submission on Penalty
   recommending the Student be expelled from the University. The Panel
   noted that expulsion was the only practical remedy available given that
   the Studentâs application for admission was based on false information
   and the Panel had no jurisdiction to revoke his credits.Â  In addition
   to the expulsion recommendation, the Panel also ordered the following
   sanctions: immediate five-year suspension or until the expulsion
   recommendation was accepted by the University, whichever came first; a
   corresponding notation on the Studentâs academic record and transcript;
   and publication by the Provost of a notice of the decision and
   sanctions with the Studentâs name withheld.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12984
