Report 274

DATE:

   February 28, 2003

PARTIES:

   Mr. A.C. v. the School of Graduate Studies

Hearing Date(s):

   September 11, 2002

Committee Members:

   Professor Ed Morgan, Chair
   Dr. Alice Dong
   Professor Luigi Girolametto
   Mr. David Melville
   Professor Cheryl Misak

Secretary:

   Mr. Paul Holmes, Judicial Affairs Officer

In Attendance:

   Mr. A.C., the student
   Professor Susan Howson, Associate Dean, School of Graduate Studies

   Appeal from the termination of the Student from the Ph.D program in the
   Graduate Department of Sociology. The Student was considered to be a
   âlapsedâ student but had been readmitted into the program after a
   Faculty committee determined his thesis should go forward to defence.
   Upon reinstatement the Studentâs thesis received a negative evaluation
   by an external examiner and it did not pass the programâs oral
   examination. After failing the oral examination the Student was
   terminated from the program. The Student appealed the termination
   directly to the Graduate Academic Appeals Board which, in dismissing
   the appeal, concluded that the reinstatement process had not been
   improper. The Student claimed that the Board erred in finding that the
   test for readmittance had been properly met and that the professor who
   oversaw his readmittance held no intellectual and philosophical bias
   against him; and that the Board erred in failing to seek and obtain an
   independent, unbiased evaluation of the thesis and to investigate the
   reasons behind the negative vote of the external examiner. The
   Committee found that the test for readmittance was properly set out by
   the Graduate Academic Appeals Board and was met in the case. The
   Committee found no evidence to indicate that the thesis should not have
   been allowed to proceed to defense. The Committee considered the
   Studentâs version of the conversations between him and the Professor in
   question, and found that while the Professor may have told the Student
   that he was not up to expected standards, that did not establish any
   misconduct or actionable bias. The Committee found that the Board was
   not required to seek an independent evaluation of the thesis because
   there was no evidence that the existing evaluations were biased, done
   in bad faith, or otherwise improper. The thesis was already subject to
   an external evaluation that was highly critical. The Committee found
   that there was nothing put before it that undermined the forcefulness
   or appropriateness of the existing external evaluation. The Committee
   found that the Student did not provided evidence of wrongdoing by the
   external examiner and to conduct an investigation based solely on the
   Studentâs claim of wrongdoing would have been inappropriate. Appeal
   dismissed.
   [1]View Report

References

   1. file:///media/12547
