Report 426

DATE:

   April 13, 2023

PARTIES:

   T.S.C. ("the Student"). v. the Faculty of Applied Science and
   Engineering

HEARING DATE(S):

   March 10, 2023 via Zoom

COMMITTEE MEMBERS:

   Cheryl Milne, Chair
   Professor Jan Mahrt-Smith, Faculty Governor
   Susan Froom, Student Governor

SECRETARY:

   Christopher Lang, Director, Office of Appeals, Discipline and Faculty
   Grievances

APPEARANCES:

FOR THE STUDENT APPELLANT:

   The Student

FOR THE FACULTY OF Applied SCIENCE & ENGINEERING

   Professor Thomas Coyle, Vice Dean, Undergraduate

   The Student appeals the decision of the Faculty of Applied Science and
   Engineeringâs Academic Appeals Board denying his request to write a
   deferred exam in the 2022 Winter session. The Student is asking for an
   order allowing him to write a deferred exam or alternatively,
   permitting a reweighted assessment based on his earlier performance in
   the course.

   The Student had been granted a deferral by the Undergraduate
   Assessments Committee for the exam on April 25, 2022, due to illness
   but missed the deferred exam. He petitioned for a second further
   deferral. The Academic Appeals Board denied an appeal for a second
   deferral. The Student posits that the decision granting him a deferral
   of the April 25, 2022 exam was not communicated to him with enough time
   to write the deferred exam which was held on May 18, 2022. The Faculty
   posits that the Student was made aware of the date regarding the first
   deferral and that the Student claimed he could not write the deferred
   exam because he would not be in the country at the time. The Academic
   Appeals Board denied the Studentâs appeal on the basis of insufficient
   evidence and justification.

   An email exchange between the Student and his academic advisor, found
   through questioning by your Committee, was used to shed light on
   whether the Student was told by his academic advisor that his deferral
   was approved. The Student maintained in his submissions that he was not
   informed of this decision and the only countering evidence from the
   Faculty was a notation in the Faculty Portal marking that the Student
   was scheduled to leave the country and that he knew of the May 18
   deferred exam date, which was made public to all students.

   In the email correspondence uncovered by Committee questioning, an
   email dated April 29, 2022 shows that the Student advised his advisor
   that he was leaving the country in a couple of days but required advice
   given that the final petition result was still pending. In a responding
   email on April 30, 2022, his advisor informed the Student that his
   petition was still under review. Through an email exchange on May 18 it
   is clear that while the Student knew there was an exam scheduled for
   May 18, 2022, the Faculty Portal still showed that his petition was in
   progress. An email provided by the Academic Advisor confirm that the
   Student had not been advised of the final decision of his petition
   until May 26, 2022.

   The Committee considered the issue of the communication of the deferral
   decision and found that while the Student knew about an exam on May 18,
   2022, he was unaware about the final decision of his petition. The
   Committee considered the issue of the expectation of the Studentâs
   attendance at the May 18 exam. The Committee found that there was a
   lack of clear communication to the Student about the decision for his
   petition. The Committee found that it is not reasonable for the Faculty
   to conclude the Student should have attended the May 18, 2022, exam
   when he did not know whether he would be permitted to write it.
   Additionally, while the Faculty argued that it was fair to hold the
   Student accountable for not attending when other students had, the
   Committee notes that assessments of fairness for other students is not
   relevant to the determination of whether the decision for the Student
   in this appeal was fair and reasonable. The Committee considered the
   issue of the reasonableness of the Academic Appeal Boardâs finding
   respecting the evidence. The Committee found it concerning that the
   material the Faculty filed painted an incomplete picture of the
   information in the Advisoryâs Portal. Material provided after the
   Committeeâs questioning largely confirms the Studentâs claim that he
   was told his deferral petition was still pending up until May 26, 2022.
   The Committeeâs conclusion is that had the additional emails been
   provided to the Academic Appeal Board, they ought to have reached a
   different conclusion. The Committee did not find it reasonable to find
   that there was insufficient evidence to support the Studentâs appeal as
   the Portal notation and emails confirmed the Studentâs claims.

   The appeal is allowed. The Committee recommends that the choice of
   remedy be made by the Faculty but suggests that this decision be made
   as soon as possible.

   [1]View Report

References

   1. file:///media/31058
