Casc516

THE UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO

IN THE MATTER OF charges of academic dishonesty made on October 23, 2007;
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic Ma/lers,

1995;
AND IN THE MATTER OF the Universily o/Toronto Act, 1971, S.O. 1971, c, 56 as amended S.O,
J978, C, 88
BETWEEN:
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
- and B

A

Membel's of the Panel:
•
•
•

Ms. Julie Hannaford, Chair
Professor Marc Lewis, Faculty Panel Member
M1·. Alex Kenjeev, Student Panel Member

Appeal'ances:
•
•

Mr, Rob Centa, Assistant Discipline Counsel,
Dr. Kristi Gomlay, Manager, Office of Student Academic Integrity

•

Mr. Max Shapiro, Student Representative for Mr. ~ Downtown Legal Services

•

Mr.

A--

B,■-1 Student

REASONS FOR DECISION

[I]

Mr.

Aalll B - was charged with a number of offences under the Code of

Behaviour on Academic 1vfa11ers ("the Code"). At the opening of his hearing, Mr .
B

.pleaded guilty to the following:

-l-

Cnsc516

CHARGE# 1:

On or about April 5, 2007, you knowingly represented as your own
idea or expression of an idea, and/or the work of another in
connection with your paper on globalization submitted for
academic credit in POU 03 YJ Y, contra,,, to section B.I. 1. (d) of
the Code.

CHARGE#4:

On or about May 8, 2007, you knowingly represented as your oll'n
idea or expression of an idea, and/or the work of another in
connection with your paper on globalization submitted for
academic credit in POU03Yl1~ contra,,, to section B.1.1. (d) of
the Code.

[2]

The University withdrew the following alternative charges:
CHARGE# 5:

In the a/temative, contrwy to section B.1.3. (b) of the Code, you did
knowingly engage in a form of cheating, academic dishonesty or
misconduct, fi'aud or misrepresentation not otherwise described in the
Code in order to obtain academic credit or other academic advantage
of any kind, by:
a. submitling you paper on globalization on or about April 5, 2007,
in partial ji1/jil/111ent of the course requirements in POU 03 Yl Y;
and/or
d. submitting a fl1rther paper on globalization on or about May 8,
2007, in partial ji1/jillment of the course requirements in
POLJ0JYJ}'.

(3]

As a result, the Tribunal heard evidence in respect of the following charges, to which Mr.
B - pleaded not guilty:
CHARGE#2:

On or about April 5, 2007, you knowingly forged or in any other
way altered or falsified a document or evidence required by the
University, and/or uttered, circulated or made use of any such
forged, altered or falsified document, namely, a University of

-2 -

Case 516

Toronto Student Medical Certificate submitted with your paper on
globalization in POLJ03YJJ~ contrwy to section B.I.l. (a) of the
Code.
CHARGE#3:

On or about April 5, 2007, you knowingly forged or in any other
way altered or falsified a document or evidence required by the
University, and/or uttered, circulated or made use of any such
forged, altered or fttlsified doc11111e111, namely, a lei/er purportedly
fi·o111 the University of Toronto Accessibility Services, sub111itted
with your paper on globalization in POLJ03YJ]~ contmct to
section B.I. l. (a) of the Code.

CHARGE# 5:

In the alternative, contrary lo section B.1.3. (b) of the Code, you did
knowingly engage in a Jori/I of cheating, academic dishonesty or
111iscond11ct, fi·m1d or misrepresentation not othenl'ise described in the
Code in order to obtain academic credit or other academic advantage
of any kind, by:
b. submi!led a forged or altered University of Toronto lvledical
Certificate on or about April 5, 2007; and/or
c. s11b111illing a forged or altered lei/er fi'o111 University Accessibility
Services on or about April 5, 2007.

[4]

This hearing spanned a period commencing July 2, 2008, and concluding November 24,

2008, The Tribunal found Mr. B - guilty in respect of Charges #2, #3, and 111
respect of the alternative charges in #5 b. and c. above.
[5]

The following are the reasons for the Tribunal's finding. Because of the way in which
this hearing evolved and because of the developments related to the delivery of evidence,
these reasons describe the hearing as it progressed from one date to another.

-3-

Cose 5 !6

BACKGROUND
[6)

A - B - began studying at the University of Toronto in the Faculty of Arts and
Science in the fall of 200 I. Initially, he registered in the transitional year program, and in
2004, he registered in the first year program at Woodsworth College. At some point, as
reflected in Mr. B - ' s academic record, he was placed on a one year academic
suspension, and in August 2005, he was encouraged to take the opportunity to consider
his academic plans and goals and to work on his reading and writing skills.

(7)

In the academic year 2006-2007, Mr, Balllll emolled in a course (POL103YIY) called
"Canada in Comparative Perspectives". This course was taught by Professor Rodney
Haddow and Professor Haddow was assisted by Mr. Luc Turgeon. The course was
designed to introduce students to the study of politics, and it was taught on 'foesdays
from 6:00 p,m. to 8:00 p.m. Evaluation in the course was structured around two essays,
one fall term test, and a final examination. Ten percent of the total grade of one hundred
percent was assigned to tutorial pai1icipation. According to the course outline, twenty
percent of the total grade was allocated to the fall term essay, seventeen percent of the
total grade was allocated to the fall term test (an in-class test), twenty percent was
allocated to the winter term essay, and the final examination was worth thirty-three
percent.

[8)

The course outline provided for a strict schedule and penalty scheme. Late papers were
penalized at the rate of two percent per weekday. The course outline provided for the
dates upon which papers were due. The last date for submission of second term work
was described as April 13 th . Exceptions to the penalty scheme were to be made only with
proper documentation,

[9)

The work in question in this matter relates to the winter term essay, an essay that was
required to be eight to ten pages long, and that was due on March 13, 2007.

[ I OJ

The second term essay assignment was the subject matter of a separate handout, and it
appeared on the course webpage as well. The topics for the written paper were set out in
this separate handout. There were five topics from which to choose. In each case, where a

-4-

Cnse516

topic was assigned, students were given text resources, and were required to identify and
use two other book length sources or the equivalent thereof,
[11]

As with most other courses at the University of Toronto, students were warned about the
consequences of failure to cite quotations, paraphrases, and borrowed ideas. Students
were informed that failure to do so would constitute plagiarism, something which is the
subject of a severe penalty. The course outline also contained a reference to the
importance and necessity of referencing borrowed ideas, quotations, and paraphrases, In
addition, the course outline and second term essay assignment referenced a guide on
plagiarism circulated at the beginning of the course, Students were invited to consult with
the teaching assistant or with Professor Haddow about any questions they had about what
ought to be footnoted and how it should be footnoted.

[12]

Sometime on April 5, 2007, an essay bearing Mr, Blllll's student number was
submitted to the Department of Political Science drop box. This "April 5th essay"
contained verbatim and nearly verbatim excerpts from unacknowledged sources. These
excerpts were not attributed appropriately with the use of quotation marks. Mr. B admits that the April 5th essay is plagiarized.

[I 3]

The April 5th essay was accompanied by a note from the University of Toronto
Accessibility Services Depiuiment, which note was dated March 13, 2007, This letter is
signed by Dr, Pearl Levey, a learning disabilities specialist. The letter asks for an
accommodation with regard to Mr. B _ , namely delivery of his paper on March
23rd, rather than March 13th. In fact, Dr, Levey had provided a letter for Mr. B■■I in
which an extension was sought until March 20th, not March 23rd, Mr. B■■I agrees
that the Accessibility Services letter from Dr. Levey has been altered, but he says he did
not make the alteration to the letter.

[14]

In addition to the Accessibility Services letter from Dr. Levey, a medical ce1iificate was
submitted with the April 5th essay. The medical certificate that was submitted indicated
that Dr. S. Goldhar provided medical services t o ~ B ■■lon April 5, 2007, and
stated that Mr. B - was "unable to complete the assignment (due on 13/03/07) due
to medical symptoms and unable to concentrate", Dr. S. Goldhar is Mr. 19111111' s
treating physician, and Dr, Goldhar did treat Mr. BJ
-5-

on January 14 and March 3,

Casc5l6

2005, March 13, May 18, October 23, October 31 and November 16, 2006, February 12,
June 13, June 29, July 10 and September 26, 2007 and as well January 9, 2008. Dr. S.
on April 5, 2007. Mr. ~ agrees that the

Goldhar did not attend with Mr. B

medical certificate submitted along with the April 5th essay is not authentic and that he
did not see a medical professional on April 5, 2007. Mr. ~ says that he did not
make the alteration.
[ 15]

Mr. Turgeon reviewed the April 5th essay, and concluded that substantial portions of it
were plagiarized. He so advised Professor Haddow. These concerns were discussed by
Mr. Turgeon and Professor Haddow, and these discussions set in motion a series of
events, and an evolving series of explanations, which further evolved over the course of
the hearing, as explained below.

[ 16]

Professor Haddow and Mr. B

engaged in e-mail correspondence beginning in late

April, 2007. As well, Mr. B - and Mr. Turgeon exchanged messages. All of these
messages were about the April 5th essay.
[17)

On May 8, 2007, Mr. PIIIIII attended a meeting with Professor Haddow to discuss the
concerns about his paper. At that meeting, Mr. B - submitted an essay ("the May
8th essay") that Mr. B - said was the one that should have been submitted rather
than the April 5th essay.

[18]

The May 8th essay was almost entirely plagi_arized, Mr. B - admitted that the May
8th essay was plagiarized.

[19]

On May 16, 2007, Mr. Ballllsent an e-mail message to Professor Haddow, attaching
another essay, this one purporting to be the "second term essay" that he intended to
submit.

[20]

Mr. B - attended a Dean's meeting on July 17, 2007, and a second Dean's meeting
on August 20, 2007.

[21 J

It is important to recog11ize that Mr. Bj

did not dispute that the April 5th essay and

the May 8th essay were plagiarized. However, the essence of Mr. B - ' s explan~tion
was that, at least with respect to the April 5th essay, it, was handed in by mistake. In other

-6-

Cnsc 516

words, Mr.

,said that he was obliged, because of his schedule and lll'gent airline

flight, to ask a friend to hand in the paper for him. The friend printed the wrong
document, and apparently, also altered the medical certificate and •the Jetter from
Accessibility Services and handed these documents in to Professor Haddow.
[22)

Mr. B-said that the individual to whom he entrusted the printing and submission of
these documents had some kind of animus towards him, and this is why the documents
that were printed were wrong and the medical and accessibility certificates were altered.

[23)

J-'

At the July 17th meeting with Professor Nicholson, Mr. '3111111 said that this individual
(named "E-

or "E- :r-"), did it "on purpose", and did it "against him".

E-

E-_),

J-"

According to Mr. Nicholson, Mr. B - said that he had had a debate about women in
parliament with Mr.

J - (or Mr.

and that he ("Ellil

"EIII J - ' ) was "weird" and a!so had had access to Mr. B

or

's home. When

asked about the whereabouts of this individual named "E-", Mr. B■■I said Ewas in British Columbia. M r . ~ had no way of getting in touch with-·
[24]

The University ultimately coi1tacted an individual named "E- 0-"· He submitted
an Affidavit in the proceeding, in which he said that he certainly knew Mr. B■■I but
had no contact with him at the relevant time (April 2007) except that he did provide some
assistance to Mr, B

l with regard to an essay he was writing. He denied

categorically handing in a paper or delivering any academic work on behalf of Mr .
B

[25)

Mr.

8111111 had made contact with Mr.

meetings, and so had the University.
[26]

0-

0

. He also denied altering a medical note or any other note from a third party.
at some point after these Dean's

By the time of the second Dean's meeting in August, 2007, it is clear that EIIII
had been identified and had denied any role in these events.

[27]

E- 0-

0-

At the time of the hearing, which commenced on July 2, 2008, it was the contention of
Mr. B - that in fact he was not referring to

at all but rather to an

individual named "DIIIIII". D - apparently was also known as ';D. V■"·

-7-

Casc516

[28)

An adjournment was sought and obtained for the purposes of attempting to identify and
find an individual who went by the name of "D-" or "DJI D■'·

[29]

The Tribunal reconvened on September 29, 2008, after the adjoununent that was sought
and obtained on July 2, 2008. The Tribunal heard evidence from Mr. B - at this
hearing, as the University had concluded the evidence in the case.

[30)

Mr. ~ explained during his direct examination that he did not personally hand in
the April 5th essay, that the May 8th essay was submitted in error and that the May 16th
essay was the essay that ought to have been submitted all along: Mr. B - explained
in his direct evidence that he had difficulty with respect to writing and some other
medical problems, and was registered with Accessibility Services. Mr. B explained that he frequently saw Dr. Levey, and that in fact, he was not in Canada on
April 5, 2007, when his paper was submitted. Moreover, Mr. B■■I explained that he
was working on the paper that was to be handed in at the Robmis Librar}\ on April 4th
and in the ve1y early moi·ning hours of April 5th. In fact, he went from the Robarts
Library to the airport.

[31)

D-

As he was pressed for time, he approached the individual he described as "D-", gave
him his USB key at the Robarts Library, asked

to print 0111 the paper and hand it

in for him, because there was no one else to hand the paper in for him. He said he knew

D - from his history class, and that 0 - was also known as "D■ Dllf.
[32)

According to Mr. B

Mr.

, he gave Dem1is the USB key on which the paper was stored.

said that r:tllll is the one who likely made the changes to the medical

ce1iificate and the letter, and he said that he was "shocked" when he learned that these
documents had been altered, something that he did ,not learn about until the Dean's
meeting.
[33]

Mr. BIIIIII explained that the May 8th essay was in fact mistakenly banded to
Professor Haddow at the time that Mr. B - was meeting with him on May 8th,
because he was nervo11s and was unaware of what he was handing to Professor Haddow.

[34)

According to Mr. Bl

, this May 8th essay was in fact a draft of something he was

working on with an individual named "G-".

-8-

Cnse516

[35)

explained that nrnch of the confusion arising from the discussions he was

Mr. B

having with Mr. Nicholson and Professor Haddow, and the ~onfusion about the names
are a result of his dyslexia. This, according to Mr. B
and names.

, causes him to mix up dates

Moreover, he was nervous and flustered in these meetings, and he felt

pressured.
[36)

In essence, Mr. B

informed the Tribunal that "D-" was the only person

D-

available in the Robat1s Library in the early morning hours of April 5, and he was the
only person he knew who could help him hand in the paper, and so he asked

D-

to

help him out - even though he had had a fight with I1!lll only two weeks before the
request to
(37)

to print off and hand in the paper for him.

At the conclusion of Mr. B - ' s direct examination, a further adjournment was
sought.

[38]

The basis for the adjournment was that Mr. Centa, on behalf of the University, wished to
examine the USB key to which Mr. B...., was referring in his direct examination. lt
was determined that the USB key still existed, that it was available, and on the consent of
all parties, the matter was adjourned so that the USB key could be properly analyzed and
examined on terms satisfactory to all paiiies.

(39)

The case next convened on November 24, 2008. At this point, the USB key had indeed
been examined and analyzed, and the evidence of Belly-Ann Campbell, a law clerk with
the firm Paliare Roland Rosenberg Rothstein (the solicitors acting on behalf of the
University of Toronto) was tendered on the consent of all parties.

[40]

Mr. B - admitted that he did not disagree with the contents of the evidence of BettyAnn Campbell (which became exhibit 5).

(41)

The essence of the evidence of Ms. Campbell is two-fold. First, Ms. Campbell's evidence
makes it clear that the April 5th essay was created between the hours of 9:04 p.m. on
April 4, 2007 and 2:35 a.m. on April 5, 2007 and that it was heavily altered to disguise
the fact that it was almost entirely plagiarized. Second, the May 8th essay appears to have
gone through several iterations, in March, 2007, and this essay also contained passages
reproduced from unattributed online sources. It is also replete with editing, whereby

-9-

Case 516

certain words are substituted with synonyms, and there arc some voice changes, notably
the substitution of the pronoun "I" for the collective "we". In other words, Ms.
Campbell's evidence makes it clear that the April 5th essay and the May 8th essay
underwent significant alterations in order to disguise the existence of plagiarism.
[42]

Finally, Ms. Campbell's evidence makes it abundantly clear that the May 16th essay was
created beginning on May•9, 2007 at the very earliest.

[ 43]

When confronted with these varioi1s pieces of evidence, and the plagiarism replete in the
April 5th and the May 8th essay, Mr. B - ' s explanation evolved to say that first,
these documents "are not my work" and/or that these dqcmnents are or were exam study
notes, not papers. 111 any event, whatever the changes were to the April 5th essay and the
May 8th essay, Mr. Bl·•• denied that he made any of those changes.

[44]

Mr. B

stated, under cross-examination, that the paper that he intended to submit

all along is the one that is referred to as the "May 16th paper".
[45]

At the end, the problem with Mr. B

B-

's evidence is that the essay that was supposed

to be submitted "all along" and which Mr.

said ought to have been submitted by

"Dall" on April 5th, did not come into existence until at the earliest, May 9th.
[46]

B-

Further, it is hard to imagine why those documents which were identified as "study
notes" by Mr.

(and it is unclear as to whether all of the wrongly handed in

documents were study notes or only some of them) would be so painstakingly doctored in
order to disguise plagiarism, if they were what they purp01ied to be - study notes.
[47]

Rather,_it appears that Mr. B-confounded the extraction of the true stmy line, by
changing key elements of his narrative, at each step of the way. Further, Mr. B
confounded the issue of which document was intended to be a study note rather than a
plagiarized essay, and which document was the real essay that onght to have been handed
in, by adding a third party, someone named "D-" or "D■ D■", as the individual

B-.

who set out to negatively affect Mr. ~ by handing in the wrong paper, doctoring
the paper, and then doctoring medical certificates and/or Accessibility letters in order to
confom1d Mr.

- 10 -

Casc516

[48]

It is hard to imagine why an individual, who wished to do harm to Mr. B

, would

alter an Accessibility Services letter to extend the time within which Mr. B - had to
submit the paper, This simply does not make sense. It cannot be that Mr. B - was

J-"

the victim of a miscreant (whether he was named "D-" or "DI D■" or "Ella
or "E- J - ' ) when the purported miscreant is alleged to have forged or

altered a medical certificate in order to provide a medical foundation for the late delivery
of the paper. Surely, if someone was out to "get" Mr. B - (as he says the purported

miscreant was), they would have done the very opposite, namely refused to hand in the
certificate, or alter the certificate in order to eradicate the foundation for the late de!ive1y
of the paper. Even if someone did favourably alter a medical ce11ificate or Accessibility
Services note in order to get someone in trouble, it would stand to reason that such a
person would make the forgery as obvious as possible in order to ensure that the victim
got caught. Here, the forgeries were very diffic\1lt to detect and, indeed, went undetected
until after Qther irregularities prompted the University to look at them more closely.
[49]

At the end of this long hearing, after three hearing dates, the Tribunal was left with a
layered story, that had evolved ov~1· a series of days, which resolved into the general
proposition that someone, between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 2:00 a.m. on April 4 to
April 5, 2007, altered Mr. Bllll's April 5th essay, then somewhere in or around that
time, altered a letter from Accessibility Services at the University of Toronto, and created
a false medical certifica~e, both of which were designed to extend the time for delivery of
a paper by Mr. BIIIII, The problem with this explanation is that it does not make
sense when viewed against the painstaking analysis of the USB key (on which the paper
was composed) and the logs at the University related to the use of the computer facilities
at the Robarts Library.

[50]

The evidence, and in pa11icular the evidence arising from the examination of the USB
key, simply does not support any of the explanations provided by Mr. B

L The

Tribunal prefers the submission of the University, namely that Mr. B - was placed
in a position whereby he needed to explain ce11ain papers and events associated with the
failure to properly cite or reference sources. It is bard to dispute the painstaking analysis
conducted by Ms. Campbell in respect of the USB key. Simply put, the essay that was
intended by Mr. B■■I (apparently) to be handed in to Professor Haddow "all along",
- 11 -

Cnsc 516

namely the f\,fay 16th essay, could not possibly have been in existence before April 5,
2007. The pillars upon which Mr. B ■■l's explanations rested in respect of the papers,
of the chicanery of which he says he was the victim, and of the confusion on his USB key.
cannot be adequately explained. Conversely, the failure of this explanation to hang
togethet·, in the face of the various analyses to which it was subjected, inclined the
Tribunal to be convinced that Mr. B

played the only role in the submission of the

papers and the medical certificate and the Accessibility Services letter and that he was the
only person who altered these documents. Mr. B - ' s explanation about the vario,1s
essays was subjected to and filtered through the prisms of scientific and rational analysis,
and, as a the result, his explanation simply did not hold water. And, it is on that basis that
the conclusion arose that Mr. B - ' s explanation about the Accessibility Services
Letter and the Medical Certificate did not ring trne. And, it is on this basis that the
Tribunal came to be convinced that Mr. B

himself altered the Accessibility

Services Letter and the Medical Certificate. This is an indirect way of arriving at the
conclusion, and the evidence upon which the conch1sion of the Tribunal is based is
indirect. The absence of direct evidence is not, however, a bar to conviction. The duty
of the Tribunal is to consider all the evidence, direct and indirect, to view it in its totality
and to filter the evidence through the prism of common sense. The evidence that was
elicited, viewed in its totality, cannot but lead to one conclusion, namely that Mr.
B:■■I did indeed submit plagiarized work, alter both an Accessibility Services Note

and a Medical Certificate, and repeatedly lie about doing all of these things. The
evidence also shows that, in weaving his web of lies, Mr. B - did not hesitate to
implicate other im1ocent individuals.
[51 J

For these reasons, the Tribunal concluded that Mr. B - was guilty of the offences, as
set out at the beginning of these reasons.

Reasons on Sanction
[52)

On Jamrnry 22, 2009, the panel convened to hear submissions with regard to penalty. It is
important to note that the hearing on January 22, 2009 had been previously convened for
November 28, 2008. However, Mr. B - was not available and did not attend. His
counsel could not ass.ist the Tribunal with regard to the reason for the non-attendance,

- 12 -

Case5l6

and in order to provide Mr. B - and his counsel ample time to confer and to attend
at the hearing, the date of January 22, 2009 was scheduled.
[53)

Mr. B - did not attend at the penalty hearing. Again, his counsel again was unable to
advise as to the reasons.

[54)

The Tribunal heard submissions from discipline counsel on sanction. On behalf of the
Provost, Mr. Centa asked the Tril)\mal to impose the following sanction:

I. An assignment of a grade of zero in POL! 03Y
2, A recommendation to the President to recommend to Governing Council that the
Student be expelled
3. That the decision be reported to the Provost for publication in the University's
newspaper with Mr. Bllll's :name withheld

[55)

After deliberating, the Tribunal imposed the above sanction. The following are the
Tribunal's reasons for the penalty.

[56)

It is true that there is a range of penalties available to the Tribunal after a finding of guilt.

These penalties are connected to the nature of the charges and of course, to the findings
in those charges.
[57)

There is now a substantial body of jurisprudence developed by the Tribunal with respect
to penalty. The foundational case with regard to penalty is that of the decision commonly
referred to as "Mr. C,", dated November 5, 1976. In that decision, John Sopinka Q.C. (as
he then was) states, " ... punishment is not intended to be retribution to get even, as it
were, with the student for what he has done. It must serve a useful function. The classical
components of enlightened plmishment are reformation, deterrence and protection of the
public. In applying these criteria, a tribunal should consider all of the following:

a) The character of the person charged;
b) The likelihood ofa repetition of the offence;
c) The nature of the offence committed;
d) Any extenuating circumstances surrounding the commission of the offence;
e) The detriment to the University occasioned by the offence;
" 13 "

Case516

j)

[58]

The need to deter others fi'om committing a similar offence. "

In this case, the Tribunal focused on the following:

I. There were four acts that gave rise to the charges and the conviction. They
included the plagiarized essay delivered on April 51\ the fmther plagiarized essay
delivered on May 811'; the falsified Accessibility Services note; and the falsified
medical certificate.
2. These plagiarized documents and the falsified note and certificate all occurred
within a very short timeframe.
3. In addition, the essay that was provided on May 811 ' was submitted at a meeting
held to discuss concel'!ls about the April 5th essay and plagiarism evident in it.
4. The fact that there are four separate, discrete instances whereby documents were
either plagiarized or altered, all within a sho1i period of time, makes the
conclusion that these instances of plagiarism and forgery of documents were part
of a pattel'!l, if not a deliberate plan.
[59]

The reason why the acts of plagiarism are made more significant relates to the use by the
Student of the Accessibility Services offered at the University of Toronto.

[60]

Part of the ethos of the University of Toronto relates to the recognition that not all
sl\1dents come to the University with the same levels of linguistic and/or learning
competencies. In order to create a level learning field, then, the University of Toronto, at
its own expense, has established a network of services and organizations designed to
assist those students with leaming and language difficulties to patiicipate at the same
level as other students in the University. In essence, the role of the University of
Toronto's Accessibility Services is to ensure that students admitted to the University are
able to pmiicipate and leam and obtain their education without fear of being held back by
challenges associated with learning competencies or language difficulties,

[61]

In order to promote the assistance that the University of Toronto has provided to such
students, it has become a practice across the University to accept, at face value, medical

- 14 -

Cnsc5l6

notes and Accessibility Services requests and letters. In the absence of such acceptance,
the University's support for those students who face various challenges will be
significantly undermined.
[62]

Of course, it is also true that the provision of Accessibility Services and other services to
students, including medical services, and the acceptance of notes, certificates, and letters
from these services, is part of the relationship of trnst between the University and the
student. This relationship of trust is part of the wider relationship of trust that goes hand
in hand with the expectation of ethical behaviour and fair treatment within the general
University population.

(63]

In considering the likelihood of a repetition of an oftence, the intertwined use and abuse
of the Accessibility Services by the Student, together with the repeated plagiarism, played
a significant role.

[64]

When a student engages in both plagiarism and a misuse of the University policy related
to accommodation of students, and when, in addition, the student in defence implicates
another student (which is what occmred in this case), the need for deterrence by way of a
penalty becomes important.

[65]

It is true that Mr. B - pleaded guilty in respect of part of the charges, but, in doing
so, he did not take responsibility either in whole or in part for either that to which he
pleaded guilty, or to those charges upon which he was found guilty. In his testimony, he
demonstrated no remorse or insight into his offences. While it is trne that Mr. B was entitled to require the University to prove its case, Mr. B

cannot be given any

credit for insight and/or remorse in the course of his testimony. He demonstrates no
insight or remorse for even those charges upon which he has pleaded guilty.
[66]

For this reason as well as the fact that there was a pattern of four incidents of plagiarism
and altered documents, the Tribunal concluded that there was a very high likelihood that
the Student would repeat the offence, and that there must be little to no prospect of
rehabilitation, especially in light of the failure of the Student to exhibit either insight or
remorse for those charges to which he pleaded guilty.

- 15 -

Cns~516

[67]

Finally, as noted above, the Student was given not one, but two opportunities to attend at
the penalty hearing. He chose to attend neither.

[68]

In the absence of the Student attending for either of the penalty hearings (both of which
were scheduled to allow him to have time to prepare and attend), the Tribunal concluded
that the Student was prepared not only to lie and cheat in order to gain an academic
advantage but was also prepared to implicate other students as excuses or scapegoats,
(which in this case was unsuccessful) and to abuse the very services (Accessibility
Services) put in place to assist him, and resorted to by him for assistance in the past.

[69]

It is notable that this matter proceeded over a series of many evenings. The panel was
obliged to hear evidence and retain and consider very complex volumes of evidence over
a series of months.

[70]

In the result, the Tribunal was unanimous in its determination of guilt, because the
evidence was highly convincing in that regard.

Reasons on Cost
[7 l J

At the request of a member of the panel, submissions as to costs were requested. The
decision of the panel is not to award costs, although such an avenue is available to it.

[72]

It should be noted that the University in making its submissions respecting costs has also
taken the position that no costs are being requested.

[73]

As an addendum to these reasons, the Tribunal attaches the submissions of the University
respecting costs, and concurs that this is not an appropriate case where costs ought to be
awarded.

Julie K. Hannaford

- 16 -

THE UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
IN THE MATTER OF charges of academic dishonesty made on October 23,
2007,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic
Matters, 1995,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Act, 1971, S.O. 1971, c. 56
as amended S.O. 1978, c. 88
BETWEEN:

THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO

- and -

A

B

SUBMISSIONS OF THE UNIVERSITY REGARDING COSTS
1.

On January 22, 2009, the University Tribunal requested that the University

provide it with submissions dealing with two matters:

a. the jurisdiction of the University Tribunal to award costs of a proceeding; and

b. whether, in the circumstances of the case, the University's wished to seek
costs of the proceeding against Mr. sa.11111.
2.

The University submits that, while the Tribunal has the Jurisdiction to award costs

of proceedings, in all the circumstances of this case the University Is not requesting that
the Tribunal do so.

3.

The University Tribunal takes its Jurisdiction from the University of Toronto Code

2

of Behaviour on Academic Matters ("Code"). The Code confers Jurisdiction on the
Tribunal to award costs of proceedings at trial. Section C.ll.(a)17(b) provides:
Where it Is considered to be warranted by the circumstances, the chair of a
hearing may in his or her discretion award costs of any proceedings at trial, and .
may make orders as to the party or parties to and by whom and the amounts and
manner in which such costs are to be paid.

4.

Thus, the University submits that the chair of a hearing has clear jurisdiction to

award costs where she or he considers it appropriate to do so.

5.

P-D_,

This jurisdiction has been exercised, albeit infrequently. Most recently, in the

2006 case of the University of Toronto and

the University Tribunal

did make a costs order against the student. I have attached a copy of the reasons for
decision to these submissions.

6.

Mr. D

was charged with falsifying and circulating two academic records

In November 2003 and January 2004. The Tribunal found Mr. D

lo have

committed the offences and recommended that he be expelled from the University.

7.

The Tribunal, at the request of the University, made an award of costs against

the student. In particular, the Tribunal ordered the student to pay $1,660.96 to the
University In compensation for disbursements Incurred by the University to locate and
serve the student, who had evaded service. The Tribunal noted:
Al the conclusion of the hearing, counsel for the University asked the Panel to
award the cost of external disbursements incurred by the University in Its efforts
to contact the Student and set a hearing date. The panel heard submissions from
the University regarding the lengthy and expensive nature of those efforts and
had an opportunity to review the Tribunal's decision In the case of Mr. K, which
was similar in many respects. Counsel for the University took the Panel to

3

section C.11.a.17(b) of the Code which sets the Tribunal's authority to award
costs.
The University noted that, in the end, the Student had cooperated with the.
University and, as a consequence, they were not asking the Panel to award the
University's total costs, but only it external disbursements. The University
indicated that they were seeking $1660.96.
The Student, through his counsel, did not contest the University's request; he
only asked that, if the Panel awarded. costs, he be allowed six months from the
date of the hearing or the decision of the Governing Council on the Panel's
recommendation of expulsion to remit payment. The University asked that the
deadline for payment be set as February 15, 2007, six months from the date of
the hearing.
The Panel, after deliberating, unanimously accepted the University's request and
ordered the Student to pay costs of $1660.96 to the University on or not later
than February 15, 2007.

8.

Thus, not only does the University Tribunal have jurisdiction to award costs of all

or part of the proceedings before It, it has exercised that jurisdiction fairly recently.

9.

However, in the circumstances of this case, the University does not seek an

award of costs. Mr. B

's conduct during the proceedings was troubling. In

particular, his unannounced decision not to attend the hearing on November 28, 2008,
significantly inconvenienced the panel, Ms. Smart, and counsel. It also delayed the
proceeding by almost two months.
10.

Moreover, his failure to attend the peremptory hearing on January 22, 2009,

again without advance notice, showed a troubling unwillingness to engage with the
University discipline process.
11.

There is no doubt that the University incurred costs directly related to Mr.

Bl-•l's failure to attend without notice. In particular, the University incurred costs
related to the scheduling of the aborted hearing on November 28, 2008, as well as costs

4

thrown away for its counsel to prepare for and attend for that hearing and it is our
submission that this type of conduct could reasonably support an award of costs within
the jurisdiction of the Tribunal.
12.

However, having considered all of the circumstances, the University does not ask

for an award of costs in this case.
13.

Finally, the University wishes to emphasize that nothing in these submissions

should be taken as a criticism of Mr. Shapiro or DLS.

All of which is respectfully submitted on January 27, 2009

Robert A. Centa
Assistant Discipline Counsel
University of Toronto

