Case 516

DATE:

   April 22, 2009

PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v. Mr. A.B.

Hearing Date(s):

   information not available

Panel Members:

   Ms. Julie Hannaford, Chair
   Professor Marc Lewis, Faculty Panel Member
   Mr. Alex Kenjeev, Student Panel Member

Appearances:

   Mr. Rob Centa, Assistant Discipline Counsel
   Dr. Kristi Gourlay, Manager, Office of Student Academic Integrity
   Mr. Max Shapiro, Student Representative, DLS
   Mr. A.B., the Student
   The Student was charged with two offences under s. B.i.1(d), and two
   offences under of s. B.i.1(a) and alternatively, under s. B.i.3(b) of
   the Code. The charges related to alleged acts of plagiarism contained
   in two subsequent essays submitted for the same assignment in one
   course, and the alleged acts of forging or altering a University
   Medical Certificate and a letter purportedly from the University
   Accessibility Services, both of which were submitted with the first
   essay. The Student pleaded guilty to the charges under s. B.i.1(d) of
   the Code. The Tribunal heard evidence in respect to the remaining
   charges under s. B.i.1(a) and B.i.3(b) of the Code. The Student did not
   dispute that the two versions of the essay were plagiarized. The Panel
   found that the Studentâs account of the events had changed over the
   course of the hearing but that the Studentâs proposition was that a
   third party had altered and submitted the Studentâs first essay along
   with a letter from the Universityâs Accessibility Services and created
   a false Medical Certificate, both of which were designed to extend the
   time for delivery of a paper by the Student. When meeting with the
   course professor to discuss concerns about the first essay, the Student
   submitted a second version of the essay which he said should have been
   originally submitted. After the meeting, the Student submitted a third
   version of the essay via email, which the Student claimed was the essay
   that he had intended to submit all along. The Panel found that the
   Studentâs explanation of the events was not supported by the analysis
   of the USB key on which the paper was composed or by the computer logs
   at the University library where the Student claimed the paper was
   composed. The analysis of the USB key demonstrated that the first and
   second essays underwent significant alterations in order to disguise
   the existence of plagiarism and that the third essay was not created
   until after the Studentâs meeting with the course professor. The Panel
   found that the Student submitted plagiarized work, altered an
   Accessibility Services Note and a Medical Certificate, repeatedly
   denied doing the acts and implicated other innocent individuals in the
   acts. The Panel found that the Student was guilty of all the offences
   for which he was charged. The Student did not attend either of the two
   penalty hearing scheduled to accommodate him. In reaching its decision,
   the Panel focused on the fact that there were four acts which gave rise
   to the conviction, that the four acts all occurred within a short
   timeframe, that the second plagiarized essay was submitted at a meeting
   held to discuss plagiarism concerns and that the four acts were part of
   a pattern. The Panel observed that the intertwined use and abuse of the
   Accessibility Services by the Student, together with the repeated
   plagiarism, played a significant role in its consideration of the
   likelihood of a repetition of an offence by the Student. The Panel
   observed that when a Student engages in both plagiarism and a misuse of
   the University policy related to accommodation of students, and when,
   in addition, the student in defense implicates another student, the
   need for deterrence becomes important. The Panel found that the Student
   demonstrated no insight or remorse for the charges he was found, or for
   which he had pleaded, guilty. The Panel found that there was a high
   likelihood that the Student would repeat the offence and that there was
   little to no prospect of rehabilitation. The Panel imposed an
   assignment of a grade of zero in the course; a recommendation to the
   President, further to s. C.ii.(b)(i) of the Code, that the Student be
   expelled from the University; and that a report be issued to the
   Provost. Submissions as to costs were requested by a member of the
   Panel. In its submissions on costs, the University submitted that, as
   per s. C.II.(a)17(b) of the Code, the Panel has jurisdiction to award
   costs and that the Panel had exercised that jurisdiction recently, but
   that in the circumstances of the case the University did not request
   the Panel to do so. The Panel agreed with the University that the
   awarding of costs was not appropriate in the case.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12750
