Case #615

   DATE: April 29, 2011
   PARTIES: University of Toronto v. S.A.
   Hearing Date(s): March 22, 2011
   Panel Members:
   Roslyn Tsao, Chair
   Professor Markus Bussman, Faculty Member
   Melvin Sert, Student Member
   Appearances:
   Robert Centa, Assistant Discipline Counsel for the University
   Nadia Meli, DLS for the Student
   In Attendance:
   S.A., the Student
   Lucy Gaspini, Academic Affairs Officer, UTM
   Trial Division â s. B.I.1(d); s. B.I.1(a); s. B.I.1(f); s. B.I.3(b) of
   Code â plagiarism â altered Turnitin submission â concocted sources â
   Agreed Statement of Factsâ guilty plea â guilty plea accepted â Joint
   Submission on Penalty â Joint Submission on Penalty acceptedÂ  -Â
   final grade of zero in the Courses; four-year suspension; notation on
   transcript until the earlier of Studentâs graduation or nine years and
   four months; and report to Provost
   Student charged with seven offences under s. B.I.1(d),Â  s. B.I.1(a),
   s. B.I.1(f), and s. B.I.3(b) of the Code. The charges related to the
   allegations that the Student plagiarized two essays, concocted sources,
   and altered an electronic submission of the two essays to disguise the
   fact she committed plagiarism. The Student pled guilty to five charges.
   The University withdrew the two charges under s.B.I.3(b). A Panel
   member noted that they recognized the Student from campus, but had no
   direct knowledge or had no direct contact with the Student. Neither the
   University nor the Student objected to this matter. The matter
   proceeded on an Agreed Statements of Facts. The Panel accepted the
   Studentâs guilty plea. The matter then proceeded on a Joint Submission
   on Penalty. The Panel accepted the Joint Submission on Penalty and
   imposed a final grade of zero in the courses, a four-year suspension, a
   notation on the Studentâs transcript to last nine years and four months
   or until graduation, whichever should occur earlier, and that a report
   to the Provost be issued.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/13011
