THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
THE GOVERNING COUNCIL
REPORT NUMBER 337 OF THE ACADEMIC APPEALS COMMITTEE
October 10, 2009

To the Academic Board
University of Toronto.
Your Committee reports that it held a hearing on Thursday, September 3, 2009, at which the
following members were present:
Professor L. Sossin (Chair)
Mr. Adam Heller
Professor Ellen Hodnett
Dr. Chris Koenig-Woodyard
Mr. Gregory West
Secretary: Mr. Louis Charpentier
Appearances:
For the Student Appellant:

Mr. A.H. (the Student)
For the University of Toronto at Mississauga:

Professor Gordon Anderson

This is an appeal from a decision of the Academic Appeals Board ("AAB") of the University of
Toronto at Mississauga ("UTM") dated November 12, 2008, which refused to allow the Student
permission to withdraw without penalty from STA220H5 and PSY320l-15 20071.
The Student suffers from hypothyroidism ("Graves Disease") and received a range of
accommodations to deal with the serious consequences of this medical condition, for which the
Student provided substantial medical documentation.

2

The Student believes his medical condition, compounded by anxiety, led to his poor
performance in the exam for PSY320l-l5 and his decision not to write the exam in STA220H5
scheduled for the next day. The Student asserts that these factors were outside of his control and
justify the remedy he is seeking.
The AAB took no issue with either the existence or the seriousness of the Student's medical
condition. In its decision, the AAB provided three reasons for its decision not to grant the
Student's petition:
1. On the basis of your presentation at the meeting and your overall academic record, the
members of the Board decided that you did not have a compelling case for an
exemption from the University regulations that apply to all students.
2. You have had a history of deferring exams and withdrawing from courses, and you had
previously been warned by the Office of the Registrar that you would be responsible
for observing deadlines.
3. The Board strongly recommends that you obtain help from Mississauga's Robert
Gillespie Academic Skills Centre ... regarding the development of your academic
skills.
In its written submissions before this Committee, the AAB oftered the following reasons for
deciding not to grant the petition:
The committee felt it could not grant the petition on the following grounds. Ahmed was
familiar with the drop process, he had been warned to meet deadlines in an orderly fashion,
had plenty of evidence throughout the term that he should drop the courses in a timely
fashion and was well aware that his illness was impeding his progress.

This Committee agrees with this conclusion reached by the AAB. While the Student's belief that
he should have been permitted the late withdrawal based on his situation is rooted in a clearly
established medical record, the academic record makes clear that UTM had accommodated the
Student in the past, and would have been prepared to do so again in the context of the courses
appealed from, had the Student requested the relief in a timely fashion. There is no indication that
UTM treated the Student unfairly.
The Student's own account of his performance confirms that his situation impaired his ability to
keep up with the course work in these courses. The difficulties the Student experienced, in other
words, were persistent throughout the term and did not arise only afier the deadline for late
withdrawal (for example, the Student indicates that he had missed five of the seven assignments in
PSY320H5). There is no indication in this case that the Student was unable to seek relief prior to
the deadline for withdrawal without penalty.
For these reasons, the appeal is dismissed.

