Report #337

   DATE: October 10, 2009
   PARTIES: A.H.,Â  (the Student) v. UTM
   Hearing Date(s): September 3, 2009
   Committee Members:
   Professor Lorne Sossin, Chair
   Adam Heller
   Professor Ellen Hodnett
   Professor Chris Koenig-Woodyard
   Gregory West
   Appearances:
   For the Student Appellant:
   A.H. (the Student)
   For the UTM:
   Professor Gordon Anderson
   UTM â late withdrawal without academic penalty â medical illnessÂ  â
   substantial documentation â previous withdrawals â previous deferrals â
   lack of a compelling case to justify the extraordinary remedy â
   Studentâs history of deferring exams and withdrawing from courses â
   previous warning to observe deadlines â Studentâs familiarity with drop
   processÂ  â no indication of the Student being treated unfairly â
   medical difficulties persisted throughout the term â no new
   difficulties arising after the deadline â no indication the Student was
   unable to seek relief prior to the deadline â appeal dismissed
   Appeal of a decision to deny the Student permission to withdraw without
   penalty from two courses. The Student suffered from hypothyroidism and
   had received a range of accommodations to deal with the consequences of
   their medical condition. The Student had provided substantial medical
   documentation in support of their condition. The Student believed that
   their medical condition, compounded by anxiety, led to poor performance
   in the exam they had written and affected their decision not to write
   an exam in another course. The Student asserted that these factors were
   outside their control and justified the remedy that they sought. The
   Academic Appeals Board took no issue with the existence or the
   seriousness of the Studentâs medical condition. The Studentâs initial
   appeal was denied due to a lack of a compelling case for an exemption
   from University regulations, the Studentâs history of deferring exams
   and withdrawing from courses, a previous warning that had been issued
   regarding the Studentâs responsibility for observing deadlines, and the
   Academic Appeal Boardâs strong recommendation that the Student obtain
   help from the Academic Skills Centre. The Committee agreed with the
   conclusion reached by the Academic Appeals Board that the Student was
   familiar with the drop process and had been warned to meet deadlines in
   an orderly fashion. The Committee agreed that there was enough evidence
   that the Student knew they should drop the courses in a timely fashion.
   The Committee further held that the Student was aware that their
   illness was impeding their academic progress. The Committee found there
   was no indication UTM had treated the Student unfairly. The Committee
   concluded that the difficulties the Student experienced persisted
   throughout the term and did not arise only after the deadline for
   withdrawal. The Committee held there was no indication that the Student
   was unable to seek relief prior to the deadline for withdrawal without
   academic penalty. Appeal dismissed.
   [1]View Report

References

   1. file:///media/12589
