Case No.: 1106

THE UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
IN THE MATTER OF charges of academic dishonesty made on October 21, 2020
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic
Matters, 1995,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Act, 1971, S.O. 1971, c. 56 as
amended S.O. 1978, c. 88

BETWEEN:
UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO

- and -

T

Z

REASONS FOR DECISION

Hearing Date: March 24, 2022, via Zoom

Members of the Panel:
Ms. Harriet Lewis, Chair
Professor Margaret MacNeill, Faculty Panel Member
Mr. David Allens, Student Panel Member
Appearances:
Ms. Tina Lie. Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg Rothstein LLP
Mr. William Webb, Co-Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg Rothstein LLP
Hearing Secretary:
Mr. Christopher Lang, Director, Office of Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances
Not in Attendance:
Mr. T
Z

2

1.

This panel of the University Tribunal held a hearing on March 24, 2022 to consider

the charges brought by the University of Toronto (the “University”) against Mr. T
Z

(the “Student”) on October 21, 2020 under the Code of Behaviour on Academic

Matters, 1995 (the “Code”). The charges concern academic misconduct in respect to the
taking of a final exam in MAT 137YI, a first-year calculus course, on or about April 16,
2020. Particulars of the charges are set out below.
A.

Preliminary Issue: Proceeding in the Absence of the Student

2.

The hearing was scheduled to begin at 1:45 p.m. on Thursday, March 24, 2022,

by videoconference, but as per usual practice, the panel waited 15 minutes to see if the
Student attended. At that time, Assistant Discipline Counsel advised that neither the
Student nor a representative of the Student were present. The University requested that
the Tribunal proceed with the hearing in the absence of the Student and for the reasons
which follow, the Tribunal agreed to proceed.
3.

Pursuant to sections 6 and 7 of the Statutory Powers Procedure Act (the “Act”) and

Rule 17 of the University Tribunal Rules of Practice and Procedure (the “Rules”), where
reasonable notice of an oral hearing has been given to a party in accordance with the Act
and the party does not attend the hearing, the Tribunal may proceed in the absence of
the party and the party is not entitled to any further notice in the proceeding. The onus of
proof is on the University to demonstrate that it provided a student with reasonable notice
of the hearing.
4.

The Tribunal had before it, affidavit materials prepared by Assistant Discipline

Counsel in a “Book of Documents (Notice)” introduced and marked as Exhibit #1 at the
hearing. Exhibit #1 sets out the history of the contact with the Student since evidence was
found of his academic misconduct which was included in a Discipline Case Report
containing notes of a meeting between the Student and Professor Francois Pitt, the
Dean’s designate. The Discipline Case Report was prepared by Christine Di Matteo who

3

was present at the hearing and provided evidence about that meeting at which the
Student denied having committed the alleged offence.
5.

Exhibit #1 also contains the March 22, 2022 Affidavit of Ms. Samanthe Huang, an

Administrative Assistant with the Office of Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievance,
attesting to the numerous attempts made between March and December 2021 by the
University and Assistant Discipline Counsel to arrange a hearing with the Student. Copies
of correspondence about scheduling between the University and the Student and
Assistant Discipline Counsel and the Student, were attached to that affidavit.
6.

Ms. Huang’s affidavit and attachments showed the following:
i.

The Student agreed to a number of dates but in each case
requested adjournments for various reasons. For example, he
requested an in person hearing although he was residing outside
of Canada. He said he needed to return to Toronto to recover
vindicating evidence he left in his Toronto residence but couldn’t
come for a period of time. Once in Toronto, he said he needed to
deal with burst pipes in his home. On other occasions he
expressed the wished to retain counsel, said he had to return to
his home country for leg surgery and thereafter needed time to
recuperate from that surgery.

ii.

The Student finally agreed to an electronic hearing for a date to be
set in February 2022 and February 25, 2022 was set as the
hearing date. Ms. Huang served the Student with a Notice of
Electronic Hearing for that date along with all of the hearing
materials.

iii.

Attached to Ms. Huang’s affidavit was an email from the Student
on February 18, 2022, to request that the hearing be adjourned
stating as a reason that he had “a cold and mental illness”.

4

7.

On February 22, 2022, Ms. Huang requested, through Assistant Discipline

Counsel, the Provost’s position on the request for a further adjournment. After consulting
with Assistant Discipline Counsel, the Provost made submissions to the Chair of this
Tribunal who was originally booked to hear the case, requesting that the Student’s
hearing be rescheduled for March 24, 2020 at 1:45 p.m. peremptory on the Student. The
request was granted and the Chair made an order that the hearing be scheduled for that
date and time.
The Student was immediately notified of the Chair’s order and on February 25,

8.

2022 was served with a “Notice of Electronic Hearing on March 24, 2022 at 1:45 p.m.
(EST)” (the Notice”) along with an updated set of the hearing materials.
9.

That the Student received the Notice and materials was confirmed in an affidavit

of Andrew Wagg, sworn on March 18, 2022. Mr. Wagg is an Incident Report Architect at
Information Security, Information Technology Services at the University.
10.

Mr. Wagg deposed that Information Technology Services manages the email

accounts used by the University’s students and that the Microsoft 365 Exchange portal
used by the University automatically records each time someone accesses a particular
university-issued email account. On March 18, 2022 he checked the portal records to
determine the last time someone used the account password to access the email account
g

.z

@mail.utoronto.ca, the account issued to the Student. Mr., Wagg found that

the account was last accessed on March 16, 2022, at 12:04 local Toronto time.
11.

Based on the evidence filed, the Tribunal determined that the Student had

accessed the Notice and materials on March 16, 2022 and thus had formal notice of the
hearing date.
12.

Based on the totality of the interactions with the Student in respect to scheduling

the hearing, the Notice given to the Student in February that the hearing would be
peremptory on him, and the evidence that the Student’s email, containing the final Notice

5

and materials, was accessed shortly before the hearing date; the Tribunal concluded that
the Student was given reasonable notice of the hearing in compliance with the notice
requirements of the Act and the Rules.
13.

The Tribunal therefore determined it would proceed to hear the case on its merits

in the absence of the Student, and the hearing proceeded on the basis that the Student
was deemed to deny the charges made against him.
B.

The Charges and Particulars

14.

The Charges and Particulars were detailed in a letter to the student in 2020 and

copied with the Notice of Hearing served on him on February 25, 2022. They are as
follows:
i.

On or about April 16, 2020, you knowingly represented as your own an idea or
expression of an idea or work of another in the final exam in MAT137Y1 (the
“Course”) contrary to section B.I.1(d) of the Code.

ii.

In the alternative, on or about April 16, 2020, you knowingly obtained unauthorized
assistance in connection with the final exam in the Course, contrary to section
B.I.1(b) of the Code.

iii.

In the further alternative, on or about April 16, 2020, you knowingly engaged in a
form of cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or misrepresentation
not otherwise described in the Code in order to obtain academic credit or other
academic advantage of any kind, in connection with the final exam in the Course,
contrary to section B.I.3(b) of the Code.

Particulars
1.

At all material times you were a student enrolled at the University of Toronto,

Faculty of Arts & Science.
2.

In Fall 2019 and Winter 2020, you enrolled in MAT137Y1 (Calculus).

6

3.

Students in the course were required to write a final exam worth 20% of their final

grade. Due to the Covid19 pandemic, the final exam was administered as a 24-hour online
exam. The only aids to which students were allowed to refer were their own notes, their
own term work, course videos, all other official course materials, the textbook and
WolframAlpha.
4.

On or about April 16, 2020, you submitted your final exam in the Course.

5.

You submitted your final exam:
(a) To obtain academic credit;
(b) Knowing that it contained ideas, expressions of ideas or work which were
not your own, but were the ideas, expressions of ideas or work of others,
including the author(s) of answers that were posted on Chegg.com which
is a website that allows subscribers to post questions on the site and to
view questions and answers posted on the site (the “Chegg Source”); and
(c) Knowing that you did not properly reference the ideas, expressions of ideas
r work that you drew from the Chegg Source or from others;

6.

You knew that Chegg Source was not an authorized source to which you were

allowed to refer in completing the final exam.
7.

You knowingly obtained unauthorized assistance from the Chegg source or from

others.

8.

You knowingly submitted your final exam with the intention that the University of

Toronto rely on it as containing your own ideas or work in considering the appropriate
academic credit to be assigned to your work.

C.

The Evidence

7

15.

Affidavit evidence on behalf of the University was given by Christina Di Matteo, an

Academic Integrity Specialist with the Student Academic Integrity (“SAI”) Office of the
Faculty of Arts and Science of the University; Asif Zaman, an Assistant Professor,
Teaching Stream in the Department of Mathematics who in the Fall of 2019 and Spring
of 2020 was the course coordinator for the Course; and Thomas Mackay, who at that
time was the Director of Faculty Governance in the Faculty of Arts and Science at the
University. Ms. Di Matteo was present in the hearing and Professor Zaman and Mr.
Mackay were available to be called should the Tribunal have questions for them.
16.

The substance of the allegations against the Student were contained in the affidavit

of Professor Zaman. The Course “is a first- year course, designed to provide students
with a foundational understanding of calculus as a prerequisite for upper level calculus
courses” and the Student was one of 1,100 students who remained in the Course at the
time of the final exam. That exam was moved online in March 2020 because of the
Covid19 pandemic and the grading scheme was altered such that the final exam was to
be worth 20% of the final grade.
17.

Professor Zaman noted that from the outset of the Course, the students were

advised about the standards of academic integrity and what was and was not acceptable
assistance. Specifically, students were warned about using tutoring companies, online
homework websites or education centres to assist with the course work. The students
were also told about ways of getting acceptable help through access to instructors and
TAs during office hours and the existence of the departmental Math Learning Centre
established to help first year students. At the beginning of the Course in the Fall of 2019,
he had also sent all students an announcement entitled “A word of caution”, warning
students about online tutoring services and the risks of being penalized for academic
misconduct if they relied on solutions provided on such sites.
18.

The final exam was administered online as an open book exam and the

instructions for taking the exam included a clear explanation about the resources which
could and could not be consulted during the exam. Specifically, students were instructed

8

that they may only use their own notes, term work, course videos, other official course
materials, the textbook and WolframAlpha. The “Do Not” list was extensive, limiting
communication with others (except course instructors) during the exam period and
specifically warning students not to use “answers, solutions, term work or notes of anyone
else”. Students were warned that instructors would be “carefully investigating every
single paper” and that penalties for academic dishonesty could range from a failure in the
course to expulsion from the University. Students were required to sign an academic
integrity statement on the cover page of the exam, and the Student signed that statement.
19.

Professor Zaman described the website “Chegg.com”, as an online subscription

service that allows subscribers to post questions and receive answers to the questions
“within 30 minutes”. Following the exam, Instructors and TAs in the Course found a
number of questions and answers from the final exam posted on the Chegg.com site
during the 24 hours period of the exam. Among these were the questions and answers
for 14, 15(a), 15(b), 15(c), 15(d), 16(a) and 16(b) on the Student’s exam.
20.

Professor Zaman’s affidavit described the similarities between the Student’s

answers to those questions in some detail. In some cases, the answers were incorrect
and even “nonsensical”. In others, they included symbols or notations that were not taught
in the Course. In yet others, the Student’s answers were identical to those on Chegg.com,
but the Student did not provide the required justification for using the steps that were used
to reach the answer. In Professor Zaman’s opinion, the fact that Mr. Z

’s answers

took the same approach, with the same or very similar steps to the Chegg.com answers
was suspicious and, given the number and degree of the similarities, was “unlikely to have
been coincidental”.
21.

That the answers were not coincidental and were more likely than not taken from

Chegg.com, was confirmed by the affidavit of Mr. Mackay. As he noted, Chegg.com has
an “Honor Code” which states that its services are not intended to be used for cheating
or fraud. Chegg.com permits instructors to request an “honor code investigation” so that
instructors can determine whether in fact any individual subscriber has accessed the

9

Chegg.com system at a certain time with specific questions and has accessed specific
answers to those questions.
22.

According to Mr. Mackay, Randy Boyagoda, Vice-Dean, Undergraduate, at the

Faculty of Arts & Science submitted a request to Chegg.com for an investigation with
respect to the Course, identifying that the final exam in the Course had been posted on
the site and noting that solutions posted had been found in some of the answers submitted
by students. In response, Chegg.com provided an Excel spreadsheet providing details
of the “askers” and “viewers”, as well as hyperlinks to the questions and answers that
were posted and accessed during the period of the final exam in the Course.
23.

Appended as an exhibit to Mr. Mackay’s affidavit was a chart showing that a user

identifying himself as G

Z

with the email address g

ztc@outlook.com from

the University of Toronto accessed solutions during the exam time to questions 14, 15(a),
(c), (d) and 16 (a) and (b). As Assistant Discipline Counsel noted, “ztc” in the above noted
email address corresponds to the initials of the Student’s Chinese name: Z
T
24.

.
After retiring to consider the evidence before us, the Tribunal determined that the

Student had accessed Chegg.com for answers during the exam period and used those
answers in place of his own. He had thereby knowingly represented as his own idea or
work, that of another, and was guilty of contravening section B.I.1(d) of the Code (Charge
#1).
E.

Penalty / Sanction

25.

After advising Assistant Discipline Counsel of our finding on the merits, the matter

continued with a hearing on the appropriate sanctions. The Tribunal had been advised at
the outset of the hearing that if the Student were to be found guilty of Charge 1, Charges
2 and 3 should be considered to be withdrawn.

10

26.

The University requested that the Tribunal order that the Student be given a grade

of zero in the Course; that he be suspended for a period of four years from the date of
the order; that a notation be placed on his student record until his graduation and that the
decision be reported to the Provost for publication with the Student’s name withheld.
27.

In support of the requested penalty, the University submitted a second affidavit of

Ms. Di Matteo sworn February 11, 2022, in which she noted that according to the SAI
records, the Student had committed two prior offences, each of which was for submitting
plagiarised materials in assignments. Specifically, in Fall Term 2019 the Student admitted
to plagiarism in an assignment in course CSC108H1, for which he received a
departmental level sanction of zero in the assignment. In the Winter term 2020, the
Student admitted to plagiarism in an assignment submitted in AST201H1. The matter was
resolved at the divisional level with a zero on the assignment, further reduction of the final
course grade of 9 marks, and a notation on the transcript.
28.

Assistant Discipline Counsel referred the Tribunal to a Summary of Cases

contained in a Book of Authorities. The summary showed a list of 12 recent Tribunal
decisions, listing the offence, whether there were prior offences, whether the student in
each case had participated in the disciplinary hearing, and the sanction that was imposed.
In six of these cases the student had also used Chegg.com.
29.

We were referred to the factors for determining an appropriate sanction in the

leading case of University of Toronto v. Mr. C. (Case #1976/77-3, November 1976). The
factors set out in that case are, the character of the person charged, the likelihood of a
repetition of an offence, the nature of the offence, any extenuating circumstances
surrounding the commission of the offence, the detriment to the University occasioned by
the offence and the need to deter others from committing a similar offence.
30.

We noted that the Student had pleaded guilty to the same offence on two previous

occasions, indicating he had not learned from that experience. He chose not to plead
guilty in this case and provided unbelievable explanations for both delaying the hearing

11

and explaining his exam results, which we found to be dishonest. He did not appear at
his hearing despite evidence that he was aware of it taking place and had been made
aware of his right to seek assistance in putting forward any case on the merits or
arguments on penalty to address any extenuating circumstances which might affect our
decision. In his absence and on the facts as we know them, including that he had used a
paid service to facilitate his cheating, we had no basis on which to consider a lesser
penalty than that requested by the University. We agreed that because of the previous
offences and because a paid service was used to commit the misconduct, there was a
sound basis for imposing a four-year suspension rather than the three years that had
been imposed in the examples given of the other cases involving Chegg.com.
31.

The Mr. C case and those which follow it note the importance of the University as

an educational institution and a degree-granting body and emphasize that members of
the University and the public alike must be able to rely on the academic integrity of the
University’s evaluation processes. Using unauthorized aids is cheating and allowing
cheating to go unsanctioned is unfair to the other students who abide by the rules and
regulations. In this case, in a class of over 1,000 students, most will have earned their
grades, be they pass or fail, without unauthorized aids. If not sanctioned, cheating
undermines the grades of all of the honest students and devalues the University’s
degrees.
32.

After considering all of the evidence and submissions, the Tribunal concurred with

and accepted the University’s recommendation on sanctions.
F.

Conclusion

33.

The Tribunal has found that the Student is guilty of the academic offence of

representing as his own an idea or expression or of an idea or work of another in the final
exam in MAT137Y1 contrary to section B.I.1(d) of the Code. The Tribunal ordered that
the following sanctions be imposed on the Student:

12

i.

The Student be given a grade of zero in Course MAT127Y1; and

ii.

The Student be suspended from the University of Toronto for a period of 4
years from the date of the Tribunal’s order; and

iii.

A notation of the penalty be placed on the Student’s transcript from the date
of the order until the Student’s graduation from the University.

34. The Tribunal also ordered that this case be reported to the Provost for publication of
a notice of this decision and the sanctions imposed, with the name of the Student
withheld.
Dated at Toronto this 5th day of April, 2022

Original signed by:
________________________________
Ms. Harriet Lewis, Chair
On behalf of the Panel

