Case 1106

   DATE:

   April 5, 2022

   PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v. H.W. ("the Student")

   HEARING DATE:

   March 24, 2022, via Zoom

   PANEL MEMBERS:

   Ms. Harriet Lewis, Chair
   Professor Margaret MacNeill, Faculty Panel Member
   Mr. David Allens, Student Panel Member

   APPEARANCES:

   Ms. Tina Lie, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg
   Rothstein LLP
   Mr. William Webb, Co-Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg Rothstein LLP

   NOT IN ATTENDANCE:

   The Student

   HEARING SECRETARY:

   Mr. Christopher Lang, Director, Office of Appeals, Discipline and
   Faculty Grievances

   The‚ØStudent‚Øwas charged under s. B.i.1(d) of the‚ØCode of Behaviour
   on Academic Matters, 1995‚Ø(the ‚Code‚) on the basis that he knowingly
   represented as his own an idea or expression of an idea or work of
   another in a final exam. In the alternative, the Student was charged
   under s. B.i.1(b) of the Code on the basis that he knowingly obtained
   unauthorized assistance in connection with a final exam. In the further
   alternative, the Student was charged under s. B.i.3(b) of the Code on
   the basis that he knowingly engaged in a form of cheating, academic
   dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or misrepresentation in order
   to‚Øobtain academic credit or other academic advantage‚Øin connection
   with a final exam.

   The hearing was scheduled to commence at 1:45 p.m., the Panel waited
   fifteen minutes allow for the Student to attend. The Student nor a
   representative of the Student appeared at the hearing. Assistant
   Discipline Counsel requested that the Panel proceed with the hearing in
   the absence of the Student. The Panel noted that pursuant to ss. 6 and
   7 of the Statutory Powers Procedure Act (‚SPPA‚) and Rule 17 of the
   University Tribunal‚s Rules of Practice and Procedure (‚Rules‚), if
   reasonable notice of a hearing has been given to a party and the party
   does not attend the hearing, the Tribunal may proceed in the absence of
   the party. The University submitted affidavit evidence outlining the
   numerous attempts made to contact the Student to arrange a hearing
   date. The affidavit evidence also outlined that the Student agreed to a
   number of dates but in each case requested adjournments for various
   reasons. The most recent adjournment request was granted and the next
   hearing date was marked peremptory on the Student. The University
   provided further affidavit evidence that outlined that the Student was
   served with the Notice of Electronic Hearing and notified about the
   peremptory nature of the next hearing date. The Panel received an
   affidavit of an Incident Report Architect with the Information
   Technology Services at the University of Toronto. The Panel noted that
   his affidavit outlined that the last time someone accessed the email
   account of the Student was after the Notice of Electronic Hearing was
   sent to the Student via email. Based on the evidence filed, the Panel
   determined that the Student was given reasonable notice of the hearing
   in compliance with the notice requirements of the SPPA and the Rules.
   The Panel proceeded to hear the case on its merits in the absence of
   the Student.

   Regarding the charge under s. B.i.1(d) of the Code, the Panel received
   affidavit evidence of the Professor who taught the course for which the
   final exam in question was submitted. The Professor‚s affidavit
   outlined that following the exam, the instructors and the teaching
   assistants in the course found a number of questions and answers from
   the final exam were posted on Chegg.com during the exam period. The
   Panel noted that the Professor‚s affidavit outlined that seven
   questions and answers from the Student‚s exam appeared on Chegg.com,
   and that there were similarities between the Student‚s answers and
   those posted on Chegg.com. The Professor‚s affidavit also noted that
   given the number and degree of the similarities, it was unlikely that
   it was coincidental. The Panel also received affidavit evidence of the
   former Director of Faculty Governance in the Faculty of Arts and
   Science (‚Director‚) which outlined that a request to Chegg.com for an
   investigation was submitted with respect to the exam. In response,
   Chegg.com provided the details of the ‚askers‚ and ‚viewers.‚ The Panel
   noted that attached to the Director‚s affidavit was a chart that
   exhibited that a user from the University of Toronto with the Student‚s
   last name accessed the solutions to the seven questions and answers
   that appeared on the Student‚s exam. Based on all the evidence, the
   Panel determined that the Student had accessed Chegg.com for the
   answers during the exam period and used those answers in place of his
   own. Therefore, the Panel found that the Student was guilty of
   knowingly representing as his own an idea or work of another contrary
   to s. B.i.1(d) of the Code. The University withdrew the charges made in
   the alternative.

   In determining sanction,‚Øthe‚ØPanel considered the factors for
   determining an appropriate sanction as outlined in the University of
   Toronto v. Mr. C (Case No. 1976/77-3, November 5, 1976) as well as
   recent Tribunal decisions. In considering the current offence, the
   Panel noted that the Student pled guilty to the same offence on two
   previous occasions which indicated that he had not learned from those
   previous experiences. The Panel further noted that the Student chose
   not to plead guilty in this case, and provided unbelievable
   explanations for both delaying the hearing and explaining the exam
   results which the Panel found to be dishonest. Furthermore, the Student
   did not appear at the hearing despite evidence that he was aware of it
   taking place. The Panel noted that in the Student‚s absence and on the
   facts before it, it had no basis on which to consider a lesser penalty
   than that requested by the University. The Panel agreed that because of
   the Student‚s previous offences and the use of a paid services to
   commit the misconduct, there was a basis for a greater penalty. The
   Panel outlined that using unauthorized aids is cheating and allowing
   cheating to go unsanctioned is unfair to students who abide by and
   follow the rules and regulations. Furthermore, if not sanctioned,
   cheating undermines the grades of honest students and devalues the
   University of Toronto‚s degrees. The Panel imposed the following
   sanctions: final grade of zero in the course; four-year suspension; a
   notation on transcript until graduation; and a report to the Provost
   for publication.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/30474
