Case #56 - Appeal

   DATE: October 4, 2001

   PARTIES: Mr. P. (Applicant) v. the University of TorontoÂ (Respondent)

   HEARING DATE: October 4, 2001

   Panel Member:
   C. Anthony Keith, Q.C., Senior Chair

   Appearances:
   Gary E. Shortliffe, for the Applicant
   Lily I. Harmer, for the Respondent

   Discipline Appeals Board (âDABâ) Decision
   Note: See Tribunal case summary for detailed facts

   Application by the Student for an extension of time to appeal a
   Tribunal decision

   Formal written notice of the Tribunalâs decision was received by the
   Student on November 19, 2000. The DAB noted section E.5 of the Code ,
   pursuant to which an appeal from a decision of the Tribunal shall be
   made by filing written notice with the Secretary within 21 days after
   the giving of notice of the decision of the Tribunal. It was common
   ground between the parties that no formal notice of appeal was
   delivered to the Secretary within that time, though the Student alleged
   that he had spoken with the then-Secretary regarding his intention to
   appeal and was told he should first attempt to obtain legal
   representation and then file a formal notice. The first written
   indication of an intention to appeal was contained in a letter from the
   Studentâs counsel dated April 6, 2001. The DAB noted that under the
   Code , the Senior Chair has the power, in âexceptional circumstancesâ,
   to enlarge the time for appeal upon application made either before or
   after the expiry of the time. The DAB further noted that there is no
   further indication in the Code as to the meaning of the phrase
   âexceptional circumstancesâ. The issue was therefore whether or not the
   circumstances described would reasonably constitute exceptional
   circumstances.

   The DAB considered the chronology of events and the submissions of
   counsel for the Student, in particular the affidavit evidence which
   indicated the Studentâs understanding of what was expected of him as a
   result of a conversation with an employee representing the University.
   On this basis, the DAB stated that it was prepared to find on the
   circumstances of this case alone that there were exceptional
   circumstances upon which to enlarge the time to appeal. The Senior
   Chair stated that this was in no way to be taken as a general statement
   that in all similar circumstances such a decision would be reached. The
   DAB noted the reasons why the University would wish to require those
   seeking to appeal Tribunal decisions to do so promptly, however, the
   University in this case, did not oppose the Studentâs application
   provided that certain conditions be incorporated into the order
   granting an extension of time. Counsel for the Student did not oppose
   the nature, or the imposition, of those conditions.

   The DAB therefore granted the extension of time to appeal, on a number
   of conditions. The conditions were: that the appeal not operate as a
   stay on the decision; that the granting of leave to appeal not operate
   so as to prevent the University from raising as an issue on appeal any
   practical difficulties in terms of presenting witnesses to deal with
   any new hearing that the appellant Tribunal might order; and that the
   parties abide by a strict timetable to commence from the date of the
   DABâs decision. This timetable included the arrangements for the
   obtaining and distribution of the transcripts of the Tribunal hearing;
   the service of the appeal materials; and the process for arranging a
   hearing date for the appeal. Submissions on costs were reserved to the
   Chair of the Appeal Tribunal.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12770
