Report 314

DATE:

   March 9, 2007

PARTIES:

   The Student Appellant v. the Faculty of Arts and Sciences

Hearing Date(s):

   February 20, 2007

Committee Members:

   Professor Emeritus Ralph Scane, Senior Chair
   Professor Jan Angus
   Mr. Kristofer Coward
   Professor William Gough
   Ms Maureen Somerville

Judicial Affairs Officer:

   Dr. Anthony Gray

In Attendance:

   The Student Appellant

For the Faculty of Arts and Science:

   Ms Sari Springer (Counsel)
   Ms Elaine Ishibashi, Associate Registrar
   Professor Suzanne Stevenson, Acting Vice-Dean, Undergraduate Education
   and Teaching

   Request for late withdrawal without academic penalty from one course.
   The Student failed the course. The Student claimed that she was
   overwhelmed by time demands arising out of assistance to her father's
   litigation, and emotional stress as well as time demands arising from
   the serious illness of her aunt and grandmother. The Student claimed
   that if the course instructor had been more severe with the lateness
   penalty imposed on the first assignment handed in late then she would
   have dropped the course. The Committee considered the Studentâs
   submissions and the University and Committeeâs approach to the policy
   on late withdrawal without academic penalty as described in Report
   #264. The Committee found that the demands imposed by the lawsuit were
   known by the Student by the drop date and that the date of the Trial
   did not provided sufficient excuse for the Student's default with
   respect to the first three papers. The situation with regard to the
   aunt and grandmother was known, and while their health had
   deteriorated, increasing the stress upon the Student, the circumstances
   occurred after the Student had so severely defaulted in the course that
   her situation was almost certainly irreparable. The Committee found
   that the penalty imposed on the first assignment was sufficiently clear
   and severe so that no reasonable student could have been lulled into a
   sense of security with respect to the instructorâs approach to time
   defaults. The Committee considered whether the general policy on late
   withdrawal without academic penalty should be revisited in order to
   allow relief to younger first year students. The Committee found that
   it should not attempt to revise a policy that has been generally
   applied by so many Academic Appeals Committee panels and by the
   Divisions.Â  The minority found that the policy should be amended and
   that relief should be granted. Appeal dismissed. The Committee
   recommended that the University undertake a review of its policies with
   respect to the admittance of younger students and to consider whether
   the University should be more proactive in reaching out to younger
   students.
   [1]View Report

References

   1. file:///media/12569
