Case 648

DATE:

   November 12, 2013

PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v. C.E.

Hearing Date(s):

   April 9, 2013; May 27, 2013; June 26, 2013

Panel Members:

   Michael Hines, Chair
   Joel Kirsh,Â Faculty Member
   Peter Qiang, Student Member

Appearances:

   Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel for the University
   Glenn Stuart,Â Barrister and Solicitor
   Justin Bumgardner, Lecturer (Course Professor)
   Miriam Avadisian, a Student
   Ivan Ampuero, Campus Police
   Charles Helewa, Campus Police
   Maeve Chandler, a Student
   The Student's brother
   The Student's mother

In Attendance:

   The Student
   Lucy Gaspini, Manager, Academic Integrity and Affairs (UTM)
   Christopher Lang, Director, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances
   Student charged with one offence under s. B.i.1(b) and in the
   alternative, one offence under s. B.i.3(b) of the Code. The charges
   related to an allegation that the Student knowingly used or possessed
   an unauthorized aid in the exam hall during a final exam. Specifically,
   the Student was alleged to have brought a completed Mid-Term Exam
   Booklet from the same course into the final exam. The Student claimed
   that the Mid-Term Booklet he possessed was from an unrelated course and
   therefore was not an aid for the purposes of s. B.i.1(b) . Both the
   Mid-Term Exam Booklet and the Final Exam Booklet were seized by the
   professor during the exam after a brief struggle with the Student. The
   professor gave the seized materials to the Chief Presiding Officer in
   the exam hall. Before the exam was finished, the Student grabbed the
   materials that had been seized and ran from the exam hall. Campus
   police were contacted and met with the Student for an interview two
   days later. During the interview, the Student informed the interviewing
   officer that he had âstashedâ the materials at the bottom of a
   staircase in the same building in which the exam had been written. The
   materials were recovered. The Mid-Term Exam Booklet that was found
   alongside the Final Exam Booklet was from an unrelated course. However,
   the professor testified that the completed Mid-Term Exam Booklet he had
   seized from the Student was from the same course. When shown the
   unrelated Mid-Term Exam Booklet found by the staircase, the Chief
   Presiding Officer denied that it was the Mid-Term Exam Booklet that had
   been handed to her by the professor during the exam. The Panel observed
   that the inability to definitively answer whether the Mid-Term Exam
   Booklet was related or unrelated was entirely attributive to the
   actions of the Student. The Panel noted that, while that fact did not
   relieve the University from the ultimate burden of proof, it obliged
   the Student to provide credible, cogent evidence to demonstrate how the
   facts are best explained by his contention that the Mid-Term Exam
   Booklet in question was from an unrelated course. The Panel found no
   reason to disbelieve the evidence of the professor that he observed the
   Mid-Term Exam Booklet was from the same course. The Panel found
   inconsistencies in the evidence of the Student, and concluded that the
   Studentâs behaviour in seizing the exam and fleeing was more consistent
   with a guilty mind than with an honest student whose panic was
   nevertheless so extreme as to rob him of any vestige of rationality.
   The Panel concluded that the Student was guilty of the offence under s.
   B.i.1(b) .

   The Student had no prior disciplinary record and provided two letters
   of reference which spoke highly of him. The Panel noted that the
   authors of the letters appeared to be unaware of the conduct in
   question and consequently attribute little weight to these references.
   The Panel treated the Studentâs extraordinary conduct after his
   materials were seized by the professor, and the protracted and
   deliberate course of deception he engaged in afterwards, as aggravating
   factors. The Panel acknowledged the series of personal tragedies
   experience by the Student in the months preceding the events in
   question. However, the Panel concluded that these tragedies could not
   be used as mitigating factors because the Student relied on them in
   attempt to provide an innocent explanation for his conduct which the
   Panel rejected. The tragedies did not explain or mitigate the fact
   found by the Panel that the Student had attempted to mislead the
   Tribunal. The Panel found that the Student was unlikely to repeat this
   type of offence and that it was not therefore necessary to prevent his
   return to the University altogether. The Panel imposed a final grade of
   zero in the course, a three-year suspension, a four-year notation on
   the Studentâs transcript, and ordered that the case be reported to the
   Provost for publication. The Panel noted that for reasons beyond the
   Studentâs control, it had taken more than four months or the Decision
   to be issued. The Panel therefore directed that both the suspension and
   the transcript notation be deemed to have commenced on the final day of
   the hearing, rather than the date of issuance.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12816
