THE UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO

IN THE MATTER OF charges of the use or possession of an authorized aid
made on November 16, 2011 ,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic
Matters, 1995,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Act, 1971, S.O. 1971 , c. 56
am.
BETWEEN :

THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
- and -

REASONS FOR DECISION
Hearing Dates: Tuesday, April 9, Monday, May 27 and Wednesday, June 26, 2013
Panel Members:
Mr. M1chael Hines, Barrister and Solicitor, Chair
Dr. Joel Kirsh, Faculty of Medicine, Faculty Member
Mr. Peter Qiang, Student Member
Appearances:
Mr. Glenn M. Stuart, Barrister and Solicitor, StuartLaw
Ms. Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Barristers
Dr. Justin Bumgardner; Lecturer, University of Toronto Mississauga
Ms. Miriam Avadisian, Student, University of Toronto Mississauga
Cpl. Ivan Ampuero, University of Toronto Mississauga Campus Police
Cpl. Charles Helewa, University of Toronto Mississauga Campus Police
Ms. Catherine Seguin, Lecturer, University of Toronto Mississauga
Ms. Maeve. Chandler, Student, University of Toronto Mississauga
Mr. ~ h e student's brother
Ms. ~ . the student's mother
In Attendance:
Mr. ~ ~
. the Student
Ms. Lucy Gaspini, Manager, Academic Integrity and Affairs, University of Toronto
Mississauga
Mr. Christopher Lang, Director, Appea ls, Discipline and Faculty Grievances, Office of
the Governing Counsel

2

Charges

1.

1

The events leading to this disciplinary hearing are connected to the writing of
a final exam in POL310 (a full-year course) on April 20, 2011. The accused
~ ~ w as a student in this course. The charges against him read as
follows:
•

On or about April 20, 2011, you knowingly used or possessed an
unauthorized aid in the final exam ("Exam") in POL31 OY5 ("Course"),
contrary to section B.l.1(b) of the Code.

•

In the alternative, on April 20, 2011, you knowingly engaged in a form
of cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct not otherwise
described in the Code in order to obtain an academic advantage in
the Exam, contrary to section B.1.3(b) of the Code.

2.

The precise events that occurred in the examination hall that led to these
charges can be stated fairly simply, although they are, themselves, not free of
controversy. Specifically, there is no doubt that Mr. ~ was in possession
of a document in the exam hall in addition to those provided and authorized
by the University. The case turns on what that document was - was it a
completed Mid-Term Exam Booklet related to POL310 (as the University
claims) or was it a completed Mid-Term Exam Booklet from an unrelated
course (as Mr. ~ cla ims)? The answer to this question will determine
whether the docu ment in the possession of Mr. ~ s an "aid" or an
irrelevancy and hence the guilt or innocence of M ~ .

3.

To assist in describing the evidence tendered before us, it is helpful to note at
this point that in support of his position, Mr. ~ tendered in evidence a
completed Mid-Term Exam Booklet that he had used in answering questions
in a mid-term exam for POL336, a course taught by a Prof. George Wooten
that was acknowledged by the University to be unrelated to POL310. Mr.
~ claimed that this booklet (hereinafter "the 336 Booklet") was the
unauthorized document that was in his possession on April 20, 2011. Mr.
~ acknowledged that possession of a completed POL31 0 Midterm
Exam Booklet would constitute possession of an unauthorized aid. For its
part, the University did not seriously suggest that mere possession of a
completed Midterm Exam Booklet from POL336 would constitute possession
of an unauthorized aid. 1

This is not to suggest that possession of such a document in the POL310 exam would be acceptable, given the
strict instructions provided to students in terms of ensuring that only expressly authorized materials are taken into
an exam hall. The argument here is that, given the difference in the two courses, the 336 Booklet would not have
constituted an "aid" . In view of our conclusion as to what the document in question actually was, this point need
not be definitively determined.

3

4.

The events that preceded and followed the events that .occurred in the
examination hall are more involved and the conclusions to be drawn from
them are far from clear.

The University's Case

2

5.

We will deal first with what occurred in the examination room. The final exam
was, according to the Course Outline, to be worth 40% of the final mark. It
involved two questions. One of these questions was summative or
cumulative, in the sense that it required knowledge of material covered over
both terms. Students would have anticipated such a question based upon the
description of the exam in the Course Outline. The students who wrote the
exam were given the usual warnings prior to the start of the exam prohibiting
the possession of unauthorized aids. Invigilators were present, as was Prof.
Justin Bumgardner, who had taught the course.

6.

As the exam was being written, Prof. Bumgardner's attention was attracted by
a student sitting at an exam table next to that occupied by M r . ~ - He
approached that student, who indicated by a written note that she suspected
that Mr. ~ was using an unauthorized aid. Unfortunately, that note was
not retained as evidence.

7.

At or shortly after that moment, Mr. ~ also raised his hand and Prof.
Bumgardner approached him. As the two spoke, Prof. Bumgardner noticed
something beneath the Final Exam Booklet that Mr. ~ was using to
record his answers. According to Mr. ~
. there ensued something of a
tussle, with Prof. Bumgardner attempting to see what lay below the Final
Exam Book and Mr. ~ attempting, by placing his palms on the Final
Exam Book, to prevent this.

8.

After a few seconds of this, Prof. Bumgardner succeeded in seeing what was
being concealed. He testified that the document in question was a Mid-Term
Exam Booklet. 2 He testified further that he could see that the front cover had
been filled in by handwriting identifying the course as POL310, the Instructor
as himself and the Student as Mr. ~ .

9.

Prof. Bumgardner seized both Exam Booklets and instructed Mr. ~ to
follow him to the invigilator's table at the front of the exam hall. He handed
the materials to the Chief Presiding Officer ("CPO") and explained what had
happened. He left the matter between Mr. ~ and the CPO, observing
that Mr. ~ assumed a vacant exam table immediately in front of the
invigilator's table, evidently to continue writing the exam (as would have been
Mr. ~ · s right).

Although the Mid-Ter m and Final Exam Booklets are similar, the printed mat erial on the cover of the form er is in
bright blue ink while the printed material on the cover of the latter is in black ink. The tw o kinds of booklets
would, w e believe, be readily distinguishable to those fa miliar with t he differences.

4
10.

Prof. Bumgardner's attention was next drawn t o ~ when , shortly
before the end of the exam, he observed Mr. ~ his seat, go to
the invigilator's table, seize the two exam booklets and, over the protestations
of the CPO and following a brief physical struggle, run out of the exam hall
and down the hallway. By the time Prof. Bumgardner managed to get to the
doorway of the exam hall, M r . ~ had vanished.

11 .

The foregoing , including Mr. ~

12.

Prof. Bumgardner was shown the 336 Booklet in his examination-in-chief and
denied that it was the document that he had confiscated on the day in
question. In cross-examination, Prof. Bumgardner was also shown a
document later identified by Mr. ~
as the POL310 Midterm Booklet Mr.
~ had used in January, 2011 when writing a make-up of that exam.
Prof. Bumgardner testified that this document was, in fact, the document he
had confiscated on April 20, 2011 , basing this on the fact that both the
document shown to him and the document he had seized had reflected that
the course in question was POL310.

13.

Although the further cross-examination of Prof. Bumgardner revealed some
minor anomalies, the substance of his account was not undermined in any
material way.

14.

The CPO was called as a corroborative witness by the University. Although
this witness confirmed that Prof. Bumgardner had handed her both a Final
Exam Booklet and a Mid-Term Exam Booklet, she was unable to shed any
light on the precise details of the information on the cover of the Mid-Term
Exam Booklet that was given to her by Prof. Bumgardner. However, when
shown the 336 Booklet, she denied that it was the Mid-Term Exam Booklet
that had been handed to her, testifying that the information on its cover
regarding the course and instructor was different from the information on the
cover of the Mid-Term Exam Booklet handed to her. She observed
specifically that she would have noted that a reference to an Instructor other
than Prof. Bumgardner would have "struck [her] as odd".

15.

The CPO also testified that Mr. ~ was extremely agitated and nervous
after Prof. Bumgardner's intervention. Although Mr. E - attempted to
continue writing the exam, he asked to take several breaks to get a drink and
to go to the washroom. The CPO confirmed Prof. Bumgardner's description of
Mr. E - seizure of the booklets and exit from the exam hall. She advised
that in addition to the two booklets, Mr. ~ had also made off with the
reports concerning the incident that were in the course of being prepared.

•s name, was reported to Campus Police.

5

16.

As stated above, Campus Police were ca lled immediately after the incident.
The name of the student was, of course, known , and efforts were made to get
in touch with Mr. ~ in order to ask questions of him and, hopefully,
recover the two exam booklets he had taken. A message was left that
evening at the telephone number on record by Campus Police Corporal Ivan
Ampuero, asking Mr. ~ to contact Campus Police. At approximately
7:20 p.m., Mr. ~ returned the call. He was asked to attend for an
interview in respect of a report of an academic infraction commi_!t~ him
that afternoon in connection with the POL310 Final Exam. M r . ~
advised Corp. Ampuero that he had not written the exam that day, having
"opted out" due to a medical condition. Despite this, Corp. Ampuero insisted
on a meeting on campus, and one was arranged for the following day.

17.

In fact, Mr. ~ called Corp. Ampuero the following day to cancel the
meeting and re-schedule it for April 22. Mr. ~ maintained that he could
not attend the planned meeting because he could not secure the use of a car.
While perhaps time-consuming to do so, it is possible to get from Mr.
~ s family residence to the Mississauga Campus by public transit.

18.

Mr. ~ attended the following day and was interviewed by Campus
Police Corporal Charles Helewa. Mr. ~ admitted having taken the
booklets and having run from the exam hall. He told Helewa that he had
"stashed" the papers at the bottom of a little-used staircase in the same
building in which the exam had been written. Helewa interrupted the interview
in order that Mr. ~ might show him where the papers were.

19.

The two attended the location described by M r . ~ and retrieved the
incident reports and two exam booklets. One booklet was Mr. ~ s Final
Exam Booklet for POL310 that had been seized by Prof. Bumgardner. The
other was the 336 Booklet. Mr. ~ told Helewa that the 336 Booklet was
the second booklet that Prof. Bumgardner had confiscated.

20.

Mr. ~ then told Helewa that when he had entered the exam hall on April
20, he did so with the 336 Booklet (which was not relevant to the POL310
exam) in the pocket of his sweatpants. As the exam progressed , he removed
the 336 Booklet from his pocket because it was making noise every time he
wrote something. This was evidently observed by the student at the desk next
to his, who then alerted Prof. Bumgardner. Mr. ~ described the
confiscation of the papers and his efforts to resume writing the exam. He
panicked , rushed the invigilator's table, seized the materials and fled ,
ultimately deciding to leave the materials at the base of the staircase where
they had just been. Helewa described Mr. ~ as teary-eyed and nervous
during this interview, "weighing his words carefully".

6

21.

The account Mr. ~ gave to Corp. Helewa on April 22 was, in its
essential points, the same account that Mr. ~ gave to the Dean's
Designate during the investigation of the matter and to the Panel at our
hearing. This account of the events of April 20, 2011 was supplemented by
some additional information that shall now be addressed.

22.

M ~ called as a witness a fellow student, Maeve Chandler. Mr.
~ Ms. Chandler had taken Prof. Wooten's course in POL336 at the
same time that year. She recalled having a meeting that involved Prof
Wooten, Mr. ~ and three other students to discuss a group essay that
the students had written. Mr. ~ had taken notes of th is meeting "on the
back of an old paper or test". Ms. Chandler was unsure what course this "old
paper or test related to", but when shown the 336 Booklet, identified it as the
document in question.

23.

After this meeting, the notes had ended up in Ms. Chandler's possession. She
testified that she later returned the notes to Mr. ~ at the end of the
2010-11 academic year. This occurred at a chance encounter at the library the two had not planned to meet, but Ms. Chandler knew that Mr. ~ was
often there studying. At first, Ms. Chandler testified that this occurred on April
20, 2011, but it became clear in cross-examination a) that she did not have a
reliable independent recollection of the precise date of this ·event and b) that
the date of April 20 had been suggested to her by Mr. ~ -

24.

Mr. ~ · s. brother then testified, presumably to explain that he was busy
on April 21, 2011 with one of the two famfly cars. However, Mr. ~ · s
brother did not indicate that it would not have been possible for him to drop
Mr. ~ off at the University. Indeed, his evidence was to the contrary.

25.

Mr. ~ · s mother also testified. She related that their family had
experienced a number of tragic events in the months preceding April 20,
2011 . In particular, Mr. ~ had suffered an accident in January, 2010,
having been hit by a bus. This led to months of painful rehabilitation. As a
part of this, Mr. ~ had been prescribed Percocet, to be used on an as
needed basis. She testified that he reacted very poorly to this medication,
becoming very emotional and anxious, crying and wringing his hands.

26.

As well, her father (M r. ~
·s grandfather) had contracted cancer around
the same time, ultimately passing away on May 6, 2010. Mr. ~ was
extremely close to his grandfather, and his death was a great blow to the
family.

27.

The events of April 20, 2011 immediately preceded the Easter Weekend, the
first since the death of Mr. ~
·s grandfather. It was apparent from the
evidence that Mr. ~ · s family was spiritually observant, and this was to

7
be a significant weekend . Tragically, on that same weekend (although
evidently after April 20), one of Mr. ~ aunts died.
28.

Mr. E - ' s mother attempted to explain that the thought of Mr. ~
travelling to the Campus by bus was unrealistic since he was "on crutches,
hobbling around". In cross-examination, it was confirmed that by April , 2011
(fifteen months after being hit by the bus), Mr. E - was no longer on
crutches and, in fact, had attempted to return to competitive running the
previous summer.

29.

Mr. ~·smother also testified that on the morning of April 20, 2011, she
had driven him to the Campus for his exam (which was not to begin until 4:00
p.m.). She testified that Mr. ~ had taken "a pill". In cross-examination,
she clarified that she had kept possession of the Percocet, and that Mr. ·
E - had to obtain her permission before taking one, hence her knowledge
of the consumption of the pill on the morning in question.

30.

Mr. ~·smother testified that on the night that the Campus Police first
called to speak to Mr. E _ , when she gave the telephone to him, he left
the room to speak in private.

31.

Mr. E - then testified. He recounted the impact on him of his
grandfather's death and the effect that Percocets had on him -they made
him feel "spaced out" and made it harder for him to focus on tasks. He stated
that he was in pain in April 2011 and remained in pain to the present time due
to the accident with the bus.

32.

On the day of the exam, Mr. ~ stated that his pain was particularly bad,
leading him to obtain a Percocet from his mother that morning and take it. He
told us that the effects of a pill would last for approximately 8 hours. Mr.
~ then was driven to the Mississauga Campus by his mother, arriving at
approximately 8 a.m ..

33.

M r . ~ stated that he spent the day in the library studying. He testified
that on that morning he encountered Ms. Chandler, who returned to him the
336 Booklet, which he folded up and placed in the pocket of his sweatpants.
He said that he did not place the 336 Booklet in his knapsack since he was
just going for a wa lk.

34.

Mr. ~ studied until approximately 3:45 p.m. As stated above, the exam
began at 4 p.m. Being uncomfortable due to pain, Mr. ~ claimed that he
became fidgety, which in turn caused the 336 Booklet in the pocket of his
sweatpants to rustle. He noticed the girl beside him raise her hand, in his
understanding to complain about the noise the 336 Booklet was making. Mr.
~ then also raised his hand in order to get guidance as to what he
ought to do with the paper. Prof. Bumgardner approached the girl first and

8
then, giving Mr. ~ no opportun ity to explain, grabbed the 336 Booklet
from him. Evidently by this point Mr. ~ had removed the 336 Booklet
from his pocket and placed it somewhere on his desk.
35.

Mr. ~ described being taken to the front of the exam hall and being
instructed by the CPO that he should begin writing the exam again from the
beginning. This caused him even greater anxiety since the exam was more
than half over. He claimed that he had attempted to explain the situation to
the CPO, again to no avail. His situation and his inability to make his
explanation known coupled (accord ing to his testimony) with the influence of
his medication caused him to panic, which in turn led hi_!!l~ab the papers
from the invigilator's table and make off with them. Mr. ~ stated that as
he was making his way through the halls, he was asking himself "What are
you doing?". He described placing the documents at the foot of the staircase
and leaving the bui lding .

36.

Mr. ~
acknowledged that he had "not been 100% forthcoming" when he
was first contacted over the telephone that evening by Campus Police,
attributing this to the stress his family was undergoing due to the emotional
circumstances. He admitted that he had agreed to come in the following day,
but decided not to when he cou ld not get a ride. On the following day, he had
reached the conclusion that he had nothing to hide and, as described by
Corp. Helewa, gave his account to Campus Police and showed them where
the documents were.

37.

In cross-examination, M r . ~ agreed he knew the rules proh ibiting
possessio n of unauthorized aids. He appeared to rely on the medication
(which he stated he had taken befo re 7:30 a.m.) and his resulting "frame of
mind" to·explain w hy he may have fai led to have removed the 336 Booklet
from the pocket of his sweatpants, stating that it was "difficult to discern"
whether he had anyth ing improper in his possession. It was o nly at a point in
the exam when he started jiggling his leg that he realized that he had the 336
Booklet in his pocket. This realization made him nervous, leading him to seek
Prof. Bumgardner's guidance. When asked why he did not wait to clarify
everything at the end of the exam, Mr. ~ replied "No one wanted to
hear w hat I had to say".

38.

Mr. ~ stated in cross-exam ination that he, rather than the girl beside
him, had been the first to seek an invigilator's attention. Mr. ~ stated
that he was only being honest "and that led to my downfall", that the
co nfusion could have been avoided had Prof. Bumgardner only approached
him first - "I was owed that and was never given the opportunity". However,
Mr. ~ agreed that when Prof. Bumgardner approached him, the proper
POL310 Exam Booklet was on top of the Midterm Exam Booklet he had
removed from his pocket. He agreed that he had resisted Prof. Bumgardner's
~eizure of the materials on his desk "because he tried to grab everything".

9

39.

In terms of the meeting he initially agreed to attend on April 21, Mr. ~
stated that he could not secure a ride from either his mother or his brother. He
asserted that, given the fact that he had been injured by being hit by a bus, it
was unreasonable to expect him to travel to the Campus by public transit.

40.

Mr. ~ s account of his meeting with Corp. Helewa was not materially
different from that provided by Corp. Helewa described above.

Findings of Fact
41.

There is only one material factual finding to be made - was the document
seized by Prof. Bumgardner the 336 Booklet or the POL310 Midterm Exam
Booklet? For the reasons set out below, we conclude that it was the latter.

42.

To begin with, it should not be overlooked that the inability to answer this
critical question with certainty is entirely attributable to the actions of Mr.
~ in seizing and making off with the document confiscated by Prof.
Bumgardner. While this fact does not relieve the University of its ultimate
burden of proof, it obliges Mr. ~ to provide a credible, cogent account
that explains satisfactorily how the facts are best explained by acceptance of
his contention that the confiscated document was the 336 Booklet. In the
Panel's opinion, he has not met this challenge.

43.

We begin with the evidence of Prof. Bumgardner. He testified both in chief
and in cross-examination that his opportunity to observe the confiscated
document was sufficient to allow him to read sections on the front cover that
Mr. ~ had filled in. He was unequivocal in his testimony that the cover
identified the booklet as being associated with the POL310 midterm. He was
shown the 336 Booklet and denied that it was the document he had
confiscated. He was later shown the POL310 Midterm Booklet and he
id entified it as the document he had confiscated.

44.

The Panel sees no reason to disbelieve this testimony. We believe that
faculty members such as Prof. Bumgardner are sensitive to the calamitous
consequences that may befall students convicted of serious academic
misconduct. We doubt that Prof. Bumgardner would raise and maintain these
concerns lightly.

45.

The testimony of Prof. Bumgardner was corroborated by that of the CPO, who
also had a brief opportunity to see the cover of the confiscated booklet. She
denied that the booklet he had handed to her was the 336 Booklet, rejecting
the suggestion that the confiscated document had Prof. Wooten's name
written on it. While this testimony standing alone might not have persuaded
us, it is consistent with and supportive of the University's key eyewitness
testimony.

10
46.

Then there are circumstances surrounding the confiscation. In particular, Mr.
~ did not deny that he and Prof. Bumgardner had tussled over the
document he had carried into the exam hall in the pocket of his sweatpants.
In fact, he confirmed that this document was, at the moment Prof.
Bumgardner approached his desk, beneath the POL310 Exam Booklet he
was writing in. This is inconsistent with his story that he had, just seconds
previously, removed the document from his pocket in order to obtain guidance
from Prof. Bumgardner as to what he ought to do with it. -

47.

Then we must assess Mr. ~ • s behaviour in seizing the materials from
the invigilator's desk and making off with them. This was certainly behaviour
consistent with panic - Mr.
acknowledged this. The Panel finds it
impossible to accept that Mr.
had attempted to explain to both Prof.
Bumgardner and the CPO what he says happened, that both Prof.
Bumgardner and the CPO refused to take the elementary step of simply
looking at the name of the course written on the cover of the confiscated
document.

48.

Had Mr. ~ · s story been true, one would have expected him to remain
until the end of the exam in order to demonstrate beyond doubt that the
confiscated document was the 336 Booklet. Even allowing for an
understandable level of anxiety resulting from the initial confrontation with
Prof. Bumgardner, we do not accept that Mr. ~ (had his story been
factually accurate) would have behaved in the manner that he did, a manner
that could not help but give rise to profound suspicion. His behaviour is far
more consistent with a guilty mind than with an honest student whose panic
was nevertheless so extreme as to rob him of any vestige of rationality.

49.

Mr. ~ attempted to buttress his claim of honest yet irrational panic by
reference to the fact that, as his mother confirmed, he had taken a Percocet
that morning. Treating that evidence most generously, we observe that by the
time of the confrontation with Prof. Bumgardner, the Percocet (taken at 7:30
a.m.) had been in Mr. ~ · s system for over nine hours. M r . ~
advised us that the effects of these pills typically dissipated after eight hours.
The cognitive impact of the pills was simply to make Mr. ~ feel a little
spaced out and to lessen his ability to focus on tasks. It was not suggested
that a Percocet tablet would rob M r . ~ of the ability to act rationally. It is
to be noted in this regard that Mr. Ellllll(was in the process of writing a final
exam despite having taken the Percocet tablet earlier that day. The panel
does not accept that Mr. ~
·s behaviour after the booklet was
confiscated was attributable to his medication.

50.

Then there is the matter of Mr. ~ s behaviour after he fled the exam
hall. He asks us to believe that he wandered through the building for a period
of time and then decided to place the materials he had seized from the
invigilator's ta ble at the bottom of a little-used stairwell. No explanation was

11
given for this ostensibly inexplicable act. One would have thought that Mr.
~ would have either taken the materials home, thrown them out or, if he
had by that point determined to attempt to exonerate himself, return them
immediately to Prof. Bumgardner, the CPO or someone in a position of
authority. It is difficult to understand why he wou ld simply place them at the
bottom of a little-used stairwell and walk away.
51 .

Mr. ~
·s account allows him the following luxury- it provides him with
two days during which, by his story, the evidence rema ins accounted for and
at the same time untainted. He can claim that when he led Corp. Helewa to
the site, the documents were just as he left them. He can cla im that- the
document that Prof. Bumgardner confiscated from him never left the building.

52.

Th is would be important if, as the University maintains, Mr. ~ actually
retrieved the 336 Booklet and, at some point prior to his Friday meeting with
Helewa, used it to replace the POL310 Midterm Exam Booklet among the
materials he had seized from the invigilator's desk, placing the entire bundle
at the bottom of the staircase. Mr. ~ · s account as to how, when and
why the documents ended up where they were makes little sense, assuming
he was innocent. By contrast, the University's theory as to how, when and
why the documents got to the bottom of the staircase makes perfect sense if
Mr. ~ was not innocent.

53.

Finally, it does not assist Mr. ~ that he lied to Corp. Ampuero when he
was first contacted on the evening of April 20, denying that he had even
written the exam. Nor does it assist him that he took two days to re-attend the
Campus to meet with Corp. Helewa without any credible explanation for the
delay. This delay conveniently (according to the University's theory) extended
the window of opportunity available to him to locate the 336 Booklet and place
it (along with the other materials) at the bottom of the staircase. As with the
corroborative evidence of the CPO, this evidence standing alone would not
have satisfied the University's ultimate onus of proof. However, it is more
explicable under the University's theory of the case than Mr. ~ s theory
of the case , and so adds weight to the other, more material direct and
circumstantial evidence relied upon by the University.

54.

We have not overlooked the evidence of Ms. Chandler that she gave Mr.
~ the 336 Booklet in and around the time in question. Indeed, she may
well have given the 336 Booklet to Mr. ~ on the morning of the exam.
That does not establish that he carried the document into the exam hall. We
have only his word for that. For the reasons set out above, we do not accept
his account of these events.

55.

For all of the foregoing reasons, we conclude that Mr. ~ was in
possession of an unauthorized aid during the POL310 exam on April 20,
2011.

12
Sanction

56.

M r . ~ has no prior disciplinary record. He submitted two letters of
reference which spoke very highly of him. It appears that the authors of these
letters were unaware of the conduct that brought Mr. ~ before us, and
consequently we attribute little, if any, weight to them in our determination.

57.

Discipline Counsel proposed the following sanction:
(a) A final grade of zero in POL310
(b) A three year suspension
(c) A notation on the Student's transcript for a period of four years
(d) A report to the Provost for publication of a notice of our decision including
sanctions, with the name of the student withheld.

Discipline Counsel observed that the normative penalty for a first offence involving a
case of serious academic misconduct is a two year suspension. However, in this case,
there were exacerbating factors, specifically the extraordinary conduct of Mr. ~ in
the minutes, hours and days following the seizure of the document by Prof.
Bumgardner, coupled with his steadfast denial of his guilt in these proceedings.
Reference was made, among others, to the case o f ~ which involved a first
offence remarkably similar to that proven before us in this case. The only material
difference in the cases was that the student in ~ c h o s e not to appear, leaving
the Panel to wonder as to the impact that the disciplinary process had had on her.
Given the absence of any evidence of remorse or other mitigating factors, the Panel
elected not to accept Discipline Counsel's request for a two year suspension, imposing
instead a three year suspens,ion.
In our case , of course, Mr. ~ did testify. We have rejected his account,
concluding that he has engaged not only in the particular offence with which he was
charged (i.e., possession of an unauthorized aid) but also in a protracted and deliberate
course of deception. We sympathize with the series of personal tragedies experienced .
by Mr. ~ in the fifteen months preceding the incident in question. However, Mr.
~ did not initially rely upon these events before us to explain why he cheated on
an exam, and then seek mitigation of his penalty. He relied on lhem to try to explain
why he, an honest student, panicked in the fash ion that he did. We have rejected this
account. The tragedies experienced by Mr. ~ in 2010 and 2011 do not explain or
mitigate the fact (as we have found) that he attempted to mislead the Tribunal in 2013.
While previous cases are to provide g~idance only, we are persuaded that Mr. ~
should be treated no more leniently than was Ms. ~ We observe that a three
year suspension is also consistent with the other case law that was put before us. This
is a serious offence, one that cuts at the heart of academic integrity. Although Mr.

E
-

13

clearly has many fine qualities, the ones most directly at issue in this
proceeding are not flattering. There is a continuing need to deter this type of behaviour.
He is unlikely to repeat this type of offence, and consequently it is not necessary to
prevent his return to the University altogether. However, his failure to acknowledge his
wrongdoing is clearly an exacerbating factor.
Under all the circumstances, we accept the proposal of Discipline Counsel regarding
penalty. We observe that, due to factors beyond Mr. ~
·s control, it has taken
more than four months for this Decision to be issued. Because our last day of hearing
was June 26, 2013, the timing of the commencement of his suspension is significant.
Therefore, we will direct that the suspension requested by Discipline Counsel shall
commence on the last day of hearing in this matter rather than the date of the issuance
of this Decision.

The Panel therefore imposes the following sanctions:
(1) The Student shall receive a final grade of zero in POL31 O;
(2) The Student shall be suspended from the University for a period of three
years, commencing June 26, 2013;
(3) The Student's academic record and transcript be annotated for a period of
four years, commencing June 26, 2013, to reflect that he has been found
guilty of academic misconduct;
(4) That this case shall be reported to the Provost for publication of a notice of
the Decision of the Tribunal and the sanctions imposed, with the name of
the student withheld.

Dated at Toronto, this

J day of November, 2013.

/ 21

Michael A. Hines, Co-Chair

