Case 756

DATE:

   March 20, 2015

PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v M.G.

Hearing Date(s):

   December 17, 2014

Panel Members:

   Roslyn Tsao, Chair
   Ernest Lam, Faculty Member
   Simon Czajkowski, Student Member

Appearances:

   Tina Lie, Assistant Discipline Counsel
   Brian Harrington, Course Instructor
   Eleanor Irwin, Deanâs Designate, UTS
   Wayne Dowler, Deanâs Designate, UTS

In Attendance:

   Christopher Lang, Director, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances

   The Student was charged with two counts under s. B.i.1(b) , in the
   alternative, two charges under s. B.i.1(d) , and, in the further
   alternative, two charges under s. B.i.3(b) of the Code in a computer
   programming course. The Student did not attend the hearing and brief
   adjournment was made. The Panel was satisfied that the Student had
   reasonable notice of the hearing and had been served, by mail, email,
   and phone call, in accordance with the Rules of Practice and Procedure
   of the University Tribunal and the hearing proceeded.

   The University called the course instructor as a witness. He testified
   that in the course, partnership with another student was encouraged,
   but must be registered and dissolved with permission of the instructor.
   The students were also warned against and given guidelines on cheating.
   The Studentâs work on the first assignment submitted was measured as
   being 75% similar to another studentâs (L), though the two were not
   partners. As was his practice, the instructor emailed the Student to
   discuss the similarities and issue a warning but the Student did not
   respond nor meet with the instructor. On a second assignment the
   Studentâs submission was suspiciously similar to an assignment
   submitted by another partnership which included L. The instructor
   recalled that he had denied a request for a partnership of three
   students, though he could not recall if it was the Studentâs request.
   The instructor emailed the three students and emailed the Department
   Chairâs Designate indicating that two of the students had already been
   identified for similarities on the first assignment. The Student did
   not write the final exam but the other implicated students (L and Y)
   did.

   The Deanâs Designate became involved with L and the alleged misconduct
   of failing to register as a pair with the Student on the first
   assignment and after forming a group of three students on the second
   assignment, not discarding that work. The Deanâs Designate confirmed
   Lâs acceptance of misconduct and that it constituted an offence under
   s. B.i.1(b) of the Code . A different Deanâs Designate became involved
   with Y who refused to admit guilt as the Student had done no work and Y
   and L had done all of the work for the second assignment in good faith.
   Y eventually admitted being part of a three-person group and received a
   light sanction.

   The Panel found the Student guilty of obtaining unauthorized assistance
   on two assignments contrary to s. B.i.1(b) of the Code . The Panel did
   not find that the University established that the Student had committed
   plagiarism as that would require Y or L to testify that the Student had
   copied their original source material. The University withdrew the
   alternative charges.

   The University sought a penalty of a grade of zero in the course, a
   two-year suspension, and a notation in the Studentâs academic record
   for two years. Â The Student had no prior record of academic misconduct
   and had not registered at the University since the Winter 2013 term.
   The Panel did not treat the case as a âplagiarism caseâ as the
   University had not made out the requisite requirements for that charge
   and at most the Student did not register his partnership for the first
   assignment and collaborated with two other students instead of one.
   Additionally, the escalation in penalty between the Student and Y and L
   was his failure to participate in the process. The Panel referred to a
   case before the Discipline Appeals Board (DAB) that considered the
   escalation of penalty at the decanal level to the trial level. The DAB
   held that the Mr. C factors are what warrant an escalation in penalty,
   not whether or not the student triggers a hearing. The Panel then
   applied the Mr. C factors and assigned a grade of zero in the course,
   imposed a six-month suspension, ordered a notation on the Studentâs
   transcript for two years, and ordered that the case be reported to the
   Provost for publication.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12872
