-r

UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
IN THE MATTER OF charges of academic dishonesty made on February 27, 2014
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic
Matters, 1995,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University ofToron.to Act, 1971, S.O. 1971, c. 56 as amended
S.O. 1978, C. 88

BETWEEN:
. .

UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO (the "University")
-AND-

lV9 ~ (the "Student")
REASONS FOR DECISION
Hearing Date: December 17, 2014
Panel Members:
Ms. Roslyn M. Tsao, Lawyer, Chair
Professor Ernest Lam, Faculty of Dentistry, Faculty Panel Member
Mr. Simon Czajkowski, Student Panel Member
Appearances:
Ms. Tina Lie, Assistant Discipline Counsel for University, Paliare Roland Barristers
Dr. Brian Harrington, Instructor for CSCA08H3: Introduction to Computer Programming
Professor Eleanor Irwin, Dean's Designate for Academic Integrity at University of Toronto
Scarborough
Professor Wayne Dowler, Dean's Designate for Academic Integrity at the University of Toronto
Scarborough
No one appearing for the Student
In Attendance:
Mr. Christopher Lang, Director, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Gtievances

2
1.

The Trial Division of the Tribunal heard this matter on December 17, 2014. The Student
was charged on February 27, 2014 as follows:
(a)

On or about October 19, 2012, you knowingly obtained unauthorized assistance
in connection with Assignment #1 in CSCA08H3 (Introduction to Computer
Programming) (the "Course"), contrary to section B.I1.(b) of the Code.

(b)

In the alternative, on or about October 19, 2012, you knowingly represented as
your own an idea or expression of an idea or work of another in connection with
Assignment #1 in the Course, contrary to section B.I1.(d) of the Code.

(c)

In the further alternative, on or about October 19, 2012, you knowingly engaged
in a form of cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or
misrepresentation not otherwise described in the Code in order to obtain
academic credit or other academic advantage of any kind in connection with
Assignment #1 in the Course, contrary to section B.I3.(b) of the Code.

(d)

On or about November 30, 2012, you knowingly obtained unauthorized assistance
in connection with Assignment #2 in the Course, contrary to section B.I1.(b) of
the Code.

(e)

In the alternative, on or about November 30, 2012, you knowingly represented as
your own an idea or expression of an idea or work of another in connection with
Assignment #2 in the Course, contrary to section B.I1.(d) of the Code.

(f)

In the further alternative, on or about November 30, 2012, you knowingly
engaged in a form of cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or
misrepresentation not otherwise described in the Code in order to obtain
academic credit or other academic advantage of any kind in connection with
Assignment #2 in the Course, contrary to section B.1.3. (b) of the Code.

Absence of Student from Hearing

2.

The Student did not attend at the Hearing. The Tribunal waited 15 minutes after the
scheduled commencement of the Hearing to allow for the Student to appear.

3
3.

The University presented evidence to the Tribunal confirming proper service of the
Charges dated February 27, 2014 and Notice of Hearing dated November 11, 2014
(which contained the requisite warning for non-attendance) in accordance with Rule 9
(Part 3) of the Rules ofPractice and Procedure ("RPP") by:
e-mailing a copy of the Charges to the Student's e-mail address contained in the
Student's ROSI record on February 28, 2014;
sending a letter from counsel, enclosing a disclosure letter and brief relating to the
matter, by e-mail to the Student and by courier to the Student's address as
contained in the Student's ROSI record on May 21, 2014;
e-mailing the Student on November 10, 2014 to advise him of the hearing date of
December 17, 2014; and
sending the formal Notice of Hearing issued on November 11, 2014 by courier to
the Student's address on December 11, 2014 and leaving same with an adult
member of the household, who advised that the Student was not home at the time
but that she would give the package to the Student.

4.

It is noted that there were a number of efforts to contact the Student by telephone at his

ROSI contact telephone number and by email between May 21, 2014 and December 10,
2014. The emails did not "bounce back" on any occasion.
5.

Accordingly, the Hearing proceeded in the absence of the Student.

Facts

6.

The University tendered three (3) witnesses: Dr. Brian Harrington, Professor Eleanor
Irwin and Professor Wayne Dowler.

Evidence of Dr. Harrington
7.

Dr. Harrington was in his first year of teaching at the time of question at the University of
Toronto, Scarborough campus.

The Course, an introductory first year course, was

4

intended for computer science students who had no pnor expenence with writing
computer code.
8.

There were 500 students in the fall 2012 Course with 15 Teaching Assistants ("TAs") to
run the labs/tutorials. There were two hour weekly sessions for the students to work with
theTAs.

9.

The Course evaluation comprised 9 labs, 4 exercises, 2 assignments, a midterm test and a
final exam.

10.

With respect to the Assignments, the Course Information Sheet stated:
You are permitted, and in fact encouraged, to work with a partner on
assignments. We also encourage you to change partners between
assignments. You must register your partnership before you start
working together on the assignment (see the assignments webpage for
how). We expect that partners working together will use a teamprogramming approach similar to the one used in labs. Splitting the
work and performing the tasks separately will not help prepare you for
the tests and final exam. In extreme cases, you may wish to dissolve your
partnership. To dissolve your partnership, you must contact the course
instructor and your partner by email and be prepared to meet with the
coordinator during office hours.

11.

The Course Information Sheet further addressed cheating as follows:
Please don't cheat. We want you to succeed and are here to help. Here
are a couple ofgeneral guidelines to help you avoid plagiarism:

12.

•

Never look at another group's assignment solution, whether it is
on paper or on the computer screen. Never show another
student (other than your partner) your assignment solution. This
applies to all drafts of a solution and to incomplete solutions.

•

The easiest way to avoid plagiarism is to only discuss the piece
of work with your partner, the TAs, and the course instructor.

Dr. Harrington explained his use of MoSS (Measurement of Software Similarity)
Software to review the computer code submitted by students for their assignments in the
detection of misconduct.

13.

The MoSS Software compares the submitted samples of code (i.e., assignments from the
entire class for a particular assignment) against each other (not against external samples).

5
MoSS will identify lines/sections of code in one student's (or permitted partnership's)
submission that are statistically similar to other submitted code. MoSS will also give a
percentage of the whole assignment that appears to be potentially "plagiarized" or unduly
similar to other submitted assignments. The MoSS software also ignores similarities to
base code that may have formed part of the assignment for all students.
14.

In response to a question from the Panel, Dr. Harrington noted that a percentage in the
range of 10 - 20% of similarity would be expected in an assignment and that higher
percentages would raise suspicion.

15.

Dr. Harrington also explained that he individually reviews those assignments identified
by MoSS to independently determine whether to allege any misconduct.

16.

The computer language being used in the Course was "Python" which is a very "openended", free-hand programming language. Dr. Harrington analogized coding in Python
to be like writing prose in that there are many ways to do the same thing.

Assignment #1
17.

For Assignment #1, all submitted assignments from the students in the Course (from all
three campuses) were analyzed by MoSS.

18.

The MoSS software detected that the Student's assignment/computer code was
substantially similar (approximately 75%) to the assignment/computer code of another
student, Mr. [L].

19.

For Assignment #1, Dr. Harrington recalled that there were approximately 20-30
students, in total, who were identified by the MoSS software. As was and is his practice,
Dr. Harrington would have emailed any students with suspicious assignments (within a
week of the assignment) to request that the student come to speak to him about alleged
misconduct in his/her assignment.

20.

As the Student and Mr. [L] had not registered as partners for Assignment #1, the level of
similarity in their computer code could not have been random in Dr. Harrington's view.

6
21.

Dr. Harrington did not retain a copy of the email sent to the Student or a sample of such
email for the Course in question to provide at the hearing. However, he stated that his
email would have been in the nature and tone to encourage the student to come see him
"first" and explain the situation. Dr. Harrington did not believe that his email would have
said that the matter will be escalated to a higher level if there was no response.

22.

In the event that a student did not respond, Dr. Harrington would refer the matter to
Professor Nick Cheng, Chair's Designate, Department of Computer and Mathematical
Sciences, for further action.

23.

Dr. Harrington advised that all students except the Student, Mr. [L] and one other pair of
students responded to his email.

Those students who responded and met with him

received a zero on the assignment if it was their first offence (as was likely the case given
that the Course was a first year course), they admitted guilt and they accepted this
penalty. These students were also given a stem warning during their meetings with him.
24.

To date, in his three years of teaching, Dr. Harrington confirmed that all students whom
he has emailed after determining that the MoSS software has identified misconduct, and
who have come to speak with him, have all admitted their guilt. The Panel views this
fact as confirmation that the MoSS software provides a reliable identification of
misconduct.

25.

The four students who did not respond to Dr. Harrington's email after Assignment #1
would have had a "GWR" on their transcript until the matter was resolved.

These

students would also be referred to the Chair's Designate for follow up.
26.

However, in the meantime, these students were still able to see the TA's scores for their
assignments on the MarkUs (computer blackboard-type) system and would not know that
there was no grade nor that their actual pending grade was "GWR".

7

Assignment #2
27.

For Assignment #2, the MoSS software identified significantly fewer susp1c10us
assignments. Dr. Harrington recalls that there were approximately 3-5 pairs, being 6-10
students, who were flagged.

28.

The MoSS software identified that the Student's Assignment #2 was suspiciously similar
to that submitted by a partnership between Mr. [L] and Mr. [Y] ("L/Y partnership").

29.

Dr. Harrington recalled that a student or students had come to see him before Assignment
#2 was submitted to ask whether a group of three students would be permitted. Dr.
Harrington recalls advising that only groups of two were permitted and had to be
registered on the MarkUs system in advance. He would have told the group of three
students or their representative that all prior work together would have to be destroyed
and that any resulting group or student would need to "start again". When asked, Dr.
Harrington could not recall whether the student/students who came to see him were any
of the Student or Mr. [L] or Mr. [Y].

30.

In Assignment #2, the Student only completed code for 2 of the 5 "functions". The
MoSS software demonstrated (and is plainly evident upon examination) that the code for
these 2 functions was near identical for these same 2 functions in the L/Y partnership
assignment. Naturally, there was no match between the Student's assignment for the
remaining 3 functions to those in the L/Y partnership because the Student did not
complete those parts of the assignment.

31.

Again, Dr. Harrington sent out an email after Assignment #2 to students identified by
MoSS. Dr. Harrington also forwarded the names of the Student and Mr. [L] to Professor
Nick Cheng, Chair's Designate, Department of Computer and Mathematical Sciences,
with an indication that these two students had already been identified after Assignment
#1 and did not respond to him at that time.

32.

After that point, the investigation relating to the Student, Mr. [L] and Mr. [Y] was
addressed by Professor Cheng.

8
33.

The Student did not write the final examination in the Course. Mr. [L] and Mr. [Y] did
write the final examination.

Evidence of Professor M.E. Irwin, Dean's Designate
34.

Professor Irwin, as the Dean's Designate, became involved upon referral from Professor
Nick Cheng, Chair's Designate, Department of Computer and Mathematical Sciences, to
address allegations that Mr. [L] had committed two academic offences. Professor Cheng
had spoken to Mr. [L] about the allegations.

35.

A matter can be addressed at the departmental level only if the matter involves a first
offence, the work in question is worth 10% or less of the course, the student admits to the
offence and the penalty sought is, at most, a zero on the offending assignment.

36.

In the case of Mr. [L], Mr. [L]'s misconduct involved two incidents and, therefore, could
not be addressed at the departmental level. The alleged misconduct was:
(a)

that Mr. [L] failed to register as a pair in Assignment #1 though he worked on the
assignment with the Student; and

(b)

that Mr. [L] had worked together with Mr. [Y] and the Student, forming a group
of three students for Assignment #2; that one or all of them went to tell Dr.
Harrington that they were working as a group of three; that Dr. Harrington then
told them that they had to stop working as a group of three and were to discard
everything they had done and start again on their assignment; that, nevertheless,
Mr. [L] did not discard the earlier work product in contravention of the direction
in the Course outline and of Dr. Harrington.

3 7.

Mr. [L] admitted and accepted that he had committed the above misconduct on both
assignments.

38.

It is noted that Professor Irwin was told by Mr. [L] that the three students worked

together on Assignment #2 before dissolving the group.

9

39.

By letter dated May 8, 2013 to Mr. [L], Professor Irwin confirmed his acceptance of the
above misconduct and that such misconduct constituted an offence under Section
B.I.1.(b) of the Code, being the use of unauthorized aid.

40.

As she had not had the chance to speak to Mr. [L] "earlier" (ie., after Assignment #1),
Professor Irwin treated the two offences as "concurrent" and imposed a sanction of a zero
on each assignment.

Evidence of Professor W. Dowler, Dean's Designate
41.

Professor Dowler, as (the other) Dean's Designate, became involved upon referral from
Professor Nick Cheng to address allegations that Mr. [Y] had committed an academic
offence. Professor Cheng interviewed Mr. [Y] with respect to the offence.

42.

The matter of Mr. [Y]'s misconduct in Assignment #2 was referred to the Dean's
Designate even though the assignment comprised only 10% of the Course grade and
could have been dealt with at the departmental level because this student refused to admit
guilt to Mr. Cheng.

43.

At the Dean's Designate meeting, Mr. [Y] would not initially admit guilt and did not
believe that he had committed an offence in Assignment #2.

44.

Professor Dowler reviewed the MoSS evidence with Mr. [Y] and the student agreed that
the Assignment #2 which he submitted with Mr. [L] was similar to that submitted by the
Student. However, Mr. [Y], in his own "articulate" defence, felt that it was unfair that he
and Mr. [L] had to destroy their earlier work because it was his position that the Student
(who left the three party group) did not do anything and that he and Mr. [L] "did the work
in good faith".

45.

Professor Dowler emphasized to Mr. [Y] that the misconduct consisted of the
collaboration with a third party in violation of clear instructions and the Course outline
and that he, thereby, was a party to an offence.

46.

Mr. [Y] ultimately accepted the logic of Professor Dowling's analysis and "very
reluctantly" agreed that he had committed an offence in that regard.

10

47.

Professor Dowler obtained Mr. [Y)'s acceptance that he should not have collaborated
with a third person and further should have destroyed any earlier work product before
starting again.

48.

By letter dated April 18, 2013 to Mr. [Y], Professor Dowling confirmed his acceptance of
the above-described misconduct.

We note that Mr. [Y] did not accept that he had

committed plagiarism as his position was that he and Mr. [L] had worked on the
assignment and that the Student had not contributed.
49.

Professor Dowler gave Mr. [Y] an admittedly light sanction amounting to one-half of the
value of the assignment, being a 5% penalty on Assignment #2, after having some
sympathy for Mr. [Y]'s circumstances.

Decision of the Tribunal

50.

The Panel finds that the Student is guilty of an academic offence under section B.I.1 (b) of
the Code for knowingly obtaining unauthorized assistance in Assignments #1 and #2 of
the Course.

51.

It is clear and compelling from the MoSS software output and Dr. Harrington's evidence

regarding his review of the Student's code as compared to the other students' code, that
there was collaboration between the groups of students. In Assignment #1, the Student
failed to register as a partnership in violation of the Course outline. In Assignment #2,
the Student obviously collaborated with the other two students, as his 2 completed
functions of computer code were near identical to the LN partnership.
52.

The statements from the other two students during the Dean's Designate meetings were
additional evidence in support of the MoSS software findings that the Student
collaborated with Mr. [L] in Assignment #1, and with Mr. [L] and Mr. [Y] in Assignment
#2.

53.

We agree with both Professor Irwin's and Professor Dowler's characterization of the
students' misconduct as being a failure to register as a partnership in Assignment #1 and a

11
failure to discard the earlier work of the group of three students m completing
Assignment #2.
54.

We apply this same analysis to characterize the misconduct of the Student and, therefore,
find the Student guilty of obtaining unauthorized assistance.

55.

For the reasons below relating to the reliability of the hearsay evidence of Mr. [L] and
Mr. [Y] tendered by the University, we make it clear that the MoSS evidence as
introduced by Dr. Harrington is more than sufficient to form the basis for our finding of
misconduct against the Student.

Plagiarism Not Established
56.

The Panel does not find that the University has met its onus in establishing that the
Student has committed plagiarism (as would necessarily have to be characterized as being
the representation of the work in the Assignments as the Student's own when it was
based on the work of the other students).

57.

The Panel raised its concern as to how we were to treat the statements made by Mr. [L]
and Mr. [Y] where they may form an independent and uncorroborated basis for alleged
misconduct. We are prepared to accept the hearsay evidence of the Dean's Designates
relating to the context and disposition of these other two students where it is not the sole
basis of the case against the Student. However, we are not prepared to accept such
hearsay where it is the only evidence against the Student to establish plagiarism.

58.

University counsel acknowledged that the statements of Mr. [Y] were hearsay and also
confirmed, in closing submissions, that she was not tendering Mr. [Y]'s statements to
establish that the Student contributed nothing to Assignment #2, which could presumably
ground a finding of plagiarism.

Rather, the University was relying on the hearsay

statements as evidence of collaboration.

12
59.

University counsel referred the Panel to the [R] 1 Decision in support of the University's
proposition that the hearsay statements of another student during a Dean's Designate
meeting are reliable. In [R], as in the case here, the Tribunal found that the hearsay
statements of the other student were "additional evidence supporting our finding that the
Student obtained and provided unauthorized assistance during the midterm test". In [R],
as in the case here, there was other independent evidence to establish that the student had
obtained unauthorized assistance. As such, we do not find it necessary to rely on the
hearsay evidence to make our findings of guilt.

We do not, likewise, find that the

contradictory hearsay evidence can establish plagiarism.
60.

In order to discharge its burden of establishing plagiarism in this case, it was incumbent
upon the University to call one or both of the other students involved in the "group" for
Assignment #1 and/or Assignment #2 who would testify that the Student copied their
original source material. The hearsay evidence of Mr. [L] and Mr. [Y], as tendered
through the Dean's Designates, actually contradict each other with respect to the
Student's contribution to the computer code in Assignment #2.

Furthermore, this

evidence was not tested under oath and there may well have been a motive for Mr. [Y] to
minimize the Student's participation given his initial firm denial of any misconduct on
his part.
61.

In particular, Mr. [L]'s statements, as conveyed by the Dean's Designate as hearsay
evidence, indicated that the Student did participate in Assignment #1 and #2 until he
exited the group, whereas Mr. [Y]'s statements, again conveyed to the Panel as hearsay
evidence, indicated that the Student did not do anything in Assignment #2. The Panel did
not have to reconcile this contradiction nor decide as to one version over the other given
that all of this evidence was hearsay.

1 R.

Case #708; June 6, 2014

13
62.

The Panel also notes that in Counsel's letter dated May 21, 2014 outlining its
"Anticipated Evidence" to the Student2, the evidence for Professor Dowler was
anticipated to be:
Professor Dowler is expected to testify that on April 15, 2013, he met
with Mr. [Y]. During their meeting, Mr. [YJ advised that he and Mr. [L}
had worked on Assignment #2 in a group of three. He and Mr. Liang
learned that they could only work on the assignment in pairs, but still
submitted the assignment that they had worked on in the group of
three. At the meeting, Mr. [YJ admitted that he had committed an
academic offence in connection with Assignment #2. (emphasis added)

63.

Furthermore, the "Anticipated Evidence" of Professor Irwin was stated to be:
Professor Irwin is expected to testify that on May 8, 2013, she met with
Mr. [L]. During their meeting, Mr. [L} explained that for Assignment
#1, you and he worked together but did not register as partners. Mr. [L}
also explained that for Assignment #2, Mr. [L}, Mr. [YJ and you worked
together. Although he was told by Dr. Harrington that he could only
submit the assignment in pairs (and not as a group of three), he and Mr.
[YJ submitted the Assignment #2 that he and Mr. [YJ had worked on
with you. At the meeting, Mr. [L} admitted that he had committed an
academic offence in connection with both Assignment #1 and Assignment
#2. (emphasis added)

64.

The University confirmed that neither Mr. [L] nor Mr. [Y] had been summonsed to testify
at the within hearing.

65.

As such, we find that the Student would not have been alerted to the position raised at the
hearing that Mr. [Y]'s statements to Professor Dowler were in the nature that the Student
did not contribute anything to Assignment #2.

66.

Without clear and convincing evidence that the Student plagiarized the work of Mr. [L]
or of Mr. [Y], the Panel cannot find the Student guilty of the plagiarism charges.

67.

The University withdrew the alternative charges.

Penalty

68.

2

The University sought the following penalty:

Exhibit 3, Tab C

14
(a)

a zero in the Course;

(b)

a two (2) year suspension from the University commencing the date of the Order;
and

(c)

a two (2) year notation of the sanction on the Student's academic record and
transcript.

69.

The Student has no prior record of academic misconduct and has not registered at the
University since withdrawing from all courses in the 2013 Winter term (the term after the
Course). The Student did not attend to write the final examination in the Course.

70.

The University urged the Panel to consider this case to be akin to a plagiarism case such
that a two-year suspension would be appropriate. With respect, the Panel is unable to
accede to this recommendation for a number of reasons.

71.

Firstly, for the reasons cited above, the University has not made out the requisite
requirements for plagiarism.

72.

Secondly, at its highest, the Panel is of the view that the Student's misconduct comprises:
(a)

in the case of Assignment #1, a failure to register as a partnership as required by
Course rules; and

(b)

in the case of Assignment #2, a collaboration among three (3) students instead of
the two (2) student limit and the subsequent failure to destroy all collaborated
code and start again.

73.

Thirdly, the rationale for the University in seeking a two (2) year suspension in light of
the sanctions given to the two other students (zero on both assignments in the case of Mr.
[L] and a 5% penalty on Assignment #2 in the case of Mr. [Y]) is that the Student:
(a)

failed to attend at the Decanal level to address the charges;

(b)

failed to respond to the University prior to Hearing;

15
(c)

failed to attend at the Hearing,

with the cumulative effect being that the Student has failed to acknowledge his offence
and exhibit remorse. The University counsel has invited the Panel to find this to be the
"most significant" distinguishing factor between the Student's case and the other two
students.
74.

In the C.A.M. Decision3, the Discipline Appeals Board ("DAB") considered the
"escalation of penalty" from the sanction that would have been imposed had the student
not changed his guilty plea at the departmental level. The Dean's Designate had imposed
the penalty of a zero in the course and no official recording of sanction on his transcript
though his name was to be placed in the offence database as a second offender. The
student later withdrew his admission of guilt after receiving the notice of penalty,
necessitating a Tribunal hearing.

75.

In C.A.M., the student was found guilty after a fully contested hearing and the Tribunal
recommended expulsion. On appeal by the student, the majority of the DAB accepted
that the student's conduct at the hearing warranted a significant escalation in penalty
based on application of the ~

factors as opposed to there being some separate

aggravating factor based on whether the student triggered a hearing:
A student who acknowledges his or her fault and accepts the penalty
reflects significantly on the assessment of the student's character,
remorse and the likelihood of repetition of the offence. In other words,
the more serious penalties imposed are a result of the application of the
~
actors, not as an arbitrary penalty for the Student seeking a
hearing. (emphasis added)4

76.

Furthermore, the DAB held:
However, it is important that the sanction imposed upon conviction at the
end of a contested hearing bear a rational relationship to the sanction
previously established for an admission of the offence having regard to
the impact of the conduct of the hearing on the factors that legitimately
affect the sanctioning process. In noting this, we are not deferring to the

3
4

C.A.M Decision (D.A.B.), Case #684; June 3, 2014
Ibid, paragraph 56

16
decisions at the decanal level, but holding the University to a consistent
position in its dealings with the Student and in its assessment of the
nature ofthe offence he committed. (emphasis added). 5

77.

In this case, we have the benefit of not one, but two Dean's Designates addressing the
same or similar matrix of facts and imposing sanctions at the Decanal level.

78.

With this in mind, the Panel must still consider the ~ factors in determining sanction
with the understanding that the Student's failure to participate in the process may warrant
an augmented or escalated penalty from what might have been imposed had the Student
participated at the Decanal level, if available.

79.

The Panel applies the ~
(a)

factors to this case as follows:

character of the person charged

We agree that, after the notable efforts by the Professor, Dean's office and Provost
to contact the Student to review the matter, the Student's failure to respond tends
to demonstrate a lack of acknowledgment and responsibility.
(b)

likelihood ofrepetition of the offence

The University agreed that the offences herein were to be treated together as a
"first offence" even though they were discrete instances. We agree with this as the
Student did not have a warning/sanction conveyed to him (albeit because he did
not respond to Dr. Harrington's first email) before Assignment #2. This is how
Professor Irwin considered Mr. [L]'s case as well.
Given that the offence consists of the conduct set out at paragraph 72 above, the
Panel is not convinced that the Student will commit the same conduct once
aprised of this decision. However, it is again noted that the Student, in failing to
respond to Dr. Harrington's first email regarding Assignment # 1 has demonstrated
a lack of responsibility which could well lead to his ignoring of what he might

5

Ibid, at paragraph 57.

17
view to be technicalities. It is noted that Mr. [L], the other student involved in
Assignment #1, likewise, had not spoken to Dr. Harrington after Assignment #1
when sanctioned.

(c)

the nature of the offence committed
The misconduct in this case, as outlined above, is not akin to plagiarism.
For Assignment #1, collaboration in groups of two was permitted in the Course
and there is no evidence that the Student did not do the work. Accordingly, the
misconduct was a failure to register as a group and is not as serious as other
misconduct.
For Assignment #2, the group of three (3) students, including the Student ought to
have discarded all work that the group had created and started again. However,
there is no tested evidence that the Student did not do the work on the parts of the
assignment that he did hand in and, therefore, the act of plagiarism was not
proven.

All three (3) students committed this same misconduct in failing to

discard the previous code.
(d)

any extenuating circumstances surrounding the commission of the offence
The Panel has no evidence relating to this factor to consider.

(e)

the detriment to the University occasioned by the offence
see (c) above

(f)

the need to deter others from committing a similar offence
It is trite to find that there is a need to deter others from committing similar
offences, or any offences, for that matter. In sanctioning this Student, the Panel
must be mindful that there is a spectrum of available sanctions between those

18
given to Mr. [L] and Mr. [Y] at the Decanal level and the two (2) year suspension
that the University recommends.
80.

The University tendered the [R] decision6 in support of its recommended two (2) year
suspension. hi [R], the student did not attend at the hearing. Mr. [R] was found guilty of
obtaining unauthorized assistance from Mr. [I] by communicating with him or copying
from his paper during a midterm test.

Mr. [I] attended a meeting with the Dean's

Designate and admitted guilt and was sanctioned with a final grade of 40% in the course
and a notation on his transcript for 12 months.

In contrast, the Tribunal imposed a

sanction on Mr. [R] of a zero in the course, a two (2) year and five (5) month suspension
and a notation for four (4) years.
81.

It is notable in [R] that the University sought a two (2) year six (6) month suspension
which the Tribunal found justification to reduce by one month to enable the student to reenroll an academic tenn earlier, if the student wished to do so, displaying some
compassion to [R] even though he did not attend the hearing.

82.

It is also noted that in the case of [R], R had a prior offence whereas the Student does not.

83.

The University rightly acknowledged that the Panel is not fettered in its discretion by any
minimum sanction in these circumstances.

84.

We are of the view that the misconduct in [R] is distinguishable in that collaboration in
groups of two was, at least, permitted by the Course, whereas copying or communicating
during a midterm test was clearly not permitted in [R].

85.

After the above consideration of the ~ factors and the University's submissions, the
Panel imposes the following sanction:
(a)

6

a zero in the Course;

Case #708; June 6, 2014

19
(b)

a six (6) month suspension from the University commencing the date of the
Order; and

(c)

a two (2) year notation of the sanction on the Student's academic record and
transcript.

86.

This sanction is "rationally connected" 7 to the penalty given to the other two students at
the Decanal level, with an augmentation arising from the Student's failure to engage in
the disciplinary process.

87.

The Panel signed an Order to this effect at the conclusion of the hearing.

88.

The Tribunal is to report this decision to the Provost for publication of a notice of the
decision of the Tribunal and of the sanctions imposed in the University's newspapers,
with the name of the Student withheld.

Dated at Toronto, this

7

day of March, 2015

See C.A.M (Case #684; June 3, 2014), atparagraph65 (D.A.B.)

