Report 359-1

DATE:

   August 25, 2011

PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v H.M. and M.Y.

Hearing Date(s):

   August 17, 2011

Committee Members:

   Prof. Hamish Stewart, Chair

Secretary:

   Mr. Christopher Lang, Director, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty
   Grievances

Appearances:

For the Students:

   H.M. (student)
   M.Y. (student)

For the School of Graduate Studies:

   Robert Centa, Counsel
   Julia Wilkes, Articling Student

   NOTE:Â These reasons address the findings on the motion only. Reasons
   for the decision on the merits are reported inÂ H.M. and M.Y. v. School
   of Graduate StudiesÂ (Report # [1]363 , FebruaryÂ 7, 2012)

   Motion brought by School of Graduate Studies (âSGSâ) for direction
   concerning the jurisdiction of the Academic Appeals Committee (âAACâ)
   and the admissibility of some of the Studentsâ material. The Students
   appealed a decision of the Graduate Academic Appeals
   BoardÂ (âGAABâ)Â to the AAC seeking some 37 remedies, grouped into five
   categories:Â (1)Â academic remedies,Â (2)Â remedies relating to tuition
   and funding,Â (3)Â compensation for various costs incurredÂ since
   2007,Â (4)Â compensation for lossesÂ and damages flowing from the
   Depart of Economicsâ conduct, andÂ (5)Â an official apology letter from
   the SGS and the University.

   The SGSÂ concededÂ that the AAC had jurisdiction to grant the remedies
   in the first category and jurisdiction to recommend the rebate or
   cancellation of fees, but no jurisdiction to grant any of the remaining
   remedies. TheÂ ChairÂ observed that the AACÂ only hasÂ the powers given
   to it by the Governing Council, expressly or by necessary implication,
   in its Terms of Reference; it has no inherent jurisdiction.Â The
   ChairÂ commented that some light may be shed on the AACâs jurisdiction
   by examining the jurisdiction of those bodies whose decisions it
   reviews, in this case, the GAAB.Â Upon review of theÂ AAC and GAABâs
   Terms of Reference, theÂ ChairÂ concluded thatÂ the AACâs jurisdiction
   is limited to considering whether academic regulations and requirements
   have been applied correctly, consistently, and fairly.Â The Students
   argued thatÂ s.19 of the GAABâs Terms of Reference givesÂ the GAAB, and
   by extension the AAC,Â the power to award financial compensation for
   losses flowing from academic decisions. The ChairÂ did not accept this
   argument.Â TheÂ Chair observed thatÂ s.19 does notÂ enable the GAAB
   Chair to decide any dispute arising under the law of Ontario or
   CanadaÂ as it wouldÂ give him or her powers comparable to those of a
   Superior Court judge.Â The Chair noted that the purpose of s. 19 is to
   enable the GAAB Chair to determine a point of lawÂ and a point of
   privilegeÂ that arises in connection with an issue that is otherwise
   within its jurisdiction.Â As such,Â a GAAB Chair would not have the
   jurisdiction to decideÂ an issue of law that was not otherwise properly
   before them.Â Similarly, s.19Â doesÂ not give the GAAB, or the AAC, the
   power to award damages.Â Awarding financial compensation for the losses
   flowing from an erroneous or unfair application of academic regulations
   and requirements is not within the jurisdiction of the AAC, nor is
   requiring the SGS and the University of Toronto to apologize to the
   Students.

   TheÂ ChairÂ granted the StudentsâÂ permissionÂ toÂ argueÂ at the
   hearing on the meritsÂ for a recommendation concerning their tuition
   but not for the remedies sought under
   categoriesÂ (2)Â âÂ (5).Â TheÂ ChairÂ stated that the AAC will not
   grant any of these non-permitted remedies. The ChairÂ held that it had
   jurisdiction to grant some of the remedies grouped into categoryÂ (1):
   the removal of FZ grades, and the request for final exams taken while
   auditing courses to be marked. The remaining remedies grouped into
   categoryÂ (1)Â were left to be decided at the hearing onÂ theÂ merits.

   The SGS submitted that some of the materials filed by the Students were
   inadmissible at the hearing on the basis that they were communications
   in furtherance of dispute settlement and therefore privileged. The SGS
   submitted in the alternative that this material was irrelevant.
   TheÂ ChairÂ reviewed the law of privilege and relevance.Â In
   theÂ Chairâs view,Â privilege applies whether the settlement
   discussions took place with or without a mediator.Â The
   ChairÂ notedÂ that the fact that settlement discussions were underway,
   though not the content of those discussions, may be admissible if
   relevant. In 2009, the Students initiated a consultation process with
   the Department of Economics for advice and informal mediation. After
   receiving information from the Students, a professor made a proposal to
   the Students. One of the Students sought some clarifications. After
   receiving clarification,Â one ofÂ the Student wrote to the
   professorÂ statingÂ âThis is to accept the offer.â The Students did not
   register asÂ had been suggested and several weeks later declined the
   offer and pursued an appeal.Â The ChairÂ held that the discussions and
   information exchanged during this period were covered by settlement
   privilege. The dispute was contemplated by the Students at the time,
   though the appeal had not yet been launched. The nature of the offers
   made by the Department of Economics and the SGS supported the inference
   that the discussions were intended to be kept confidential.Â AndÂ in
   light ofÂ the structure of the discussions,Â and theÂ fact that some of
   the proposals involved compromising usual University policies, it was
   wholly implausible to describe all of the discussions as the giving and
   receiving of academic advice, rather than as negotiation to resolve a
   dispute.Â The possibility that the Students may have accepted the offer
   and nonetheless proceeded with a grade appeal did not destroy the
   privilege. The 2009 negotiations were designed to settle a dispute
   about whether the Students could resume their studies. Even if this was
   not the precise dispute now before the AAC, those discussions were
   privilegedÂ and therefore inadmissible.Â TheÂ ChairÂ further held that
   the content of these negotiations had no bearing on the issues
   currently before the AAC and thus were irrelevant and inadmissible. The
   fact that negotiations occurred was relevant, but only to explain why
   the Students were permitted to write tests while auditing courses. In
   2010, another series of discussions took place between the Students and
   Counsel for the Department of Economics. TheÂ ChairÂ concluded these
   discussions were privileged and therefore inadmissible. The fact that
   negotiations occurred was not relevant andÂ wasÂ inadmissible.

   Both before and during theÂ motion, the Students madeÂ a number
   ofÂ requests of the Chair that were all declined.Â The Students
   requested documents, including notes, minutes, and statements, produced
   at or as a record of the GAAB hearing. The Chair refused to make the
   requested order.Â The Chair concluded that he had no power to compel
   anyone to produce documents, that the GAAB is not a court of record and
   that any documents prepared to assist the GAAB are immune from
   disclosure to the parties in the appeal to the AAC, and that the
   documents were irrelevant.Â The Students also requested the Chair order
   the SGS to register them immediately for the 2011/2012 academic
   year.Â The Chair declined to make the requested order, as it was not
   within the jurisdiction of an AAC Chair hearing a preliminary motion to
   decide questions of law.

   [2]View Report

References

   1. https://governingcouncil.utoronto.ca/system/files/adfg-documents/REPORT%20363%20w%20Appendix%20359-1.pdf
   2. file:///media/28409
