THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
THE GOVERNING COUNCIL
Motion Decision #359-1 of the Academic Appeals Committee

August 25, 2011
To the Academic Board
University of Toronto
Your Committee reports that it heard a motion on Wednesday, August 17, 2011, at which
the following were present:

Professor Hamish Stewm1, Chair
Secretary: Mr. Christopher Lang, Director, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances
Appearances:

Fo1· the Students:
Mr.
Ms
For the School of Graduate Studies (SGS):
Mr. Robert A. Centa, Counsel, Paliare Roland
Ms. Julia Wilkes, Al'licling Student

I.

The Nature of the Motion

The Students.appeal from a decision of the Graduate Academic Appeals Board (GAAB)
to the Academic Appeals Committee of Governing Council (AAC). They have filed
more than 800 pages of material in support of their appeal. Counsel for SGS had this
material paginated and bound in two separate volumes, and page references in this Repm1
are to that ma~erial. Volume l is titled "Academic Appeal to the Governing Council" and
contains 580 pages. Volume 2 is titled "Graduate Academic Appeal to GAAB" and
contains 261 pages.
Before responding to the Students' appeal, the SGS moves pursuant toss. 3.1.4 and 3.1.7
of the AAC's Terms of Reference for directions concerning the scope of the appeal.
Specifically, the SGS submits that:

1

l. the AAC does not have jurisdiction to award many of the remedies sought by
the Students; and

2. some of the material in the Students' material is (i) protected by dispute
settlement privilege and (ii) irrelevant to the dispute, and is therefore inadmissible
in the hearing on the merits before the AAC.
The Students submit that the AAC, being a committee of the Governing Council, does
. have jurisdiction to award all remedies sought, that all of their material is relevant, and
that none of it is privileged. In addition, by e-mail sent before the hearing and again at
the hearing, the Students made certain requests of the Chair. For the reasons given
below, the Chair accepts the SGS's submissions, and declines to act on the Students'
requests.

II.

Background to the Appeal

In the 2008/09 academic year, Mr. and Ms. (the Students) were
emolled in the first year of the Ph.D. program in the Depa1iment of Economics. The
Students are manied to each other. They were absent from the University for much of
the Fall 2008 term and J)art of the Winter 2009 term owing to the serious illness and
subsequent death ofMr.s father. Both Students received grades of FZ in the
five courses that they took that year (three in the Fall 2008 term and two in the Winter
2009 term).
In the Fall 2009 term, the Students were permitted to audit the first module of two
courses and to write the test for that module. Because the Students never registered for
the 2009/10 academic year, the Department refused to mark those tests.
The Students eventualJy appealed the FZ grades and the refusal of the Department to
grade the tests they took in Fall 2009. They also sought a tuition refund, guaranteed
fonding for four years from their new registration date, and prompt registration. Their
appeal was considered by the Graduate Depa1iment Academic Appeals Committee of
Economics (GDAAC). In two substantially identical reports dated 3 June 2010, the
GDAAC recommended that the appeal be dismissed. The GDAAC held that the
Students' requests for a tuition refund, guaranteed funding, and prompt registration were
not within its jurisdiction. It found that the FZ grades were appropriate. It held that
Department's refusal to grade the tests taken in Fall 2009 was j ustified because the
Students were not at that time registered. In decisions dated 17 June 2010, Professor
Arthur Hosios, Chair of the Department of Economics, accepted the GDAAC's
recommendation and dismissed the Students' appeals (vol. 1, pp. 173-191 ).
The Students appealed to the GAAB. In a decision dated November 19, 2010, the GAAB
allowed the Students' appeal in part. The GAAB found that "a decent solution" to the
Students' situation would have been a leave of absence for Fall 2008 (vol. 1, p. 221 ).
Since a leave of absence had not in fact been granted, the appropriate outcome was " to
2

award the non-mark grade of WDR for each of the courses taken in the Fall Term, 2008"
(vol. 1, p. 222). The GAAB therefore directed that the grade of FZ for the three courses
that the Students took in Fall 2008 be vacated and replaced \Vith the notation WDR. The
GAAB also recommended that the university waive the Students' fees attributable to Fall
2008. However, the GAAB dismissed the Students' appeal of the FZ grades for the two
courses taken in Winter 2009, and agreed with the GDAAC and Professor 1-losios that the
Students were not entitled to have the tests written in Fall 2009 graded (vol. 1, p. 223).
In a letter dated December 3, 2010, Professor Brian Corman, Dean of Graduate Studies,
rejected the GAAB's recommendation that tuition attributable to Fall 2008 be waived
(vol. 1, p. 225).

III.

The Students appeal to the AAC of Governing Council

There has been some confusion throughout the process as to the Students' status at the
University of Toronto. The Department of Economics at one point asked SGS to
terminate the Students (see Vol. 1, p. 134), but later stated that it was considering
suspending that request (see Vol. 1, p. 144). Although there are a number ofreferences
to "termination" in the material, the SGS did not act on the Department's request and the
Students were never terminated. At the hearing of the motion, Mr. Centa stated that the
Students are currently lapsed, not in good academic standing, and in arrears on their
tuition for 2008/09. On the basis of the material filed, that appears to be the correct
description of their current status.

IV.

Jurisdiction

The Students have asked the AAC to grant some 37 remedies, grouped into five
categories (see vol. 1, pp. 22-23):

1. Academic remedies, for example, removal of their FZ grades from Winter 2009;
2. Remedies relating to tuition and funding, for example, waiver of all tuition for the
2008/09 academic year;
3. Compensation for various costs they have incurred since 2007, for example,
"monthly expenses due to the unexpected unemployment since September 2009"
4. Compensation for "losses and damages" flowing from the Department's conduct,
for example, "Compensation for 3 years of delay to get into job market as a PhD
graduate"; and
5. "An official apology letter from the SGS and the University of Toronto".
The SGS submits that the AAC has jurisdiction to grant the remedies in the first category,
and jurisdiction to recommend the rebate or cancellation of fees, but no jurisdiction to
grant any of the remaining remedies. The Students submit that the AAC has jurisdiction
to grant all of these remedies.

3

Jurisdiction to Grant the Remedies Sought in Categories 2 through 5
The AAC is a committee of Governing Council, and as such has only the powers given to
it by the Governing Council, expressly or by necessary implication, in its Terms of
Reference. It has no inherent jurisdiction. However, some light may be shed on its
jurisdiction by examining the jurisdiction of those bodies whose decisions it reviews, in
this case, the GAAB.
The AAC Terms of Reference defines the AAC's functions, as they are relevant to the
Students' appeal, as follows:
2.1 To hear and consider appeals made by students against decisions of faculty,
college or school councils (or committees thereof) in the application of academic
regulations and requirements ...
The GAAB's Terms of Reference are somewhat more detailed than those of the AAC,
and provide in part:
3.
a
The [GAAB] shall hear and determine appeals of students
registered in the School of Graduate Studies conceming grades in a course or
component of a grade in a course, or concerning any other decision with respect
to the application of academic regulations and requirements to a student. ...
3.
b.
. .. The [GAAB] may recommend to the University that fees of a
student be rebated or cancelled in whole or in part, but shall not otherwise
recommend or award any monetary or other compensation.

19.
The Chair [of a GAAB hearing panel] shall determine issues of the law of
Ontario or of Canada that may arise with respect to an appeal. ...
Mr. Centa submitted that the Terms of Reference do not grant the AAC any power to
make decisions in respect of waiver of tuition, to grant financial compensation for any
loss flowing from an academic decision, or to order any division of the University to
apologize to anyone. He noted that the GAAB terms of reference, while granting a
power to recommend the rebate or cancellation of fees, explicitly forbid the GAAB from
making a monetary award and argued that the AAC, hearing an appeal from the GAAB,
could not have any additional powers in this respect.
The Students were unable to identify anything in the AAC Terms of Reference that might
expressly give it the jurisdiction to grant the remedies in categories 2 through 5.
However, they made several arguments in support of the AAC'sjurisdiction to grant
those remedies. None of these arguments has any merit.

4

First, the students repeatedly stated that no-one told them that they could not get a
financial remedy from Governing Council. This statement is not consistent with the
record before your Committee. Professor Berry Smith, Vice-Dean of SGS, told the
students on September 22, 2009, that they could not appeal fees (vol. 2, p. 219). Inanemail dated April 29, 2010, Ms Jane Alderdice of SGS advised the students that "Financial
matters are not within the jurisdiction of the GDAAC" (vol. 1, p. 171). This advice was
evidently based on the GDAAC Guidelines, which are available on-line to the public,
including the Students. In its report of 3 June 2010, the GDAAC held that it lacked
jurisdiction to consider any financial remedies and therefore rejected the Students' claims
of that nature (vol. 1, p. 188). The Chair of the Department agreed (vol. 1, p. 173). At the
GAAB, Mr. Centa, on behalf of the SGS, submitted that the GAAB lacked jurisdiction to
give any financial remedy. The Department of Economics and the SGS have consistently
taken the view that the Students could not get a financial remedy through the GDAACGAAB-AAC academic appeal process.
More fundamentally, the Students' first argument is irrelevant. Even an express
statement (and there was none) from SGS that the Students could obtain an award of
damages from the GAAB or the AAC would not have given those bodies the necessary
jurisdiction. The jurisdiction of the GAAB and the AAC does not depend on what
University officials or students think it is but on their Terms of Reference, as interpreted
by their Chairs. In respect of fees in a graduate program, the jurisdiction of the GAAB,
and of the AAC hearing an appeal from the GAAB, is limited to making
recommendations, which the SGS may accept or reject.
Second, the Students submitted that all of the losses that they allegedly suffered flowed
from the academic decisions that they challenge-the FZs that they received in
2008/09-and that those losses should therefore be considered "academic" matters. This
submission has no merit. The damages sought by the Students are in the nature of
financial compensation for losses allegedly flowing from allegedly erroneous decisions
taken by the Department of Economics and the SGS; but those losses are not themselves
academic matters. The AA C's jurisdiction does not extend to remedying all the
consequences, whatever they may be, of a decision that the AAC does have jurisdiction
to review.
A similar result was reached in a decision of Professor Emeritus Ralph Scane in the
appeal ofT.D., dated March 14, 2008, ruling on the jurisdiction of the GAAB. The
student argued that a decision of SGS, over which the GAAB clearly had no jurisdiction,
should nonetheless be reviewed by the GAAB because of its academic consequences.
Professor Scane rejected this argument at p. 4:
In a university, almost every regulation, requirement or decision has an academic
effect, at some greater or lesser degree of remoteness from an individual student.
It is ridiculous to contemplate that the academic appeals procedures set up by the
University can on that basis be invoked to review and control all of these.

5

Professor Scane's reasoning applies not just to the scope of decisions that are reviev-,1able
in the academic appeals process but also to the scope of consequences that are reviewable
in the appeals process. A decision does not fall under the process merely because of its
academic consequences; similarly, "the application of academic regulations and
requirements" does not include all the consequences of an academic decision, even if that
decision does fall under the process. To hold otherwise would be to expand the
jurisdiction of the ACC well beyond its intended scope.
Third, the Students rely on s. 19 of the GAAB Terms of Reference, which provides that
the GAAB Chair "shall determine issues of the law of Ontario or of Canada that may
arise with respect to an appeal." They suggested that this term gives the GAAB, and by
extension the AAC hearing an appeal from the GAAB, the power to award financial
compensation for losses flowing from academic decisions. This argument cannot be
accepted. Section 19 does not enable the GAAB Chair to decide any dispute arising
under the law of Ontario or Canada; that would give him or her powers comparable to
those of a Superior Court judge. The purpose of s. 19 is to enable the GAAB Chair to
determine a point oflaw that arises in connection with an issue that is otherwise within its
jurisdiction. The Students' own case before the GAAB provides a good example.
Professor Scane decided that certain evidence was inadmissible before the GAAB on the
ground of privilege (vol. 1, p. 223). In so ruling, he was deciding an issue of the law of
Ontario that had arisen in connection with the issues that were within his jurisdiction. He
would not have had jurisdiction to decide a point of privilege in a case that was not
otherwise properly before the GAAB. Similarly, s. 19 does not give the GAAB, or the
AAC for that matter, the power to award damages.
Finally, the Students argued that there must be some committee at the University that can
give them the remedies they seek. The Students submitted that Governing Council, being
the University's highest decision-making body, must have the power to give them all the
remedies that they sought, and that the AAC, being a committee of Governing Council
intended to deal with complaints about academic decisions, also has this power. This
argument is misconceived. Even if the Governing Council has the powers that the
Students attribute to it (a point on which the Chair expresses no opinion), the AAC does
not necessarily have those powers; it has only the powers that Governing Council has
given it. It may well be, as Mr. Centa suggested in his oral submissions, that there is no
body at the University that has the power to give a financial remedy for the kind of losses
that the Students allege they have suffered. However, for the purposes of this motion, it
is not necessary to decide that point; it is sufficient to observe that if the AAC has any
power to award financial compensation, or to order an apology, that power must flmv
from the AA C's Terms of Reference.
The purpose and function of the AAC, according to s. 2.1 of its Terms of Reference, is to
decide "appeals made by students against decisions of faculty, college or school councils
(or committees thereof) in the application of academic regulations and requirements". Its
jurisdiction is therefore limited to considering whether those academic regulations and
requirements have been applied correctly, consistently, and fairly. Its remedial
jurisdiction is limited to making orders of an academic nature; such as allowing a student
6

to withdraw late without academic penalty, granting aegrotat standing, granting a request
to write a defetTed examination. It is well-recognized that the AAC has no jurisdiction to
re-read a paper or examination to consider the merits of the grade assigned, or to review
decisions about admissions. Awarding financial compensation for the losses flowing
from an erroneous or unfair "application of academic regulations and requirements" is
not within the jurisdiction of the AAC. Neither is requiring the SGS and the University
of Toronto to apologize to the Students.
A similar conclusion was reached in Report No. 302, dated July 26, 2005. Your
Committee granted a student permission to withdraw late from a course without academic
penalty. The student asked the AAC whether, as a consequence of that decision, "she
could be refunded the money she spent on the course" (p. 3). Your Committee decided
that it lacked jurisdiction to make any order in this respect.
At the hearing on the merits, the Students will be permitted to argue for a
recommendation concerning their tuition for 2008/09, but will not otherwise be permitted
to argue for the remedies sought under categories 2 through 5, and the AAC will not
grant any of the other remedies sought under categories 2 through 5.

The Remedies Sought in Categ01J1 1
The SGS concedes that the AAC has jurisdiction to grant the remedies sought under
category 1. The Students have set out those remedies are as follows (vol. I, p. 22):
1-1) The groundless FZs in Winter 2009 to be removed.
1-2) An official letter from the SGS explaining our circumstances in fall 2008 and
winter 2009 and certifying our justified absence due to family crisis that resulted
in WDRs.
1-3) Immediate registration not to lose another academic year. Also, our OSAP
loan is due as a result of the department's illegitimate termination and refusal to
process our registration.
1-4) Special accommodations from the depm1ment and the SGS so that we could
complete the first year courses as soon as possible.
1-5) In Fall 2009~ we took the final exams for the first stage of micro and macro.
We would like them to be marked and considered completed.
The AAC has jurisdiction to grant remedies 1- 1 and 1-5. The Chair is not certain that the
AAC has jurisdiction to grant the remaining remedies, but considers it preferable to
decide that question, if necessary, at the hearing on the merits.

V.

Privilege and Relevancy

The SGS submits that some of the material filed by the Students is inadmissible at the
hearing on the merits on the ground of that they were communications in furtherance of
dispute settlement and therefore privileged. The SGS submits that the Students'
7

discussions with Professor I3erry Smith, Associate Dean of SGS, and Professor Martin J.
Osborne, Associate Chair, Graduate Studies, of the Department of Economics, between
May 22 and October 27, 2009 as well as their correspondence and meetings with Mr.
Centa in the fall of 2010, constituted failed attempts to settle the Students' dispute with
SGS. The SGS submits that no evidence concerning the content of these efforts at
settlement should be admitted at the hearing on the merits, and notes that Professor Scane
ruled to that effect at the GAAB (vol. I, p. 223). The SGS submits in the alternative that
this material is irrelevant.
The Students submit that their interactions with Professor Smith were not settlement
negotiations. In their written submissions, they stated that they were not negotiating but
"seeking help and academic advise" from Professor Smith and also asking him "to
FORCE the department to reverse their illegitimate academic decisions about our case".
The Students did not make any specific submissions about their correspondence and
meetings with Mr. Centa in the fall of 20 I 0. However, they argued that all of the
material they filed was relevant to their case.

Privilege
The privilege for communications in furtherance of dispute settlement is described in
Halsb111y 's Laws of Canada: Evidence (20 I 0) as follows (HEV-182, footnotes omitted):
Communications between the parties to a dispute for the purpose of settling the
dispute are not admissible in subsequent litigation if the attempt to settle fails. The
purpose of this privilege is to encourage settlement by enabling the parties to speak
frankly and to offer concessions without the fear that those words will be used against
them in litigation .... There are three conditions for the existence of the privilege:
I. Litigation must have commenced or be contemplated;
2. The communication must have been made with the express or implied
intention that it not be disclosed if negotiations failed; and
3. The purpose of the communication was to reach a settlement.
The privilege originated in judicial proceedings, but is also applicable in proceedings
before other tribunals (see, for example, Canadian Broadcosling C0111oration v. Paul
(2000), 198 D.L.R. (4th) 633 (F.C.A.)) because the underlying policy is the same: the
parties to a dispute should be encouraged to explore possible avenues of settlement, to
suggest accommodations, to compromise their positions, without fear that those
accommodations and compromises will be used to their detriment if settlement
negotiations fail. "In the absence of such a protection, few parties would initiate
settlement negotiations for fear that any concession they would be prepared to offer could
be used to their detriment if no settlement agreement was reached." (Bryant, Fuerst, and
Lederman, 11w Law <)(Evidence in Canada (3d ed. 2009) at §14.314.)
The involvement of a mediator does not in itself destroy the privilege (Bryant, Fuerst, and
Lederman, § 14.349), though some authorities suggest that a mediator might be compelled
8

to testify about the mediated settlement discussions if, in the particular case, the interest
in disclosure outweighed the interest in confidentiality (e.g., Rudd v. Trossacs
Investments Inc. (2006), 265 D.L.R. (4th} 718 (Ont.Div.Ct.)). The Chair's view is that
the policy reasons for protecting communications in furtherance of dispute set1lement,
and therefore the privilege itself, apply whether the settlement discussions took place
with or without a mediator.
The privilege protects the content of the communications. The fact that settlement
discussions were underway, though not the content of those discussions, may be
admissible if relevant.
The onus of establishing a privilege is on the party wbo asserts it. If the privilege is
established, it is pennanent and may be asserted in any subsequent proceedings, even if
those proceedings involve a different dispute or different parties (Bryant, Fuerst, and
Lederman at §14.331).

Relevance
Evidence is relevant to a fact in dispute "if its admission in the proceedings makes the
existence of that fact more or less probable, to any degree" (Ha/sbwy 's Laws ofCanada
at HEV~9).

The 2009 Discussions: Privilege
The SGS appeal process provides that at any time before an appeal is beard by the
GAAB, "a student may consult the relevant SGS Vice-Dean for advice and/or informal
mediation". The Students initiated this process by e-mail on May 27, 2009 (Vol. 2, p. 37
and p. 179). During the summer of 2009, the Department of Economics and Professor
Smith sought and obtained information from the students concerning their situation. On
September 15, 2009, Professor Osborne made a proposal under which the Students might
resume their studies for the 2009/ l 0 academic year 01ol. 2, p. 214); later that week,
Professor Osborne gave a deadline of September 22 for repJying to that offer (Vol. 2, p.
215). On September 21, Mr. sought some clarifications; Professor Osborne
and Professor Smith responded the next day (Vol. 2, pp. 217-219). On September 23,
Mr. wrote to Professor Osborne, stating "This is to accept the offer" (Vol. 2 p.
222). However, the Students never registered, apparently because they were unable or
unwilling to pay any portion of their a1Tears of tuition fees, and on October 13 chose to
decline the offer and pursue an appeal (Vol. 2, pp. 227-32). After some fmther
discussion (Vol. 2, pp. 233-44), Professor Smith wrote to the Students stating that "we
seem to have nm out of options in this case and I do not believe it would be helpful to
discuss it any more."
At the hearing of the motion, Mr. Centa made a very compelling argument that these
discussions were privileged. The Chair advised the students of the three conditions
necessary for the existence of the privilege and invited them to identify which condition
was lacking in this case. The Students repeated their written submission that their
9

discussions with Professors Smith and Osborne were in the nature of receiving academic
advice rather than dispute settlement, thus in effect denying that the third condition was
satisfied.
The Chair is persuaded that the discussions between May and October 2009 satisfy all the
conditions for dispute settlement privilege.
First, the Students disagreed with the grades assigned by the Department of Economics
for the 2008/09 academic year and with other decisions that the Department had taken in
connection with their personal situation (vol. 2, pp. 33-35) and were contemplating
invoking the University's appeal procedures to obtain a remedy. Thus, the dispute was
contemplated, though the appeal had not yet been launched.
The Students did not dispute the existence of the second element of the privilege. In any
event, whatever the Students' intention may have been, your Chair infers from the nature
of the offers made that the Department of Economics and the SGS intended to keep these
discussions confidential.
The Students argued that the third element of the privilege was lacking because the 2009
discussions were not settlement discussions but the giving and receiving of academic
advice. Some of these discussions may well be characterized that way. But even if that
is the case, the giving and receiving of that advice was part of a process of negotiation, of
offer and counter-offer, in which the Department of Economics and the SGS made a
number of proposals to accommodate the Students' situation and to enable them to reenroll in the fall of 2009. Some of these proposals involved compromising the
University's usual policies. For example, the SGS would have allowed the Students to
register on the basis of partial, rather than full, payment of their arrears of tuition (vol. 2,
p. 227). It is wholly implausible to describe all of these discussions as the giving and
receiving of academic advice, rather than as negotiation to resolve a dispute.
It might be argued that the 2009 negotiations were not intended to settle the underlying
dispute in this case, that is, the award of five FZ grades in 2008/09. The Students might
well have accepted the Department's offer and nonetheless proceeded with a grade appeal
to the GDAAC and then to the GAAB. Professor Smith left this possibility open in his email of September 22 (Vol. 2, p. 219). However, this possibility does not destroy the
privilege. The 2009 negotiations were clearly designed to settle a dispute about whether
the Students could resume their studies in the Ph.D. program; even if it was not the
precise dispute that is now before the AAC, those discussions were privileged.
The 2009 Discussions: Relevance
The only issues properly before the AAC are (i) whether the award ofFZ grades for the
Students' work in Winter 2009 was, given their personal situation at the time, a correct,
consistent, and fair application of the University's policies and procedures, and (ii)
whether the Department should grade the tests that the Students wrote in Fall 2009. The
content of the negotiations concerning the Students' possible registration for 2009/10
10

have no bearing one way or the other on those issues. They arc therefore irrelevant and
the Students will not be permitted to put them in evidence at the hearing on the merits of
the appeal. The fact that negotiations did occur is relevant only to explain why the
Students were permitted to write the tests in Fall 2009.
The 2010 Discussions: Privilege

The Students appealed to GAAB in March 2010 (vol. 2, p. 250); however, that was the
incorrect appeal route, and their appeal was eventually directed to the GDAAC. As noted
above, the GDAAC made its recommendations on 3 June 2010, and Professor Hosios
accepted them on 17 June 2010. The students then appealed to the GAAB. Before the
hearing at the GAAB, Mr. Centa, counsel for the Department of Economics, e-mailed the
Students, inviting them to a meeting "to see ifwe can try to resolve the outstanding issues
between you and my client" (vol. I, p. 511). Mr. Centa advised the Chair that some
discussions did occur. These discussions did not succeed in resolving the issues, and the
Students' appeal to the GAAB was heard in October 2010.
The Students' discussions with Mr. Centa in the fall of 2010, in advance of the hearing at
the GAAB, are privileged. The appeal to the GAAB had been launched. The intention to
keep the discussions confidential is readily inferred. The purpose of the discussions was,
as Mr. Centa stated in his e-mail, to resolve the outstanding issues, including the very
issue that was before the GAAB. The Chair infers that at that stage of the proceedings,
there is no chance that the parties would have agreed to a settlement that did not cover all
of the issues. Evidence concerning the Students' settlement discussions with Mr. Centa
will not be admitted at the hearing on the merits of the appeal.
The 20 JO Discussions: Relevance

The fact that settlement discussions took place before the GAAB hearing in 20 IO is
irrelevant to the issues on this appeal.

VI.

The Students' Requests

By e-mail before the hearing, and again at the hearing, the Students made a number of
requests of your Chair. They were all declined, for the reasons that follow.
By e-mail dated August 13, 2011, the Students asked Mr. Lang for "a complete archive of
notes, minutes, statements and of course testifies of the GAAB's hearings". They
asserted that Ms Jane Alderdice, Secretary to GAAB, had made a complete record of the
proceedings. Mr. Lang replied by e-mail that same day, indicating that he had nothing to
do with the GAAB. The Students then directed their request to Ms Alderdice herself.
Mr. Centa responded on behalf of SGS, stating that "Documents created by or for the use
of the GAAB chair or panel are not provided to students as part of the appeal process."
The Students therefore requested that the Chair order Ms. Alderdice to produce these
documents for use in the hearing at the AAC. The Chair refused to make that order, for
11

three reasons. First, the Chair of the AAC has no power to compel anyone to produce
documents. Second, even if the Chair did have the power to order production of these
documents, he would not do so. Ms. Alderdice's role at the GAAB was not to prepare a
transcript for the use of the parties; the GAAB is not a court of record. Her role was to
assist the GAAB panel hearing the Students' appeal. Any documents that she may have
prepared in that role are solely for the use of the GAAB and are immune from disclosure
to the parties in the appeal to the AAC. Third, the documents sought by the Students are
irrelevant. The Students appeal from the decision of the GAAB. All material relevant to
that appeal has already been filed.
Second, in several e-mails sent to Mr. Lang within a few days preceding the hearing, the
Students requested that they be allowed to enroll in the Ph.D. program in Economics in
September 2011. The day before the hearing, Mr. Centa replied on behalf of SGS:
"Lapsed graduate students are not entitled to register and must apply for reinstatement
which is not automatic but subject to the review and approval of the graduate unit and
SGS." The Students renewed their request at the hearing. Although the nature of their
request was not entirely clear, it appeared to the Chair that the Students were asking him
to order SGS to register them immediately for the 2011/12 academic year. Your Chair
refused to make any order relating to the Students' registration. Any such order is clearly
not within the jurisdiction of the AAC Chair hearing a preliminary motion to decide
questions of law, where a hearing on the merits has not occurred.
Third, the Students asked the Chair, Mr. Lang, and Mr. Centa to identify the University
committee that would have jurisdiction to grant the remedies they seek under categories 2
through 5, should the Chair issue a decision in favour of the SGS. It was not appropriate
for the Students to seek this information from Mr. Centa, whose duty in these
proceedings is not to assist the Students but to represent SGS's position. Mr. Lang's role
in these proceedings is neutral, and is to assist the Chair and the parties with issues that
arise in these proceedings; it is not to advise the Students on the proper route for
commencing other proceedings. And the Chair does not know the answer to the
Students' question, nor is it the role of the Chair to answer it. The Students have already
been advised by the ADFG Office to go to Downtown Legal Services, and they may also
wish to consult with the University Ombudsperson.

VII.

Orders and Directions to the Parties

1. The AAC may make a recommendation concerning rebate or cancellation of tuition for
2008/09, but otherwise has no jurisdiction to grant the remedies sought by the Students
under categories 2 through 5 (vol. I, pp. 22-23).
2. At the hearing on the merits, the Students may not call any evidence or make any
argument to prove their entitlement to the remedies that they seek under categories 2
through 5, except to the extent that such evidence or argument is relevant to a
recommendation concerning rebate or cancellation of tuition for 2008/09.

12

3. The only proper respondent on this appeal is the SGS; accordingly, the names of the
other respondents listed at vol. l, p. 13, are to be deleted or, if that is not convenient, to
be disregarded by the AAC.
4. At the hearing on the merits, no evidence may be called concerning the Students'
negotiations with SGS and the Department of Economics between May and September
2009, unless and to the extent that the fact that negotiations were occurring during that
time is relevant to an issue in the hearing.
5. At the hearing on the merits, no evidence may be called concerning the Students'
settlement discussions with SGS in the fall of 2010.
6. The appeal books filed by the Students are to be edited as described in paras. 27 and 28
of the Submissions of the SGS, except for the Students' e-mail correspondence with
Professor Osborne mentioned in para. 27(ii), which Mr. Centa conceded at the hearing
was not privileged; the editing is to be carried out by Mr. Centa's office.
7. Within three weeks ofreceiving this Report, the SGS is to file its response to the
Students' appeal.

13

