THE UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO

IN THE MATTER OF charges of academic dishonesty made on December I 3, 2010,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code o.f Behaviour 011 Academic

Mallers, 1995,
AND 11'1 THE MATTER OF the University o_(Toro11to Act, 1971, S.O. 1971, c. 56 as amended
S,0, J 978, C, 88

BETWEEN:
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO

-AND-

J

0

REASONS FOR DECISION

Dntc of Hearing: Fcbmary 16, 2011

lVIcmbers of the Panel:
Mr. Jeffrey S. Leon, L.S.M., Chair
Professor Andrea Litvack, Faculty of Social 'Nork, Faculty Panel Member
Mr. Eric Siu, Student Panel Member

Appearances:
Mr. Robert Ccnta, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Barristers
Mr. Mike Canniffe, Legal Case Worker, Downtown Legal Services
In Attcndnncc:
Mr, J
O , the Student
Professor John Browne, Dean's Designate, Faculty of Arts and Science
Mr. Christopher Lang, Director, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances

-2-

I.

A hearing of the Trial Division of the University Tribunal was convened on Wednesday,

Febrnary 16, 2011 at I :00 p.rn. in the boardroom (Room 209), Sirncoe Hall to consider charges
laid against J
2.

O

rv!r. 0

under the Code of Behaviour 011 Academic Molters, 1995 (the "Code").

was in attendance and represented by counsel, a Law Student frorn Downtown

Legal Services,
3.

The issue in this case is whether the admitted conduct of lv!r. 0

was a sufficiently

serious breach of the Code so as to justify, in addition to a lengthy suspension, a
rccornmendation of expulsion from the University. The Panel carefully considered the evidence,
the submissions of counsel and relevant prior decisions of this Tribunal. We have concluded, for
the reasons set out below, that Mr. 0

's conduct demonstrates such a flagrant disregard for and

breach of the Code that the appropriate and necessary sanction in this case is:
(a)

A final grade of zero in the course MAT 133Y, which was taken in the

Fall/Winter 20I0-2011;
(b)

A suspension frorn the University, commencing Febrnary 16, 2011, for a period

not to exceed five (5) years; and
(c)

A recommendation to the President of the University that he rccommend to the

Governing Council that 1vlr. 0

be expelled from the University.

THE CHARGES

4.

Mr. 0

was charged as follows:

(a)

On October 26, 2010, you knowingly had another person pcrsonate you at a terrn
test in MAT 133Y (the "Test" and the "Course"), contrary to Section B.I.l(c) of
the Code;

(b)

ln the alternative, on October 26, 2010, you knowingly engaged in a forrn of
cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or misrepresentation not
otherwise described in the Code in order to obtain academic credit or other

-3academic advantage of any kind in connection with the Test in the Course,
contrary to section B.1.3(6) of the Code.
5.

The particulars were as follows:
(i)

You were registered at the University of Toronto and enrolled in the Course at all
material times.

(ii)

You were scheduled to write the Test on October 26, 20 I 0.

(iii)

You hired another person to attend and write the Test for you.

(iv)

You gave the other person your University of Toronto student card so that he
could pretend to be you at the Test.

(v)

Y 0\1 hired and directed the other person to write the Test for you so that you
might obtain an academic advantage in connection with the Test.

(vi)

Your conduct violated the Code.

EVIDENCE
6.

This matter proceeded pursuant to an Agreed Statement of Facts. The substantive facts

admitted are as follows:

1l1AT 133Y
(a)

MAT 133Y is an introductory survey of some basic theory and applications of
calC\ilus and linear algebra. It is cunently taught by Prof. Abe lgefold. The final
grade in the course comprised a final examination (50% of the grnde), three term
tests (worth 40% of the grade) and h1torial quizzes (10%).

(b)

In academic year 2008-2009, Mr. 0

enrolled in MAT 133Y for the first time.

He scored 2 points on the 4 tutorial quizzes that he wrote. He received a grade of
52% on the first term test (of three) and withdrew from the course before the
deadline for withdrawal.
(c)

In academic year 2009-2010, Mr. 0

enrolled in MAT 133Y for the second

time. He scored 2 points on the 13 t11torial quizzes that he wrote, He did not

-4write any of the three term tests, but presented a medical note explaining his
absence for the first two term tests. He did not write the final examination. On
April 21, 20 I 0, he petitioned for and was granted late withdrawal without
academic penalty (WDR).
(d)

In September 2010, Mr. 0

enrolled in NIAT 133 for a third time. He scored

two points out on the 4 tutorial quizzes that he wrote.
Advertise111e11/s

(e)

In early September, starting on or around September 7, 2010, Mr. 0

placed a

series of advertisements on free, internet-based classified advertisement websites.
The three advertisements below are examples of the advertisements he placed.
(f)

On September 14, 2010, Mr. 0

placed mi ad on the Craigslisl website. This

advertisement read:
Looking for a asian (Chinese, Korean) guy who graduated from or currently
attending to U ofT who is good at math.
3 midterms + 1 final
I will pay you $ 1000 + bonus
Caontact me at 647-300-8478
(text preferred)
(g)

On September 14, 2010, Mr. 0

(h)

Mr. 0

placed a similar advertisement on Kijiji website.

also placed an advertisement on the Teleco11111111te Anywhere website.

The advertisement read as follows:
Seeking a guy who grnduatcd U of T

Looking for an asian gi1y who is good at math (undergrad course)
Undergrad and Graduates from U ofT arc welcome
To help write 3 tests and a final
I will pay you $ 1000 and bonus
Contact me for info
You can reach me at 647-300-8478 ...

-5October 25, 2010-Department of1\1at/1e111atics met 1vith Mr. 0

(i)

The University learned of these mlverlisemcnts in September.
investigation, the University identified Mr. 0

After some

through the telephone nmnber

that appeared in the adverlisemenls, which he had !isled in ROSI as his contact
telephone m1mbcr.
U)

The Department ofivfothcmatics contacted Mr. 0

and invited him lo discuss the

matter with them at a meeting, On October 25, 2010, Prof. Catherine Sul em
(Associate Chair Undcrgrnduale), Donna Birch (Undergraduate Advisor), and
Prof. lgclfield (the "Departmental representatives") met with Mr. 0
(k)

The Departmental representatives showed Mr. 0

the three advertisements and

asked him to explain himself.
(I)

Mr. 0

said that the adve1iisements were his attempt to find a private tutor who

could communicate well with him to help him get through the course. He told the
Departmental representatives that he had previously had difficulty with MAT 133,
and that the references to money, the tests and the exam were his attempt to limit
the cost of the tutoring,
(m)

The Departmental representatives found Mr. 0

credible, and by the end of the

short meeting had concluded that he was telling them the lrnth. They encouraged
him to make use of all the extra help facilities that the department makes available
to students (tutorials, office ho\ll's, math aid centres) and to be more carefol in the
foturc about how he phrased things.
(n)

The meeting ended on good terms, and the Departmental representatives believed
the matter was conch1ded.

October 26, 2010-ivlAT 133 Term Test #1

(o)

Tenn Test # I in MAT 133 was held from 6: IO to 8:00 p.m. on October 26, 2010,
the day after Mr. 0

met with the Departmental representatives.

-6-

(p)

A person purporting to be Mr. , ·.

signed into the Term Test using 11,fr O 's

student curd.
(q)

The person begmi to write the Tenn Test. Prof. Iglcfeld later determined that this
person answered scored 40 out of 40 on the multiple choice questions, and l O out
of l Oon the long answer questions that he attempted.

(r)

At approxilllately 6:20 p.m., Prof. lgelfeld went to the room where Mr. 0 . was
scheduled to write Tenn Test #1. Pro!'. Igclfeld did not recognize Mr. 0. among
the students in the room.

(s)

Prof. lgelfeld asked the teaching assistant collecting signatmes to point out where
Mr. 0

was sitting. When the teaching assistant did so, Prof. Igclfcld did not

recognize the person sitting at the desk as Mr. 0

. Prof. Igelfeld asked the

person if he had any identification in addition to the student card, which appeared
to belong lo Mr. 0

The person said that he did not have any other

identification with him.
(t)

Prof. lgelfcld asked the person if the two of them had met recently. The person
said no, and started to pack up his things to leave the roo!ll. Prof. Igclfeld told
him to continue writing the examination.

(u)

Prof. Igclfeld left the examination room, obtained a digital camera, and returned
to the examination room at about 6:55. He then took a picture of the person who
purported to be Mr. 0

(v)

The person writing the exalllination then packed up his things, handed in the Terlll
Test, and left the exa!llination roolll.

(w)

On October 28, 2010, Mr. 0

attelllpted to drop MAT 133. The Office of

Student Academic Integrity reinstated Mr. 0
department had a concern that Mr. 0
011

Academic Maffers.

in the class because the

may have violated the Code of Behaviour

-7Ad111issio11s

(x)

Mr. 0

admits that he knowingly:

(i)

placed advertisements on the internet in an attempt to hire someone to
write his term tests and final examination for him in MAT 133;

(ii)

hired a person going by the name of'John' (surname unknown) to write the
tests and examination in MAT 133 for him;

(iii)

agreed to pay John a fee of $1000 in exchange for John writing the term
tests and examinations for him;

(iv)

lied to the Departmental representatives during the meeting on October 25,
20 I 0, regarding why he placed the advertisements;

(v)

went ahead with his plan to have John write the Tenn test for him despite
his meeting with the Departmental representatives; and

(vi)

provided John with a copy of his student card so that John would be able
to sign into the Tenn Test as Mr. 0

7.

Mr. 0

and to write the Tenn Test for him.

admits that he knowingly had 'John' personate him at the October 26, 20 I0,

Term Test in MAT 133.
8.

On November 16, 2010, Mr. 0

met with Professor John Browne, Dean's Designate for

Academic integrity, to discuss the allegation that he had violated the Code of Behaviour 011
Academic Matters,

During this meeting, Mr. 0

admitted that he knowingly had John

pcrsonate him at Term Test Ill in MAT 133,
PLEA

9.

Mr. 0

waived the reading of the charges filed against him and confirmed his plea of

guilty to charges # 1 and #2. The Panel was advised that if Mr. 0

was convicted on charge# 1,

the Provost would withdraw charge #2. The Panel considered the Agreed Statement of Facts and

-8-

found Mr. 0

guilty of charge#!, that he knowingly had another person personatc him at a

term test in MAT 133Y. Counsel for the University then withdrew charge 112. The hearing then
proceeded to the Penalty Phase.
EVIDENCE ON PENALTY

I 0.

Counsel for the University did not call any evidence.

11.

Mr. 0

was called as a witness. Mr. O.

is 24 years of age and came to Canada in 2003

from South Korea to pursue his studies. He attended high school in Nova Scotia. He does not
have any family in Canada. He moved to Toronto in order to obtain a degree from what he
described as a "world famous" University.

It was Mr. 0

's dream to graduate from the

University of Toronto.
12.

lvlr. 0

described certain medical issues that he had in 2005. He testified that in 2006,

he was the victim of an assault at the Scarborough Campus of the University, as a result of which
he transferred to the Downtown Campus, He testified that the assault lrnd a profound effect on
him. Mr. 0

suffered from depression and other mental and social issues. He returned to South

Korea for a period of time to "settle down" and then came back to Toronto.
13.

Mr. 0

wanted to pmsuc studies in Economics. However, he C0\1ld not do so because

of his inability to pass the mathematics prerequisite (i.e., MAT I 33Y). iv!r. 0
desperation in wanting to pass the course.

described his

He acknowledged his conduct was wrong and

indicated that he was ashamed. He apologized. At the time, he felt he had no other choice than
to proceed with his plan to have someone write the exam for him in order to pass the course.
14.

Mr. 0

expressed the desire to continue with his studies. He testified that he would try

his best without taking advantage of others' efforts and would use the other resomces available
on campus to assist him.
15.

Mr. 0

has no prior academic offences.

16.

In cross-examination, Mr. 0

acknowledged that he had been the beneficiary of a

number of prior accommodations on the basis of his illness. He had received extensions and

-9-

defcnals.

He had been provided with direction through resources made available by the

University and was advised more than once lo get acadernic counseling.
17.

tvlr. 0

acknowledged that when he enrolled in MAT l 33Y, he knew it was going lo be

a difficul! comse. He knew there were options available to him through teaching assistance,
l11torials and otherwise, but did not seek such assistance. Rather, on the second day of classes,
before availing himself of any opportunity to get help, he began to place the ads to find someone
to write the examination for him, He acknowledged that this was his only strategy for passing
the COlll'Se.
18.

Mr. 0

agreed that when he met with representatives of the Department of

Mathematics, he did his best to persuade them that his intention was not to have someone else
write the examination, that he was an honest student and that he was trying to get tutoring. He
knew what he was doing was wrong, but he did not change his plans. He knew he could have
walked away from the plan or petitioned for a deferral, but he canied on.
19.

In response to a question frorn the Panel, Mr. 0

indicated that he had learned a lot from

this experience. He indicated that he would not lie or lake advantage of other people in the
futme.

In his response, he did not indicate that he had any specific plan or strategy for

continuing with his studies.
SUBMISSIONS ON PENALTY

20.

Counsel for the University and for Mr, 0

agreed that Mr. 0

should receive a final

grade of zero in the comse MAT 133Y, which was taken in Fall/Winter 2010/2011. Counsel for
the University requested that Mr. (),

be suspended from the University commencing February

I 6, 20 l l for a period not to exceed five (5) years and that the Tribunal recommend to the
President of the University that he recommend to the Governing Council that Mr. 0

be

expelled from the University and that this case be reported to the Provost for publication of a
notice of the decision of the Tribunal and the sanction or sanctions imposed with the name of the
student withheld.

Counsel for Mr. 0

proposed that Mr. 0

be suspended from the

University, commencing February 16, 2011 for a period of five (5) years, ending on Febrnary 15,

• IO·

2016 and (ha( the case be reported to the Provost for publication ofa notice of the decision oflhe

Tribunal and the sanction or sanctions i111poscd with the na111e of the student withheld.
21.

Counsel also provided the Panel with nu111erous prior decisions of the Tribunal,

including: University of Toronto and C. (Nove111ber 5, 1976); University of' Toro11to and M
F

W

(September I, 2010); University of Toronto and F.C. (April 20, 2009); University of

Toronto a11d Kl\\ (April 18, 2008); U11iversity of Toro11/o a11d P. (2000/01-07); University of
Toronto and C. (2000/01-08); University of Toronto and Mr. P. (2000/01-07); University of
Toronto and K

N

(April 18, 2008); University of Toronto and V.A. a11d A.fl. (May 17,

2002); Universi(J' of Toro11to and P.,W. (April 9, 2002); University of Toronto a11d V

S

l.

W1

(April 6, 2006); The University of Toro11to a11d Ms. R. W (April 18, 2008 11502); 111e

U11iversi(J1 ofToro11/o and R.K. (July 24, 2007 #494).
22.

Counsel for 1vlr. 0. also provided a chart of "Representative Impersonation Cases".

23.

Counsel agreed that i111pcrsonalion for purposes of writing an examination is an

exlre111ely serious offence under the Code. Mr. Cenla pointed to Appendix C of the Code, the
Provost's Guidelines on Sanctions Offences and Suggested Penalties for S(11dcnts, which
provides that "for pcrsonating, or having an individual personate on a test or examination, the
reco111111ended sanction shall be expulsion from the University". The Panel recognizes it is not
bound by this Guideline. However, the Panel agrees that knowingly having another person
pcrsonatc a student on an academic examination is one of the most serious offences under the
Code.
24.

In advocating for a recommendation of expulsion, Mr. Ccnta e111phasizcd the planning

process that was involved in this offence. This was not impulsive or spontaneous conduct. The
course of conduct began on the second day of classes.

H involved a commercial element,

namely, an offer to pay someone to write the exam, with the potential for a "bonus". This was
not a momentary lapse in judgment.
25.

As aggravating conduct, Mr. Centa pointed to the meeting with the representatives of the

Mathematics Department on the day prior to the exam. Mr. 0

could have changed his 111ind,

-ll -

but instead, when confronted, he talked his way out of the allegations and proceeded with his
plan.
26.

The Panel agrees with Mr. Ccnta that this is aggravating conduct that makes Mr. 0

pattern of conduct all the more serious. Although this is a "first offence", iV!r. 0
facts, has already been given another chance.
chance, Mr. 0

's

, on these

Rather than taking advantage of that second

lied, rejected any opportunity to find another means of passing or withdrawing

from the Course and, in effect, flaunted the benefit of doubt he was given at this first stage of the
academic process. It is difficult to conceive of a more egregious way to engage in this offence.
Mr. 0

's conduct showed a total disregard for the academic process and the need for honesty in

order to preserve the integrity of that process.
27.

Mr. Canniffe ,1rgcd the Panel to view this as a first offence. The Panel accepts that

Mr. 0

ultimately admitted the offence, cooperated with the University, and plead guilty to the

offence in accordance with an Agreed Statement of Facts. He also urged the Panel to consider
Mr. 0

's eircmnstanccs in terms of his depression, desperation, family pressures and remorse.

28.

Mr. Canniffe also argued that Mr. 0

would be unlikely to repeat the offence. He also

argued that the lengthy suspension would meet the goals of both general and specific deteITence
and would permit Mr. 0

,'s rehabilitation.

A five-year suspension would be a significant

sanction that would deter others and would recognize the importance of academic integrity. It
would also allow Mr. 0

to attempt to complete his st,1dics on his own merit by taking

advantage of the resources offered to him by the University. He urged the Panel to not view this
conduct as being in the same category as serial cheating.
29.

As indicated, the Panel regards this particular course of conduct by Mr. 0

to fall within

the most serious category of conduct involving persona lion of a student at an examination. The
meeting on the day before the examination and Mr. 0

Is delennination to proceed with his plan

notwithstanding what took place at that meeting, brings this case into that most serious category.
In our view, anything less than a recommendation for expulsion wo11ld not indicate sufficient
condemnation of this flagrant conduct and would not send the requisite, clear signal to both Mr.
0

and other st11dents regarding the seriousness of this conduct.

- 12 30,

Also, this was a proposed commercial transaction. It involved the payment of money mid

the prospect of a "bonus". The internet, social media sites and other relatively new electronic
exchange services that are difficult to monitor create a proliferation of opportunities to advertise
and recruit individuals who are prepared to, and able to, participate in schellles of pcrsonation in
writing exams on a commercial basis. A forceful message that such conduct will not be tolerated
is necessary to promote general deterrence.
31.

Mr. 0

's conduct in lying his way through the initial meeting, spurning the options that

were available to him at that point to take a different course of action and bring the scheme to a
halt and his evidence at the hearing, which demonstrated no real appreciation of a plan for
approaching his studies in the future, both support the recommendation of expulsion for pmposcs
of specific deterrence, in addition to general deterrence. These factors also outweigh, in this
particular case and on this evidence, the considerations identified by Mr. 0

's com1scl which he

argued supported a lesser sanction for the purpose of rehabilitation.
32.

Respect for the University as an academic institution and respect for the integrity of the

acadelllic process require the sanction directed by this Panel.

ORDER
33.

The University Tribunal finds and orders:
(a)

THAT Mr. 0

is guilty of the academic offence of having another person

personate him at an examination, contrary to section B. J.l (c) of the Code of
Behaviour 011 Academic 1\fatters;

(b)

THAT the following sanctions shall be imposed on Mr. 0
(i)

he shall receive a final grade of zero in the course MAT 133Y, which was
taken in Fall/Winter 20l0-2011;

(ii)

he be suspended from the University commencing February 16, 2011, for
a period not to exceed 5 years.

- 13 -

(c)

THAT the Tribunal recommends to the President of the University that he
recommend to the Governing Council that Mr. 0

be expelled from the

University;
(d)

THAT this case shall be reported to the Provost for publication of a notice of the
decision of the Tribunal and the sanction or sanction imposed, with the name of
the student withheld.

DATED at Toronto, August 25, 2011.

