Case 617

DATE:

   August 25, 2011

PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v. J.O.

Hearing Date(s):

   February 16, 2011

Panel Members:

   Mr. Jeffrey S. Leon, Chair
   Prof. Andrea Litvack, Faculty Member
   Mr. Eric Siu, Student Member

Appearances:

   Mr. Robert Centa, Assistant Discipline Counsel for the University
   Mr. Mike Canniffe, DLS for the Student

In Attendance:

   Mr. J.O., the Student
   Prof. John Browne, Dean's Designate
   Mr. Christopher Lang, Director, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty
   Grievances

   Student charged under s. B.i.1(c) of the Code . The charges related to
   allegations that the Student hired an individual through advertisements
   to impersonate him and write a term test as if he were the Student. The
   parties submitted an Agreed Statement of Facts. At the meeting with
   Departmental representatives, the Student denied the allegations,
   explaining he was only looking for a tutor; the Departmental
   representatives found him credible. The next day, the Student sent an
   impersonator to write the term test and was discovered and charged. The
   Student pleaded guilty to the charges. The Panel found the Student
   guilty under s. B.i.1(c) . The Panel stated that the particular course
   of conduct by the Student fell within the most serious category of
   conduct involving personation; anything less than a recommendation for
   expulsion would not indicate sufficient condemnation and would not
   achieve both specific and general deterrence. The Panel also emphasized
   the need for general deterrence. Because this was a commercial
   transaction and the availability of online advertising makes it harder
   to monitor these types of transactions, a forceful message needed to be
   sent to promote general deterrence. The Panel held that these factors
   outweighed the possibility of rehabilitation. The Panel imposed a grade
   assignment of zero in the course; a five-year suspension; a
   recommendation that the Student be expelled; and that a report be
   issued to the Provost.

   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12772
