Case #873

   DATE: December 13, 2016
   PARTIES: University of Toronto v. K.Y. (âthe Studentâ)

   Hearing Date(s): October 7, 2016

   Panel Members:
   Ms. Michelle S. Henry, Lawyer, Borden Ladner Gervais LLP, Chair
   Professor Louis Florence, Faculty Panel Member
   Mr. Chad Jankowski, Student Panel Member

   Appearances:
   Mr. Victor Kim, Legal Case Worker for the Student, Downtown Legal
   Services
   Ms. Tina Lie, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg
   Rothstein LLP

   In Attendance:
   The Student
   Ms. Andrea McGee, Registrar and Assistant Dean, Office of Student
   Services
   Mr. John H. Daniels Faculty of Architecture, Landscape, and Design
   Ms. Krista Osbourne, Administrative Assistant, Office of Appeals,
   Discipline and FacultyÂ Grievances

   Trial Division â s. B.i.1(a) of Code â forged documents â Verification
   of Student Illness or Injury form â Agreed Statement of Facts â
   Â guilty plea â Agreed Statement of Facts on Penalty â Joint Submission
   on Penalty â sentencing principles â Mr. C. factors to be considered in
   appropriate penalty â grade assignment of zero in the course; a
   suspension of three years and four months; a notation on the Studentâs
   transcript until graduation; and a report to the Provost.

   Student charged with two charges of forging a document under s.
   B.i.1(a) of the Code , or in the alternative, two charges of academic
   dishonesty under s.B.i.3(b) of the Code . The charges related to
   allegations that the Student submitted a forged Verification of Student
   Illness or Injury Form in support of a request for academic
   accommodation.

   The matter proceeded by an Agreed Statement of Facts which set out that
   the Student first submitted a forged Verification of Student Illness
   Form to his professor via email after he had submitted an assignment
   after its due date. Â When the professor requested that the Student
   provide her with the original Verification of Student Illness Form, the
   Student gave her a document that he admitted was forged. Â The Student
   pled guilty to the forgery charges. Upon the Panel finding guilt on the
   forgery charges, the University withdrew the alternative charges of
   academic misconduct.

   The parties made a Joint Submission on Penalty. Â The Panel heard
   submissions regarding the appropriateness of the penalty and how the
   Mr. C factors applied to this case. The Panel took into consideration
   the serious and deliberate nature of the offences; that the Student's
   conduct in forging medical notes implicated medical professionals, and
   undermined the integrity of those charged with providing those medical
   notes as well as the University's procedure for assessing and granting
   accommodations to its students; that this was also not the first
   offence for the Student; and that the Student had submitted two false
   forms. Â Mitigating factors included his early admission of guilt and
   full cooperation with the discipline process. Â The Panel accepted the
   partiesâ Joint Submission on Penalty of a grade assignment of zero in
   the course; a suspension of three years and four months; a notation on
   the Studentâs transcript until graduation; and a report to the Provost.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12926
