Case No. 873
THE UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
IN THE MATTER OF charges of academic dishonesty made on May 31, 2016,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic
Matters, 1995,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Act, 1971, S.O. 1971, C. 56 as amended
S.O. 1978, c. 88
BETWEEN:
UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO (the "University")
-and-

] 9 ~ (the "Student")

REASONS FOR DECISION

Hearing Date: October 7, 2016
Panel Members:
Ms. Michelle S. Herny, Lawyer, Borden Ladner Gervais LLP, Chair
Professor Louis Florence, Faculty Panel Member
Mr. Chad Jankowski, Student Panel Member
Appearances:
Mr. Victor Kim, Legal Case Worker for the Student, Downtown Legal Services
Ms. Tina Lie, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg Rothstein LLP
In Attendance:
The Student
Ms. Andrea McGee, Registrar and Assistant Dean, Office of Student Services, John H. Daniels
Faculty of Architecture, Landscape, and Design
Ms. K.rista Osbourne, Administrative Assistant, Office of Appeals, Discipline and Faculty
Grievances

1

1. A Hearing of the Trial Division of the University Tribunal convened on October 7, 2016
to consider charges of academic dishonesty brought by the University against the Student
under the Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters, 1995 (the "Code"). The Student was
informed of the charges by letter dated May 31, 2016, from Professor Sioban Nelson,
Vice-Provost, Faculty & Academic Life.

THE CHARGES
2. At all material times, the Student was a registered student at the University of Toronto
John H. Daniels Faculty of Architecture, Landscape, and Design. The University alleges
that the Student engaged in the following offences:
1)

On or about December 4, 2015, the Student knowingly forged or in any other way
altered or falsified a document or evidence required by the University of Toronto,
or uttered, circulated or made use of such forged, altered or falsified document,
namely a Verification of Student Illness or Injury form dated November 27, 2015,
which the Student submitted in support of his request for academic
accommodation or relief in ENV341Hl, contrary to Section B.I.l(a) of the Code.

2)

In the alternative, on or about December 4, 2015, the Student knowingly engaged
in a form of cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or
misrepresentation not otherwise described in order to obtain academic credit or
other academic advantage of any kind by submitting a forged, altered or falsified
document, namely a Verification of Student Illness or Injury form dated
November 27, 2015, in supp01i of his request for academic accommodation or
relief in ENV341Hl, contrary to Section B.I.3(b) of the Code.

3)

On or about December 15, 2015, the Student knowingly forged or in any other
way altered or falsified a document or evidence required by the University of
Toronto, or uttered, circulated or made use of such forged, altered or falsified
document, namely a Verification of Student Illness or Injury form dated
December 15, 2015, which the Student submitted in supp01i of his request for
academic accommodation or relief in ENV341Hl, contrary to Section B.I.l(a) of
the Code.

4)

In the alternative, on or about December 15, 2015, the Student knowingly
engaged in a form of cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or
misrepresentation not otherwise described in order to obtain academic credit or
other academic advantage of any kind by submitting a forged, altered or falsified
document, namely a Verification of Student Illness or Injury form dated

2

December 15, 2015, in support of his request for academic accommodation or
relief in ENV341Hl, contrary to Section B.I.3(b) of the Code.
AGREED STATEMENT OF FACTS

3. The Hearing proceeded on the basis of an Agreed Statement of Facts, which was marked
as Exhibit 2 at the Hearing. The Panel also received a Joint Book of Documents that is
refened to in the Agreed Statement of Facts, which was marked as Exhibit 3 at the
Hearing. A summary of the agreed facts follows.
ENV341Hl

4. In the 2015 Fall Semester, the Student was enrolled in ENV341Hl, Environment and
Human Health (the "Course"). He was required to submit a term paper worth 30% of his
final grade by November 26, 2015. The Student did not submit the term paper by the
November 26, 2015 deadline.
5. On December 4, 2015, the Student submitted his term paper, together with a copy of a
completed Verification of Student Illness or Injury form dated November 27, 2015 which
was signed by a Dr. Leser at a College Street Clinic ("November 27 Form").
6. On December 9, 2015, the Professor sent the Student an email, asking for an original of
the November 27 Form. The Student responded by email and indicated that he would get
another original copy of the Form by the following day.
7. On December 14, 2015, when the Student had not provided the original of the November
27 Form to the Professor, the Professor contacted the College Street Clinic to verify the
authenticity of the Form. She was advised by the receptionist at the clinic that there was
no record of the Student ever having been at the clinic.
8. That day, on December 14, 2015, the Professor sent the Student an email asking him to
meet with her the next day. On December 15, 2015, the Student met with the Professor
and provided the Professor with an original of a Verification of Student Illness or Injury
form dated December 15, 2015, which was purportedly for him and completed and
signed by Dr. Kapoor of the College Street Clinic on behalf of Dr. Leser (the "December
15 Form").
9. Following the meeting, the Professor contacted the College Street Clinic again. The
receptionist confirmed that the Student had not been at the clinic that day. However, the
receptionist told the Professor that a female student had attended the clinic that morning,
asking for an original of a note that had been issued in November. The receptionist
advised that she processed the form that morning without the female student having
3

completed the student information section. Accordingly, when the f01m was completed
by Dr. Kapoor and was provided to the female student, the "to be completed by the
student" section at the top of the form was blank.
10. On the evening of December 15, 2015, the Student sent the Professor an email in which
he wrote:
I am te1Tibly sorry that I have to tell you that I photoshoped [sic] the doctor notes, which
means I wrote my name at someone else doctornote [sic]. I have nothing else to explain
but just feel terribly sorry. I couldn't speak up in front of you because I got very nervous .
You asked me for an original medical notes instead of the copy one, I thought it might to
too late to tell you the truth and I stepped into wrong direction further. I know that I have
to deal with Academic integrity from now. But just one again very sorry and I regard
sincerely.

Meeting with Dean's Designate and the Student's Admissions

11. On February 9, 2016, Professor Jeannie Kim, Assistant Dean of the Faculty, met with the
Student to discuss the allegation of academic misconduct. At the meeting, the Student
admitted that he had forged a friend's medical note (the November 27 Form), and when
the Professor asked for the original, he asked his friend to attend at the College Street
Clinic to obtain another original (the December 15 Form).
12. As part of the Agreed Statement of Facts, the Students admits that he did not see Dr. M.
Leser on November 27, 2015, and he did not attend the College Street Clinic on
December 15, 2015 to obtain the Forms.
13. The Student futther admits that he knowingly forged, altered or falsified the November
27 Form and the December 15 Form; and he submitted the Forms to seek academic
accommodation or relief, and on the understanding that the University of Toronto
required legitimate medical documentation and evidence to be presented in order to
obtain that academic accommodation or relief.
FINDINGS ON CHARGES
14. Following deliberations and based on the Agreed Statement of Facts and the Joint Book
of Documents, the Panel concluded that charges 1 and 3 (as outlined in paragraph 2

above) had been proven with clear and convincing evidence on a balance of probabilities,
and accepted the guilty pleas of the Student in respect of those charges. The Panel was
advised that if the Tribunal convicts the Student on charges 1 and 3, outlined above in
paragraph 2, the University would withdraw the alternative charges. The Panel therefore
makes no findings with respect to charges 2 and 4.

4

PENALTY

15. The University and the Student submitted an Agreed Statement of Facts on Penalty and a
Joint Submission on Penalty recommending the following penalty:
a. a final grade of zero in the course ENV341 Hl;
b. a suspension from the University of Toronto for three years and four months from
January 1, 2017 to April 30, 2020; and
c. a notation of the sanction on his academic record and transcript from the day the
Tribunal makes its order until graduation.
16. The parties also agree that this case shall be reported to the Provost for publication of a
notice of the decision of the Tribunal and the sanction imposed in the University of
Toronto newspapers, with the name of the student withheld.
17. Counsel to the University provided submissions on the high threshold required for a
Tribunal to deviate from the joint submission on penalty. As set out in the Discipline
Appeals Board in S.F. and The University of Toronto (Case No. 690 - Appeal, dated
October 20, 2014), only truly unreasonable or "unconscionable" joint submissions should
be rejected (see paragraph 22). In the Panel's view the joint submission in this case is
reasonable.
18. The Panel also heard submissions regarding the appropriateness of the penalty, reviewed
relevant past decisions of the Tribunal submitted by the University, and considered the
factors set out in University a/Toronto and Mr. C. (Case No. 1976/77-3; dated November
5, 1976). In paiiicular, the Panel took into consideration the serious and deliberate nature
of the offences and the detriment to the University. The Panel was also concerned that
the Student's conduct in forging medical notes implicated medical professionals, and
undermined the integrity of those charged with providing those medical notes, as well as
the University's procedure for assessing and granting accommodations to its students.
19. The fact that this was also not the first offence for the Student was also considered. The
Student had committed a prior offence eight (8) months before, which suggested that he
had not learned from his prior mistake. Further, in the present case, he had submitted not
one, but two false Verification of Student Illness or Injury forms.
20. That said, there were mitigating factors to consider. The Student admitted guilt very
early on-even before he was confronted with the allegations of wrongdoing. He
admitted that he had stepped in the wrong direction and fully cooperated with the
University throughout the discipline process. This demonstrated that he had taken
responsibility for his misconduct.
5

21. Having regard to the above, and based on the review of similar cases provided by
Counsel to the University, the Panel agrees that the recommended sanctions are
appropriate.

DECISION OF THE PANEL

22. At the conclusion of the hearing, the Panel made the following order:
a. The Student is guilty of two counts of knowingly forging or in any other way
altering or falsifying a document or evidence required by the University of
Toronto, or uttering, circulating or making use of such forged, altered or falsified
document, contrary to section B.I.l.(a) of the Code;
b. the following sanctions shall be imposed on the Student:
1.

a final grade of zero in the course ENV341Hl;

11.

a suspension from the University of Toronto for three years and four
months from January 1, 2017 to April 30, 2020; and

111.

a notation of the sanction on his academic record and transcript from the
date of this order until graduation.

c. this case shall be reported to the Provost for publication of a notice of the decision
of the Tribunal and the sanction imposed, with the Student's name withheld.

DATED at Toronto, December J3 , 2016.

6

