Case 1013

   DATE: July 16, 2019
   PARTIES: University of Toronto v. D.T. ("the Student")

   HEARING DATE: April 16, 2019

   Panel Members:
   Ms. Amanda Heale, Chair
   Professor Julian Lowman, Faculty Panel Member
   Mr. Rory Smith, Student Panel Member

   Appearances:
   Mr. Robert Centa, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland
   Rosenberg Rothstein LLP

   In Attendance:
   Mr. Christopher Lang, Director,Â Office of Appeals, Discipline and
   Faculty Grievances
   Ms. Jennifer Dent, Associate Director,Â Office of Appeals, Discipline
   and Faculty Grievances

   Not in Attendance:
   The Student

   The Student was charged with one count of academic misconduct under s.
   B.i.3(a) of the Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters, 1995 (âCodeâ) on
   the basis that he knowingly forged, circulated or made use of a forged
   academic record, namely, a document purporting to be a degree
   certificate from the University of Toronto .

   The parties submitted an Agreed Statement of Facts (âASFâ), a Joint
   Submission on Penalty (âJSPâ), and a Joint Book of Documents (âJBDâ).
   The Student confirmed by way of the ASF that he did not wish to attend
   or participate further in the proceedings.Â  He requested that the
   Tribunal proceed in his absence and waived his right to any further
   notice of the proceedings. The Panel therefore decided to proceed with
   the hearing in the absence of the Student, noting that the Student
   indicated in the ASF his understanding that the Tribunal might, in his
   absence, find that he had committed an academic offence and impose
   sanctions, and that the Tribunal was not bound by the terms of the JSP.

   As set out in the ASF, the Student admitted that, as part of an
   application for employment, he submitted a resume stating that he had
   graduated from the University of Toronto, as well as a forged degree
   certificate purporting to confirm his graduation from the University of
   Toronto. The Student pleaded guilty to the charge of submitting the
   forged degree certificate. After reviewing the ASF and the JBD, the
   Panel concluded that the charge had been proven with clear and
   convincing evidence on a balance of probabilities and accepted the
   guilty plea of the Student.

   The Parties submitted a JSP which the Tribunal accepted noting that it
   is critical to the integrity of the University and to its reputation
   that others can rely upon the official academic records that it
   provides. The Tribunal also noted that expulsion is generally
   recommended in similar cases in the absence of mitigating circumstances
   and/or a JSP. The Tribunal concluded that the JSP in this case was
   reasonable, particularly in light of the seriousness of the offence.

   The Tribunal imposed the following sanctions: immediate suspension for
   a period of up to five years; a recommendation that the Student be
   expelled, as per s. C.ii(b)(i) of Code; and a report to the Provost for
   publication.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/29273
