Case 1525

   DATE:

   January 25, 2024

   PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v. H.S. ("the Student")

   HEARING DATE:

   November 27, 2023, via Zoom

   PANEL MEMBERS:

   Alexandra Clark, Chair
   Dr. Emily Nacol, Faculty Panel Member
   Ryan Cortez, Student Panel Member

   APPEARANCES:
   Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg
   Rothstein LLP
   Lily Chen, Representative for the Student, Downtown Legal Services

   IN ATTENDANCE:

   The Student

   HEARING SECRETARY:

   Carmelle Salomon-Labbe, Associate Director, Office of Appeals,
   Discipline and Faculty Grievances

   The Student was charged with two counts under section B.i.1(a) of the
   Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters, 2019 (the ‚Code‚) for knowingly
   altering or falsifying a document or evidence required by the
   University or making use of the falsified document, specifically a
   death certificate and a document containing an invitation to
   celebration of life in support of the Student‚s petition for academic
   accommodation or relief in a course (the ‚Course‚). In the alternative,
   the Student was charged with one count for knowingly engaging in a form
   of cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud, or
   misrepresentation to obtain academic credit contrary to section
   B.i.3(b) of the Code.

   The Student attended the hearing, and was represented by legal counsel.
   The Panel reviewed an Agreed Statement of Facts (‚ASF‚) submitted
   jointly by the Student and the University. As part of the Course, the
   Student was required to submit a paper (the ‚Paper‚), worth 30% of the
   Course mark. The Student failed to submit the paper, and received a
   failing grade in the Course which consequently prevented the Student
   from graduating in June 2023 as planned. In May 2023, the Student filed
   a petition in which they requested an extension to file her petition
   and to submit the Paper late, due to the passing of a family member. In
   support of the petition, the Student provided several pieces of
   documentation, including an invitation to a celebration of life for the
   deceased family member and, when prompted for further documentation, a
   death certificate (collectively, the ‚Petition Documents‚). The Student
   subsequently admitted to falsifying the Petition Documents and
   apologized for their conduct in a meeting with the Assistant Registrar
   and in a separate correspondence sent to the Vice Provost‚s office.¬
   Based on the facts set out in the ASF, the Panel concluded that the
   Student was guilty of the charges laid under section B.i.1(a) of the
   Code. The University withdrew the alternative charged under section
   B.i.3(b) of the Code.

   In determining the appropriate sanction, the Panel considered the
   factors set out in the decision of University of Toronto v. Mr. C.
   (Case No. 1976/77-3), namely, the character of the person charged, the
   nature of the offence committed, the detriment to the University
   occasioned by the offence, and the need to deter other from committing
   a similar offence. The Panel noted that the nature of the offence, and
   in particular the fact that the Student had circulated forged documents
   on two separate occasions, coupled with the fact that the Student had
   committed a prior academic offence , the Student merited a more severe
   penalty. The Panel further stated that the gravity of offence, one of
   the most serious contemplated by the Code, merited a sanction capable
   of meeting the goals of both specific and general deterrence. However,
   the Panel considered the Student‚s admission to the offence to be a
   mitigating factor. The Panel found that it was unnecessary to prolong
   the duration of the notation on the Student‚s academic record beyond
   the period of the suspension proposed by the University, given that the
   Student had already completed their coursework.

   Based on these factors, and the sanctions imposed in similar cases
   presented by the University, the Panel imposed the following sanction
   on the Student: a final grade of zero in the Course; a four-year
   suspension, and; a four-year notation of the sanction on the Student‚s
   academic record and transcript.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/31459
