Direct Line: (416) 978-8426
Facsimile: (416) 978-8182
E-mail:
m.mckone@utoronto.ca

October 30, 2000
Via Registered Mail
Personal and Confidential
Dear Mr. C.:
At its hearing held on October 10, 2000, the Trial Division of the University Tribunal
considered the following charge against you:
1. That on or about August 12, 1997 you knowingly personated another
person at an academic examination contrary to section B.1.1. (c) of the
Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters.
The particulars of the charges are as follows:
2. On August 12, 1997, the final examination for ECO 200Y ((7S) was held.
3. You attended at that examination and presented yourself as Mr. T. P.
4. You wrote the final examination for ECO 200Y in Mr. P’s name and
under his student number.
I am writing to formally confirm that the panel found you guilty of the charge. The Panel
provided the following reasons for this decision.
Re:
Mr. P.
Firstly, I would like to deal with the various factors in the recorded case. We
consider the offences of which Mr. P. has been found guilty to be extremely
serious and warranting an extremely serious sanction. Had it not been for the
long period of time between the date of offence and the date of the trial we would
have considered expulsion, as recommended by the University. However, we feel
that there is evidence that in the intervening period, Mr. P. has made an effort to
substantially improve his academic performance. We have looked at submissions
made during the hearing, which indicate that Mr. P’s marks have increasingly
become better. We accepted evidence that he has tried harder and he has
obviously sought help and tried to deal with this. We also note that all four
charges surrounded a very short period of time. While they are different charges,
there were no previous convictions nor has there been any further misconduct to
indicate that Mr. P. is likely to commit this offence again. We believe that his

efforts to do better academically and to seek help are indicative of the positive
aspect of his character.
However, we felt that we should impose as strong a sanction possible short of
expulsion because it is important from the point of the University community as a
whole and a very detrimental effect to the University on the whole, students
engaging in this type of conduct.
Re:
Mr. C.
With respect to Mr. C. we do not find any extenuating circumstances at all. There
is no evidence that there was any, in fact, some of the evidence appears to be with
the difficulty in locating Mr. C. and this may be contributing to the delay and
having these matters brought to trial. As a result we recommend to the President
of the University the expulsion of Mr. C. and that there be publication with his
name withheld.
Yours sincerely,

Ms Margaret McKone
Acting Secretary
University Tribunal
cc:

J. Hannaford, Chair, Tribunal Panel
D. Cook, Vice-Provost
T. Costigan, Counsel for S. K.
L. Rothstein, Senior Discipline Counsel
B. Sessle, Dean, Faculty of Dentistry

