Report 378

DATE:

   July 3, 2015

PARTIES:

   Ms. V.O. (the Student) v. the University of Toronto at Mississauga
   (UTM)

Hearing Date(s):

   May 26, 2015

Committee Members:

   Ms. Emily Orchard, Chair
   Professor Elizabeth Smyth
   Ms. Susan Froom

Secretary:

   Mr. Christopher Lang, Director, Office of Appeals, Discipline and
   Faculty Grievances

Appearances:

For the Student Appellant:

   Ms. V.O., the Appellant (âthe Studentâ)

For UTM:

   Ms. Michelle Kraus, Office of the Registrar, Petitions, UTM
   Professor Kelly Hannah-Moffat, Vice-Dean Undergraduate, UTM

   Request to graduate with an Honours degree despite not meeting the
   degree requirement of a CGPA of at least 1.85. After a lengthy history
   of poor academic performance, the Student graduated with a Bachelor of
   Arts, and then enrolled in a graduate program. The Student appealed her
   ineligibility to earn an Honours degree to the Academic Appeals
   Subcommittee, which concluded that the Student did not have a
   compelling case to justify an exemption from University regulations.

   The Student then appealed to the Academic Appeals Committee. The
   Committee noted that the Office of the Registrar had informed the
   Student before graduating and at each stage of the appeal process that
   she could raise her CGPA to the requirements by enrolling in 2.0
   credits and attaining a final grade of 77 percent. The Student
   therefore had the ability to graduate with an Honours degree at any
   time she wished. The Committee took into account the contradiction
   between the Studentâs submissions that she did not want her failure to
   earn an Honours degree to affect her career and her simultaneous
   unwillingness to invest the time and effort to earn said degree. The
   Committee concluded that waiving the minimum threshold to be granted an
   Honours degree would be an extremely rare occurrence, and emphasized
   that hard work alone cannot be the basis upon which the Committee
   grants a petition to waive a fundamental degree requirement. Similarly,
   the Studentâs desire to move on with life and her preference to take
   more specialized courses did not justify granting the extraordinary
   relief. Appeal dismissed.
   [1]View Report

References

   1. file:///media/12624
