Case #799

   DATE: September 1, 2015
   PARTIES: University of Toronto v B.P.
   Hearing Date: August 6, 2015
   Panel Members:
   Jeffrey S. Leon, Chair
   Chris Koenig-Woodyard, Faculty Member
   Shan Arora, Student Member
   Appearances:
   Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel
   Kristi Gourlay, Manager and Academic Integrity Officer, Office of
   Student Academic Integrity, Faculty of Arts and Science
   Michael Pelz, Teaching Assistant of the Course
   Virginia Fletcher, Law Clerk, Paliare Roland Rosenberg Rothstein LLP
   In Attendance:
   Natalie Ramtahal, Coordinator, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty
   Grievances
   Trial Division â s. B.i.1(d) and s. B.i.1(f) of the Code â plagiarism
   and concoction â Student submitted a paper containing material from
   unattributed sources and used citations that were false or misleading â
   hearing not attended â reasonable notice of hearing provided as per
   provisions of the Code and the Statutory Powers Procedure Act â finding
   on evidence â finding on guilt â prior academic offence of plagiarism
   and use of concocted references â grade assignment of zero in the
   Course; 3-year suspension; the earlier of either a 4-year notation on
   the Studentâs academic record and transcript or a notation until his
   graduation; case reported to Provost for publication
   Student charged under s. B.i.1(d) , s. B.i.1(f) and, in the
   alternative, s. B.i.3(b) of the Code . The charges related to
   allegations that the Student knowingly represented the ideas of another
   as his own work and that the Student knowingly submitted academic work
   containing a purported statement of fact or reference to a source which
   had been concocted. The Student was not present for the hearing. The
   Panel concluded that the efforts made to contact the Student regarding
   the hearing via email and courier were reasonable and in accordance
   with the provisions of the Code and the Statutory Powers Procedure Act
   .
   In a meeting with the Deanâs Designate for Academic Integrity, the
   Student acknowledged that he had submitted a paper containing material
   from sources without appropriate acknowledgement and used citations
   that were false or misleading. In that meeting the Student also stated
   that he was experiencing some challenges related to managing his
   disabilities, but he was unable to provide relevant documentation of
   the disabilities or to explain how they would relate to committing the
   offences.
   Student was found guilty with respect to the charges of plagiarism and
   concoction. The University then withdrew the alternative charge of
   academic dishonesty not otherwise described. The Panel took into
   account the fact that the Student had a prior conviction for charges of
   plagiarism and the use of concocted references. The Panel also noted
   that the Student had changed selected words to synonyms, which is
   indicative of a deliberate attempt to avoid detection of plagiarism.
   The Panel imposed a grade assignment of zero in the Course; a 3-year
   suspension; the earlier of either a 4-year notation on the Studentâs
   academic record and transcript or a notation until his graduation from
   the University; and that the case be reported to the Provost for
   publication.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12908
