Report 422

DATE:

   September 19, 2022

PARTIES:

   M.N. ("the Student"). v. the School of Graduate Studies

HEARING DATE(S):

   June 9, 2022 via Zoom

COMMITTEE MEMBERS:

   Professor Hamish Stewart, Chair

   Professor Nhung Tran, Faculty Governor

   Evan Kanter, Student Governor

SECRETARY:

   Nadia Bruno, Special Projects Officer, Office of Appeals, Discipline
   and Faculty Grievances

APPEARANCES:

FOR THE STUDENT APPELLANT:

   The Student

FOR THE school of graduate studies

   Jodi Martin, Paliare Roland Rosenberg Rothstein LLP

   The Student appeals Graduate Academic Appeals Board (GAAB) decision to
   affirm the previous decisions of the Institute of Biomaterials and
   Biomedical Engineering (the Institute) and Graduate Department Academic
   Appeals Committee (GDAAC)to remove Professor Wheeler as the Studentâs
   doctoral dissertation supervisor.

   The Student enrolled in the Ph.D. program at the Institute in September
   2012, under the supervision of Professor Wheeler, and started working
   in Professor Wheelerâs lab. The Student suffered from a major medical
   condition and received a number of medical leaves as accommodations for
   this condition. From the Winter 2018 term onwards, the Student was on a
   medical leave of absence and anticipated returning at some point in
   2019. During the Studentâs medical leave, Professor Wheeler determined
   that he could not serve as the Studentâs supervisor any longer. The
   material the Committee reviewed indicated that Professor Wheelerâs
   decision had been made well before September 2019.

   In September 2019, Professor John Davies, the Instituteâs Associate
   Director of Graduate Programs, informed the Student via email that when
   he returned from medical leave, Professor Wheeler would no longer be
   his supervisor. The Institute offered the Student two options for
   completing his doctoral dissertation and Professor Davies also
   summarized the options in a letter. Under both options Professor Davies
   would have served as the Studentâs supervisor. The Student rejected
   both options and indicated he wanted to continue his doctoral
   researcher under Professor Wheelerâs supervision. The Student appealed
   to the GDAAC and was dismissed. The Student later appealed to the GAAB
   and was also dismissed.

   Before the Committee, the primary remedy the Student sought was an
   order allowing him to complete his Ph.D. under Professor Wheeler in
   Professor Wheelerâs lab, and in the alternative, an order requiring a
   new hearing at the GDAAC. The Studentâs written and oral submission
   were directed largely at persuading the Committee to order the
   Institute to require Professor Wheeler to continue supervising his
   research. The Studentâs submission argued that it was unreasonable for
   the Institute to determine that Professor Wheelerâs continued
   supervision was no longer possible. The Chair of the Committee is of
   the view that the Committee has no jurisdiction to make such an order
   and that even if did, the Committee would not order the remedy sought
   by the Student.

   The Student made five principal submissions to support his position,
   namely 1) An email dated August 2016 between the Student and Professor
   Wheeler constituted a contract requiring Professor Wheeler to be his
   supervisor; 2) He was only three months away from completing his
   dissertation; 3) Professor Wheeler would have been obliged to continue
   supervising the Student had he returned to Toronto as of May 2019; 4)
   The options offered were not feasible; and 5) Continued supervision by
   Professor Wheeler was required by the Universityâs obligation to
   accommodate the Studentâs disability.

   The Committee found that the email was not a binding commitment Â and
   did not render the Instituteâs decision unreasonable. The Committee
   also found that the Student was not three months away from completing
   his dissertation, but rather that three months were a prerequisite to
   the Studentâs progress towards completion, which would, according to
   the report, take at least ten months. The Committee found that there
   was no basis for the Student to submit that Professor Wheeler would
   have had to accept him back into the lab had he returned May 2019. The
   Committee noted that the question of what would have happened if the
   Student had returned in May 2019 was of marginal relevance. The
   Committee found that assessing the feasibility of the options offered
   to the Student required, along with other elements, expertise in
   biomechanical engineer which the GDAAC had but the Committee did not.
   The Committee deferred to the GDAACâs assessment that the options were
   feasible. Lastly, the Committee found the Institute was within the
   Human Rights Code as it provided the Student with extensive
   accommodations and despite these accommodations, the Student was unable
   to function effectively in Professor Wheelerâs lab.

   In the alternative, the Student submitted that the GDAAC process was
   flawed and that the Committee should have ordered a new hearing. The
   Committee rejected this submission and adopted the reasons of the GAAB
   for doing so. The Committee agreed with the GAAB that the procedural
   flaws the Student raised were not so significant as to provide grounds
   to invalidate the decision and that any negative impact of a delay in
   decision was mitigated by the extension the Student was provided for
   submitting his appeal to the GAAB. The Committee added that the absence
   of the student member for the GDAAC meeting was not a procedural flaw
   as there was no requirement for the student member to be present.

   The appeal was dismissed.
   [1]View Report

References

   1. file:///media/30675
