Case 766

   DATE:Â June 16, 2015
   PARTIES: U niversity of Toronto v. F.A.

   Panel Members:
   Ms. Sarah Kraicer, Chair
   Professor Michael Evans, Faculty Panel Member
   Ms. Lucy Chau, Student Panel Member

   Appearances:
   Ms. Tina Lie, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland, Barristers
   Dr. Robin Marushia, Instructor for BIOA02H3: Life on Earth: Form,
   Function and Interactions, University of Toronto Scarborough

   In Attendance:
   Professor Wayne Dowler, Deanâs Designate, University of Toronto
   Scarborough
   Ms. Natalie Ramtahal, Coordinator, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty
   Grievances

   Not in Attendance: The Student

   Trial Division â s. B.i.1(d) of Code â plagiarism â Student knowingly
   represented the ideas or expressions of another as her own in a formal
   lab report submitted for academic credit âStudent did not attend
   hearing â reasonable notice of hearing provided â finding of guilt â no
   mitigating factors â no engagement in the discipline process â Tribunal
   sanctions should be reviewed for consistency with other Tribunal
   sanctions but not with divisional level sanctions â University not
   required to show how Student committed offence (whether Student
   plagiarized work of other student or vice versa); in either case,
   offence is committed and same sanctions apply - sanction for plagiarism
   must serve as effective deterrent - grade of zero; two year suspension
   from date of order; corresponding notation on Studentâs academic record
   and transcript for three year period from date of order; and
   publication by Provost of notice of decision and sanctions with the
   Studentâs name withheld.

   The Student was charged with one count of academic misconduct under the
   Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters, 1995 (the â Code â) on the basis
   that she knowingly committed plagiarism in submitting a formal lab
   report for academic credit containing the ideas or the expressions of
   another as her own work. Specifically, the Student was charged with
   plagiarism under s. B.i.1(d) of the Code . In the alternative, the
   Student was charged with obtaining unauthorized assistance in
   connection with the formal lab report under section B.i.1(b) of the
   Code and with academic dishonesty under s. B.i.3(b) of the Code .

   Neither the Student nor a legal representative of the Student appeared
   at the hearing. The Panel noted that the onus of proof is on the
   University under the Statutory Powers Procedure Act (the â Actâ ) and
   the University Tribunal Rules of Practice and Procedure (the â Rulesâ )
   to establish that it provided the Student with reasonable notice of the
   hearing. The Panel heard evidence of the efforts made by the University
   to serve the Student with notice. It noted that the University provided
   notice to the Student by both courier and email to the Studentâs ROSI
   mailing address and email account respectively. The Panel also noted
   the numerous efforts to communicate with the Student by email and by
   phone at the number provided by the Student. The Panel noted in
   particular that the University spoke by telephone to a person
   identifying herself as the Studentâs mother who informed the University
   that she (the mother) had provided the Student with notice of the
   hearing. In addition, none of the emails sent to the Student bounced
   back and none of the courier packages were returned. No response was
   received from the Student. The Panel was satisfied that the totality of
   attempts made to provide notice to the Student demonstrated that notice
   had been adequately provided to the Student in accordance with the
   requirements of the Act and the Rules . As such, the Panel decided to
   proceed with the hearing in the Studentâs absence.

   The Panel noted the evidence of the coordinator of the course in which
   the Student was enrolled, who had responsibility for oversight of the
   course including marks management. The lab report submitted by the
   Student in this case was submitted via the website Turnitin.com
   (âTurnitinâ), which is used for the detection of possible plagiarism.
   Turnitin in this case indicated a âsimilarity indexâ of 68% between the
   report submitted by the Student and a report submitted by another
   student in the same course. As a result, the course coordinator
   examined the two reports and determined that there were significant
   similarities between the two. This was despite the fact that the two
   students were in different groups and not working from the same data
   set. The Panel noted that three of the five written pages of the
   Studentâs report contained the identical verbatim text as that in the
   other studentâs report and that the remaining two pages contained
   approximately 50% of the same text. The course coordinator twice
   requested a meeting with the Student to discuss the report but received
   no response.

   The Panel stated that the onus was on the University to establish on
   clear and convincing evidence on a standard of probabilities that the
   academic offence charged had been committed. It agreed with the
   Universityâs submission that it was not required to show how the
   Student committed the offence (whether she plagiarized the work of the
   other student or assisted the other student in plagiarizing her work);
   in either case, the offence was committed and the same sanctions apply.
   The Tribunal determined that the evidence was cogent and compelling and
   established that the report submitted by the Student contained ideas or
   expressions of ideas that were not her own. The Tribunal found the
   Student guilty of plagiarism, contrary to s. B.i.1(d) of the Code . The
   remaining charges were withdrawn by the University.

   In determining the appropriate sanction, the Panel noted the principles
   set out in University of Toronto v Mr. C (Case No. 1976/77-3; November
   5, 1976) and noted the importance of consistency in the approach of the
   Tribunal to sanctions. Although the Tribunal did not consider itself
   bound by the âgeneral standardâ argued for by the University of a
   two-year suspension in first cases of plagiarism, it did consider the
   sanctions proposed by the University to be appropriate and reasonable
   in the circumstances of this case. While there was limited evidence
   that the Student had received a zero grade on a lab report previously
   in a different course, the Tribunal accepted the Universityâs
   clarification that this case was considered to be a first offence. In
   this case, the Student did not respond to any communications from the
   University on this issue, did not attend the hearing and as a result,
   there were no mitigating circumstances for consideration. The Tribunal
   noted the seriousness of the offence of plagiarism, stating that this
   offence strikes at the heart of the integrity of academic work and
   undermines the essential relationship of trust, learning and teaching
   between all students and the University. The Tribunal stated that the
   grave threat that plagiarism poses to the core of academic integrity
   warrants a strong penalty and must serve as an effective deterrent. The
   seriousness in this case was somewhat lessened by the fact that the
   mark value of the plagiarized assignment was worth only 8% of the total
   course work.

   The Tribunal did not consider the lighter sanction administered to the
   other student at divisional level for his similar plagiarism to be a
   relevant factor in determining the sanction for the Student in the
   instant case. It noted that the Student in this case failed to
   participate at any stage of the process. The Tribunal also stated that
   Tribunal sanctions should be reviewed for consistency with other
   Tribunal sanctions, and not with divisional level sanctions. The
   Tribunal imposed the following sanctions: a final grade of zero; a
   suspension from the University for a period of two years from the date
   of the order in this case, ending on April 12, 2017; and a notation of
   the sanction on the Studentâs academic record and transcript from the
   date of the order, ending on April 12, 2018. The Tribunal also ordered
   that the case be reported to the Provost for publication of a notice of
   the decision and the sanctions imposed, with the name of the Student
   withheld.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12875
