UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO

IN THE MATTER OF charges of academic dishonesty made on May 23, 2014,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic
Matters, 1995,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Act, 1971, S.O. 1971, c. 56 as
amended S.O. 1978, c. 88

BETWEEN:
UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO

- and -

F-4IIII
REASONS FOR DECISION

Hearing Date: April 13, 2015

Members of the Panel:
Ms. Sarah Kraicer, Lawyer, Chair
Professor Michael Evans, Department of Statistics, Faculty Panel Member
Ms. Lucy Chau, Student Panel Member
Appearances:
Ms. Tina Lie, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland, Barristers
Dr. Robin Marushia, Instructor for BIOA02H3: Life on Earth: Form, Function and
Interactions, University of Toronto Scarborough

In Attendance:
Professor Wayne Dowler, Dean's Designate, University of Toronto Scarborough
Ms. Natalie Ramtahal, Coordinator, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances
Not in Attendance:
Ms. ~ . the Student

2

1.

The Trial Division of the University Tribunal was convened on April 13, 2015 to
consider charges brought by the University of Toronto ("the University") against
Ms. ~ ("the Student") under the University of Toronto Code of
Behaviour on Academic Matters, 1995 ("the Code").

Preliminary Issue: Proceeding in the Absence of the Student
2.

The Tribunal waited 10 minutes after the scheduled time to begin the proceeding.
Neither the Student nor a representative of the Student appeared.

3.

Pursuant to sections 6 and 7 of the Statutory Powers Procedure Act ("the Act"),
and Rule 17 of the University Tribunal Rules of Practice and Procedure ("the
Rules"), where reasonable notice of an oral hearing has been given to a party in
accordance with the Act and the party does not attend at the hearing, the
Tribunal may proceed in the absence of the party and the party is not entitled to
any further notice in the proceeding. The University requested that the Tribunal
proceed with this hearing.

4.

A notice of hearing may be served on a student by personal service, "by sending
a copy of the document by courier to the student's mailing address contained in
ROSI" [Repository of Student Information], "by emailing a copy of the document
to the student's email address contained in ROSI" or "by other means authorized
under the University's Policy on Official Correspondence with Students" (the
"Policy") (Rules 9 (b)(c) and (d).

5.

The Policy states that Students are responsible for maintaining on ROSI a
current and valid postal address and a University-issued email account. Students
are expected to monitor and retrieve their mail, including electronic messaging
accounts issued to them by the University, on a frequent and consistent basis.

6.

The onus of proof is on the University under the Act and the Rules to establish
that it provided the Student with reasonable notice of the hearing in accordance
with these provisions.

7.

The University filed evidence from Natalie Ramtahal, Coordinator, Appeals,
Discipline and Faculty Grievances, with the Office of the Governing Council of
the University, and from Janice Patterson, legal assistant at Paliare Roland
Rosenberg Rothstein, counsel to the University, relating to the efforts that were
made by the University to provide notice of this hearing to the Student.

3

8.

As set out in more detail below, the University and counsel for the University
provided notice to the Student by courier and email. In addition, the University
made numerous attempts to communicate with the Student about this proceeding
by email and phone, and spoke to a person who identified herself as the
Student's mother, and who advised that she had provided the notice of hearing to
the Student. The Student did not respond to any of these communications. The
Tribunal is, however, satisfied, on reviewing the evidence outlined below, that the
Student received reasonable notice of this hearing.

9.

On May 23, 2014, a copy of the Charges in this proceeding were emailed to the
Student at her ROSI email address. On July 22, 2014, a second copy of the
Charges and disclosure material were emailed to the Student's ROSI email
address and couriered to the Student's ROSI mailing address.

10. Both Ms. Lie and Ms. Patterson made several attempts between June 2014 and
March 2015 to contact the Student by email at her ROSI address and by
telephone at the number provided by the Student as her "business number". Two
of these calls were answered by a woman who advised that the Student now had
a different number, and (on the second call) that she had informed the Student
about the first call. The Student did not respond to these calls or emails.
11. In an email dated March 9, 2015 sent to the ROSI email address, counsel for the
University advised the Student that as she had not heard from her, that the
hearing would be scheduled on Monday April 13, 5:45 p.m., and that a Notice of
Hearing would be sent to the Student.
12. On March 18, 2015, the University served a copy of the Charges and Notice of
Hearing for a hearing scheduled for Monday April 13, 2015 at 5:45 p.m. by email
and courier to the Student's email and mailing addresses contained in ROSI. The
courier package was accepted by "J. Ali" on March 19, 2015.
13. On April 10, 2015, Ms. Patterson again called the Student's phone number listed
in ROSI and the woman who answered identified herself as the Student's
mother. The Student's mother indicated that she (the mother) had seen the
Notice of Hearing, was aware that there was a University of Toronto hearing
scheduled for Monday, April 13, 2015 and asked if she could attend the hearing.
She also advised that she had provi,ded the Student with the Notice of Hearing,
but did not know if the Student would be attending the hearing. She provided a
different phone number for the Student.

4

14. On April 10, 2015, Ms. Patterson left a voicemail message at the phone number
provided by the Student's mother, reminding her of the scheduled hearing date
and time and leaving contact information.
15. The Tribunal has considered the evidence before it and the submissions of
counsel for the University and has concluded that the Student has been given
reasonable notice of the hearing in compliance with the notice requirements of
the Act and the Rules. The content of the Notice of Hearing complies with the
requirements of the Act and the Rules. The Notice of Hearing was sent to the
Student via email and via courier to the addresses listed in ROSI, in compliance
with the Rules and Policy on Official correspondence. In addition, the University
spoke to a person who identified herself as the Student's mother and who
informed the University that she had provided the Student with the Notice of
Hearing, so it is likely that the Student has actually received the Notice of
Hearing. The University also made numerous attempts to communicate with the
Student and left messages via telephone, email and courier with information
about the allegations, the charges and the scheduling of hearing. None of the
emails ever "bounced back" and none of the courier packages were returned.
Despite these efforts by the University, no response was ever received from the
Student.
16. The University has proven that it provided reasonable notice of the hearing to the
Student. The Tribunal therefore determined that it would proceed to hear the
case on its merits.

The Charges and Particulars:
17.

The Charges and Particulars are as follows:
1.

On or about April 1, 2013, you knowingly represented the ideas or the
expressions of the ideas of another as your own work in the formal lab
report that you submitted in BIOA02H3 (Life on Earth: Form, Function and
Interactions) (the "Course"), contrary to section B.1.1 (d) of the Code.

2.

In the alternative, on or about April 1, 2013, you knowingly obtained
unauthorized assistance in connection with the formal lab report that you
su9mitted in the Course, contrary to section B.1.1 (b) of the Code.

3.

In the further alternative, on or about April 1, 2013, you knowingly
engaged in a form of cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud
or misrepresentation not otherwise described in the Code in order to

5

obtain academic credit or other academic advantage of any kind in
connection with the formal lab report that you submitted in the Course,
contrary to section B.l.3(b) of the Code.

Particulars of the offences charged are as follows:

1.

At all material times you were a student at the University of Toronto
Scarborough.

2.

In Winter 2013, you enrolled in the Course. The Course/Lab Coordinator
for the Course was Dr. Robin Marushia.

3.

On April 1, 2013, you submitted a formal lab report (the "Lab Report") in
the Course, which was worth 8% of your final grade in the Course.

4.

You were required to complete and submit the Lab Report on your own,
without collaborating with any other students in the Course.

5.

You submitted the Lab Report:
(a)

to obtain academic credit;

(b)

knowing that it contained verbatim or nearly verbatim passages
from other sources, including from the Lab Reports submitted by
other students in the Course; and

(c)

knowing that it contained ideas or expressions of ideas which were
not your own, but were the ideas or expressions of ideas of others.

6.

You knowingly obtained unauthorized assistance in connection with the
Lab Report, including from other students in the Course.

7.

You knowingly submitted the Lab Report with the intention that the
University of Toronto Scarborough rely on it as containing your own ideas
or work in considering the appropriate academic credit to be assigned to
your work.

6

18.

At the outset of its submissions, counsel for the University stated that if the
Tribunal were to find the Student guilty of Charge 1, it would withdraw Charges 2
and 3.

The Evidence
19.

The Tribunal heard the evidence of Dr. Robin Marushia, Instructor, University of
Toronto Scarborough. Dr. Marushia was the Course Coordinator for BIO A02S in
the Winter 2013 session, in which the Student was enrolled. The Course
Coordinator is responsible for oversight of the course as a whole including
enrolment and marks management.

20.

The charges against the Student relate to the formal lab report assignment she
submitted worth 8% of the total course mark. Students worked in groups to
gather and compile data for the reports, and therefore all students in the group
were expected to employ the same data set. All students were, however,
required to analyze the data and write the lab report on their own.

21.

The Syllabus for BIO A02S that was provided to all enrolled students stated that
the course "would be using the website "turnitin.com" ("Turnitin") for the
submission of assignments (e.g. formal lab reports). The syllabus referred to the
University policy for Turnitin, which indicated it was used "for a review of textual
similarity and detection of possible plagiarism". The Syllabus also included
information on academic integrity, and stated that academic offences for in-term
work such as for reports included using someone else's ideas or words without
appropriate acknowledgement, and obtaining or providing unauthorized
assistance on any assignment.

22.

The Student submitted a 5 page Lab Report dated April 1, 2013 entitled 'The
Effect on Growth and Development Using Various Nutrients". The Turnitin
Originality Report indicated a "similarity index" of 68% for the Student's Lab
Report to a lab report entitled "Examining the effect of nutrients on plant
morphology" submitted by O.S., another student in the same course. Dr.
Marushia stated while in general she examines every paper that has a higher
than 30% match rate, for this assignment she used 50-60% cutoff because
students were writing on the same topic with the same data set.

23.

Alerted to the high similarity index for the Student's lab report on Turnitin, Dr.
Marushia examined the Student's report and compared it to that of O.S. and
determined that there were significant similarities between the two, despite the

7

fact that the two students were in different groups and therefore not sharing the
same data set. The evidence before the Tribunal indicates that approximately
50% of the text in first three sections of the Student's report (Abstract,
Introduction, Materials and Methods) is identical to the text in O.S.'s lab report.
Approximately 90% of the text in the Results section is identical to the results
section of O.S's lab report. The entire Discussion section in the Student's report
is identical to the discussion section in O.S.'s lab report. In summary, three of
the five written pages of the Student's report have the identical verbatim text as
that in O.S.'s report, while the remaining two pages share about 50% of the same
text.
24.

On April 8, 2013 and on April 22, 2013 Dr. Marushia emailed the Student to
request a meeting to discuss her lab report which had been "flagged for
plagiarism". The April 22 email further indicated that if no response was
received, the assignment would be submitted to the department chair and
possibly the office of Academic Integrity. Dr. Marushia received no response from
the Student.

25.

Dr. Marushia testified that she had occasion to speak to the Student the previous
term in connection with BIO A01 when the student's formal Lab Report in that
earlier course was also flagged by Turnitin with a high similarity index to a lab
report that had been submitted by another student in a previous year. The
Student received a zero on that report in BIO A01. The University led no further
evidence about this incident, and, as set out below, does not rely on it as a prior
offence. The Tribunal has therefore not considered this prior incident in its
determination of the Charges.

26.

Dr. Marushia stated that she met with the student O.S. about his lab report, and
that he was given a grade of 0% for that assignment in the course at the
divisional discipline level.

Decision of the Tribunal on the Charges
27.

The onus is on the University to establish on clear and convincing evidence on a
standard of probabilities that the academic offence charged has been committed.
The Student is charged under Charge 1 with knowingly representing the ideas or
the expressions of the ideas of another as her own work. The Code provides that
"knowingly" includes where a person ought reasonably to have known. The
University submits that it is not required to show how the student committed the
offence. Whether she plagiarized the work of O.S., or assisted O.S. in

8

plagiarizing her work and therefore was a party to the offence under section
B.ii.((a)(b) the offence is committed and the same sanctions apply. The Tribunal
agrees.
28.

The Tribunal is of the view that the evidence establishes that the Student
knowingly represented the ideas or expression of ideas of another as her own
work in her formal Lab Report. The extent of the duplication between her Report
and that of O.S. can only be the result of extensive copying of the ideas and
expression of ideas of the other student. She was advised that such
collaboration was not permitted in this assignment, and that the assignment
would be subject to review for plagiarism by Turnitin and by the course
instructors. The evidence establishing the offence is cogent and compelling and
has met the University's burden of proof with respect to Charge 1.

29.

The Tribunal finds that the Student is guilty of Charge 1.

30.

Charges 2 and 3 were withdrawn by the University.

Decision of the Tribunal on Penalty
31.

The University sought the following sanctions:
(a)

a final grade of zero in the course BIOA02H3;

(b)

a suspension from the University of Toronto from the date of this order for
a period of two years, ending April 12, 2017;

(c)

a notation of the sanction on her academic record and transcript from the
date of this order for a period of three years, ending on April 12, 2018;
and,

(d)

that this case be reported to the Provost for publication of a notice of the
decision of the Tribunal and the sanction imposed, with Ms. ~ · s
name withheld.

32.

The University did not lead any additional evidence with respect to the sanction.

33.

The Tribunal has considered the principles and factors relevant to sanction set
out in University of Toronto and Mr. C (Case No. 1976/77-3; November 5, 1976).
The determination of an appropriate penalty in every case by the Tribunal will

9

34.

depend on an assessment of these principles and factors in the individual
circumstances of the case. At the same time, it is important that there is general
consistency in the approach of Tribunals to sanction, so that students are treated
fairly and equitably. (Discipline Appeal Board, University of Toronto v. D.S ,Case
No. 451; August 24, 2007).
The University has presented a number of cases to support their argument that
there is a "general standard" for a two year suspension for a first offence of
plagiarism. The Tribunal does not consider itself bound by any such general
standard, and notes that in D.S., the Discipline Appeal Board observed at para
49 that "students who are first time offenders committing one act of plagiarism,
generally have received sanctions in a range of one to two years". However, for
the reasons set out below, and based on a consideration of all of the relevant
principles and factors, the Tribunal considers the sanctions proposed by the
University, including a two year suspension, to be appropriate and reasonable in
the circumstances of this case.

35.

The Student has not participated at any stage of the discipline process and has
not responded to any communications from the Instructor, Registrar, Dean's
Office or counsel to the University regarding these issues and allegations of
misconduct. There is accordingly no evidence before us of mitigating or
extenuating circumstances, good character, remorse or insight.

36.

On the other hand, while there was some limited evidence that she had received
a zero on a lab report in a different course in the previous term, the University
clarified that it considered this to be a first offence and that the Tribunal should
not consider that the Student had been subject to formal discipline or that she
had received a clear warning about future behavior. The Tribunal therefore is of
the view that the evidence does not disclose a pattern of conduct that would
suggest that she will repeat the offence.

37.

As to the nature of the offence, plagiarism is a very serious offence that strikes at
the heart of academic integrity at the University and that undermines the
essential relationship of trust, learning and teaching between all students and the
University. The grave threat that plagiarism poses to the core of academic
integrity warrants a strong penalty. In addition, the sanction must serve as an
effective general deterrent to others, as plagiarism is an ongoing and significant
issue for the University.

38.

The extent of the plagiarism here was significant, as the majority of the Student's
lab report was plagiarized work. The seriousness is somewhat lessened by the

10

fact that the mark value of the plagiarized assignment was only 8% of the total
course work.
39.

We do not consider the much lighter sanction administered to O.S. at the
divisional level for his similar plagiarism to be a relevant factor in our
determination of sanction. Unlike the Student, O.S .agreed to meet with
University officials and chose to avail himself of this informal process to resolve
his misconduct. Procedures and sanctions are different at the divisional stage in
order to promote early resolution, and such sanctions can only be imposed
where a student admits misconduct. While a student should not be penalized for
not admitting misconduct at the decanal level, a failure to participate at any stage
of the process means that the Tribunal has no evidence of remorse, assumption
of responsibility, or other mitigating factors. (See University of Toronto v. J.H. C.
(Case No. 741; February 4, 2014, para 10). Decanal level sanctions are not
comparable to tribunal sanctions. Tribunal sanctions should be reviewed for
consistency with other Tribunal sanctions, and not with divisional level sanctions
(Discipline Appeal Board, University of Toronto v. D.S., Case No. 451; August
24, 2007, at para 43).

40.

Our review of the Tribunal cases presented to us indicate that a two year period
of suspension would be generally consistent with the sanctions administered to
other students in similar circumstances. In particular, in University of Toronto v.
H-S. M (Case No. 788; February 18, 2015) and in University of Toronto v. J.H.C.
(2014 ), the Tribunal ordered a two year suspension for a first offence of
plagiarism where the students had also failed to participate at all in the discipline
process.

41.

In all of the circumstances, and with regard to the factors identified in the C.
case, the Tribunal is satisfied that the University's proposed sanctions are fair
and appropriate.

Order of the Tribunal

40.

The Tribunal issued the following Order on April 13, 2015:
THAT Ms. ~ is guilty of one count of knowingly representing an idea or
expression of an idea or work of another as her own, contrary to section 8.1.1.(d)
of the Code;
THAT the following sanctions shall be imposed on M s . ~ :

11

(a)

a final grade of zero in the course;

(b)

a suspension from the University of Toronto from the date of this order for
a period of two years, ending on April 12, 2017; and

(c)

a notation of the sanction on her academic record and transcript from the
date of this order for a period of years, ending on April 12, 2018; and,

THAT this case be reported to the Provost for publication of a notice of the
decision of the Tribunal and the sanction imposed, with Ms. ~
·s name
withheld.

Dated at Toronto this / bday of June, 2015

Ms.S~

