UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
GOVERNING COUNCIL
REPORT NUMBER 278 OF THE ACADEMIC APPEALS COMMITTEE

March 14, 2003
To the Academic Board,
University of Toronto
Your Committee reports that it held a hearing on March 14, 2003, at which the following
were present:
Assistant Dean Jane Kidner, Chair
Professor John Furedy
Professor Ellen Hodnett
Professor John Wedge
Mr. Josh Paterson
Secretary: Mr. Paul Holmes, Judicial Affairs Officer
The following were in attendance:
For the Appellant:
Ms. S.D., the Appellant (“the Student”)

For the University of Toronto at Mississauga:
Professor Gordon Anderson
This is an appeal from the decision of the Academic Appeals Board of the University of
Toronto at Mississauga (UTM) dated March 23, 2001, denying an appeal from the
decision of the Committee on Standing dated December 11, 2000. The latter decision
denied a petition by the Student for late withdrawal from PHL273H5 without academic
penalty.
Background:
The Student enrolled in the Faculty of Arts and Science at UTM in the Fall of 1991.
From 1991 to 2000, the Student enrolled in number of courses at UTM, and during that
time was placed on academic probation for poor academic performance several times,
and was placed on suspension on more than one occasion. The Student was also granted
late withdrawal from nine courses during that time. In 2001 the Student’s cumulative

Report Number 278 of the Academic Appeals Committee
GPA dropped to 1.34, and as a result the Student was refused further registration at the
university. If she is successful in this appeal, such that the grade of F in PHL273H5 is
removed from her transcript, the Student will be permitted to continue at the university
and attempt to complete her degree.
The Facts:
In the Fall of 2000 the student enrolled in two half courses including PHL273H5. The
last date for dropping this course without academic penalty was November 5, 2000.
In late September 2000 the Student’s father suffered a serious heart attack and was
admitted to hospital. The Student left school immediately and returned to New
Brunswick where her parents lived and where her father was in the hospital. The Student
stayed in New Brunswick for one month to be with her father and assist her mother while
her father was recovering. During her month absence from school, it was the Student’s
intention to keep up with her schoolwork and to resume her classes when she was able to
return to school. The Student arranged with her professors to have her assignments sent
to her by e-mail.
The Student returned to UTM in late October 2000. At that time she was well behind in
her schoolwork having been away from classes for a month. The Student testified that
she decided to drop PHL273H5, and continue on with her second half course, which she
ultimately passed. The Student admitted that she was not aware of the precise date for
dropping a course without academic penalty.
On November 5, 2000 the Student logged onto the student web service of ROSI at
approximately 5:30 pm. The Student testified that her intention was to drop PHL273H5,
but that her attempt to drop the course was denied as a result of a system failure. The
Student testified that the electronic message she received was “access denied – see the
Registrar”. The Student testified that she made one or two more attempts that evening to
log onto ROSI to drop PHL273H5, but all attempts were similarly denied. The Student
was not able to recall the precise time of subsequent attempts. The Student testified that
as a result of being denied access to ROSI on November 5th, she assumed incorrectly that
she had missed the course drop date. Nevertheless, the Student testified that she also
attempted to drop PHL273H5 on the evening of November 5th using the student
telephone service of ROSI, but was not able to do so because the lines were consistently
busy.
On the following day, November 6, 2000, the Student attended the Registrar’s office in
person in order to drop PHL273H5, and was told by the Registrar that she had to file a
petition to drop the course, which she did do.
According to Professor Anderson’s testimony, UTM’s system records confirm that the
Student did in fact log onto ROSI at approximately 5:30 pm on November 5, 2000 and
again a few minutes later, but that the Student took no further action and made no
“transactions”. Professor Anderson further testified that he was not aware of any existing

- Page 2 of 4 -

Report Number 278 of the Academic Appeals Committee
problems with the server on November 5th that would have prevented the Student from
accessing the system to the drop a course. However, Professor Anderson did not provide
the Committee with any documentation in support of his case. Further, Professor
Anderson was unable to tell the Committee whether the deadline for course withdrawal
on November 5th was 5:00 pm (the time that the Registrar’s office closes) or 12:00 am
(midnight). Therefore the Committee had no evidence before it to explain why the
Student may have been denied access to ROSI to drop PHL273H5 on November 5th other
than a system failure.
Decision:
It is clear from previous decisions of your Committee that permission for late withdrawal
without academic penalty will only be granted in exceptional circumstances. In this case
the Committee had only a minimal amount of evidence on which to base its decision.
The Student provided medical records showing that her father had suffered a serious
heart attack. She also provided copies of e-mails with her professor showing that it had
been her original intention to try to keep up with her schoolwork while she was away for
the month. The student’s oral testimony was that she attempted to drop the course on
November 5th (the deadline for course withdrawal) using ROSI. Her oral testimony was
supported (in part) by the oral testimony of Professor Anderson who agreed that ROSI
records confirmed the student had logged onto the system the evening of November 5th.
Documentation filed by UTM in support of its case amounted to one typewritten page
setting out the decision of the Academic Appeals Committee of UTM. No further
evidence was provided by UTM to support its case. In particular, UTM failed to provide
any evidence in support of its position that while the Student may have logged onto ROSI
on November 5th, she did not do so in an attempt to drop the course. In particular, UTM
failed to provide ROSI records for November 5th which would have shown the following:
whether the system was operational that evening, how many times and at what time of
day the Student made attempts to log onto ROSI, what electronic message the Student
received, and what the precise deadline was for dropping a course (5:00 pm or 12:00
midnight).
The Committee finds that where the Student’s academic record and career are at stake,
there is an onus upon the university to provide evidence in support of its case, particularly
where the very issue to be decided is whether or not the university’s own system to allow
students to drop a course had failed. It would not be fair to penalize a student as a result
of the failure of the university’s computer system.
In the absence of documentation from UTM in support of its case, the Committee
accepts the Student’s testimony that she made several attempts to drop the course on
November 5, 2000, but was prevented from doing so because of a system failure. Given
her attempts, the Committee finds that the Student demonstrated due diligence in
attempting to withdraw from the course within the deadline for course withdrawal.

- Page 3 of 4 -

Report Number 278 of the Academic Appeals Committee
The appeal is allowed.

April 15, 2003

Paul Holmes
Secretary

Jane Kidner
Chair

Docs Open # 25924 v.5
Public Copy

- Page 4 of 4 -

