Report #278

   DATE: April 15, 2003
   PARTIES: Ms. S.D. (âthe Studentâ) v. UTM
   Hearing Date(s): March 14, 2003
   Committee Members:
   Assistant Dean Jane Kidner, Chair
   Professor John Furedy
   Professor Ellen Hodnett
   Professor John Wedge
   Mr. Josh Paterson
   Secretary:
   Mr. Paul Holmes, Judicial Affairs Officer
   In Attendance:
   For the Appellant:
   Ms. S.D., âthe Studentâ
   For UTM:
   Professor Gordon Anderson
   UTM â late withdrawal without academic penalty â attempts to drop
   course on ROSI denied as a result of system failure â Faculty failed to
   provide ROSI records in support of its case â onus on the University to
   provide evidence in support of its case when Studentâs academic record
   and career are atÂ  stake â due diligence demonstrated by Student â
   appeal allowed â the grade of âFâ in the course to be vacated and
   replaced with WDR
   Request for late withdrawal without academic penalty from one course.
   The Student failed the course and was subsequently refused further
   registration. The Student claimed that she fell behind in her course
   work due to her fatherâs illness. She claimed that it was her intention
   to drop the course, but that her repeated attempts to so using the
   student web service of ROSI were denied as a result of a system
   failure. The Student claimed that the electronic message she received
   was âaccess denied â see the Registrarâ. The Student also attempted to
   drop the course using the student telephone service of ROSI, but was
   unable to do so because the lines were consistently busy. The Committee
   found that the Faculty failed to provide evidence in support of its
   position that while the Student may have logged onto ROSI on the date
   in question, she did not do so in an attempt to drop the course. In
   particular, the Faculty failed to provide ROSI records which would have
   shown whether the system was operational at the time in question, how
   many times and at what time of day the Student made attempts to log
   onto ROSI, what electronic message the Student received, and what the
   precise deadline was for dropping a course. The Committee found that
   where the Studentâs academic record and career are at stake, the onus
   is on the University to provide evidence in support of its case. The
   Committee found that the Student demonstrated due diligence in
   attempting to withdraw from the course within the deadline for course
   withdrawal. Appeal allowed. The Committee ordered that the grade in the
   course be vacated and replaced with the nonâgrade report WDR.
   [1]View Report

References

   1. file:///media/12650
