Case 1011

DATE:

   October 7, 2019

PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v. H.A. ("the Student")

HEARING DATE:

   July 8, 2019

Panel Members:

   Ms. Johanna Braden, Chair
   Professor Julian Lowman, Faculty Member
   Ms. Natasha Brien, Student Member

Appearances:

   Mr. Robert A. Centa, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland
   Rosenberg Rothstein LLP

In Attendance:

   Ms. Jennifer Dent, Associate Director, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty
   Grievances

Not in Attendance:

   The Student

   The Student was charged withÂ twoÂ countsÂ of academic misconduct under
   s. B.i.3(a) of theÂ Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters,
   1995Â (theÂ âCodeâ) on the basis that he knowinglyÂ falsified,
   circulated or made use ofÂ twoÂ forged academic records,
   namely,Â documents purporting to be Confirmation of Enrolment letters
   from the University dated June 23, 2017 and September 6,
   2017,Â respectively.

   Neither the Student nor a legal representative of the Student appeared
   at the hearing.Â The Panel noted that theÂ Policy on Official
   Correspondence with StudentsÂ makes it clear that a student is
   responsible for maintaining a current and valid University-issued email
   account. Students are also expected to monitor and retrieve their email
   on a frequent and consistent basis.Â The University provided evidence
   that the Student had been served at his ROSI-listed email address with
   theÂ chargesÂ and notice of hearing. The Student was subsequently
   served withÂ a revised notice of hearing changing the name of the
   Chair; and a second revised notice of hearing, changing the location of
   the hearing.Â Neither of the revised notices changed the date or time
   of the hearing.Â The Panel noted that there was evidence that the
   Student had accessed his email account after service of theÂ charges
   and theÂ original notice of hearing which notified him of the date and
   time of the hearing.Â Taking into considerationÂ rulesÂ 9, 14Â andÂ 17
   of theÂ RulesÂ of Practice and ProcedureÂ of the University Tribunal
   coupled together with sectionsÂ 6Â andÂ 7 of theÂ Statutory Powers and
   Procedures Act, the Panel found the Student had been given reasonable
   notice of the hearing and ordered the hearing to proceed to be heard on
   its merits in the absence of the Student.

   The Student was registered at the University from Fall 2015 to
   Fall-Winter 2016-2017.Â A Risk Assessment Officer at Immigration,
   Refugees and Citizenship Canada (âICRCCâ) received two letters from the
   Student in support of the Studentâs application for a study permit
   replacement.Â The two letters sent by the Student to ICRCC purported to
   be Confirmation of Enrolment letters from the University, but
   wereÂ forgeries.Â Â The two letters were clearly forgedÂ or
   alteredÂ and were notÂ genuine letters from the University. There was
   no direct evidence that the Student forged or altered them himself; the
   only evidence was the letters sent to ICRCC and then to the University
   for authentication. The Tribunal foundÂ it more likely than not that
   the Student, at the very least, circulated and made use of two
   falsified Confirmation of Enrolment letters so that he could
   fraudulently obtain a study permit replacement allowing him to remain
   in Canada.

   The Tribunal was satisfied that the two forgedÂ Confirmation of
   EnrolmentÂ letters were âacademic recordsâ for the purposes of
   theÂ Code.Â The Tribunal noted that the definition of âacademic recordâ
   contained in the Code includes âany other record or document of the
   University ... used, submitted or to be submitted for the purposes of
   the University.âÂ AlthoughÂ the Panel noted thatÂ Confirmation of
   Enrolment letters are typically used to satisfy third
   partiesÂ regarding a studentâs academic standing,Â they serve an
   important purpose of the University. They represent an official control
   mechanism for verifying enrolment, so that only students registered
   with the University can claim the benefits associated with
   registration.Â The Panel found the Student guilty of the two charges.

   In determining the appropriate sanction,Â the Panel noted that although
   this was the Studentâs first academic offence, the dishonest conduct
   wasÂ repeated,Â and the falsifications were deliberate and careful.
   There was no evidence of extenuating circumstances, as the Student
   declined to participate in theÂ hearing. The Panel
   notedÂ thatÂ whenÂ people fake their University enrolment with
   immigration officials, they put honest international students at a
   disadvantage,Â jeopardize the Universityâs reputation and undermine the
   Universityâs efforts to accommodate and support international
   students.Â The Panel also stated that the need for general deterrence
   is a significant concern as this type of offence is hard for the
   University to police. The Panel concluded that a five-year suspension
   would not be appropriate.Â Had the Student appeared and given credible,
   truthful evidence of compelling mitigating circumstances that helped to
   explain the misconduct, theÂ PanelÂ stated that itÂ might have
   concluded differently. As the Student did not attend, theÂ Panel found
   that the most severe sanction, a recommendation of expulsion,Â was the
   most suitable.

   TheÂ PanelÂ imposed the following sanctions:Â a
   five-yearÂ suspension;Â aÂ recommendationÂ thatÂ the Student be
   expelled, as per s.Â C.ii.(b)(i) of Code; andÂ a report to the Provost
   forÂ aÂ publication.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/28658
