Case #1017

   DATE: November 26, 2019

   PARTIES: University of Toronto v. K.D

   HEARING DATE: August 27, 2019

   Panel Members:
   Mr. R.S.M. Woods, Chair
   Dr. Ian Crandall, Faculty Member
   Ms. Madison Bruno, Student Member

   Appearances:
   Mr. Robert Centa, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland
   Rosenberg Rothstein LLP

   In Attendance:
   Ms. Krista Osbourne, Administrative Clerk and Hearing Secretary, Office
   of Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances

   Not in Attendance:
   The Student

   The Student was charged with academic misconduct under s. B.i.3(a) of
   the Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters, 1995 (the â Code â) on the
   basis that they knowingly falsified, circulated or made use of two
   forged academic records, namely, a document purporting to be a degree
   certificate and a document purporting to be a transcript of
   consolidated academic record from the University.

   Neither the Student nor a legal representative of the Student appeared
   at the hearing. Based on the evidence provided by the University of
   service of the charges, amended charges and notice of the hearing on
   the Student to the Studentâs email and mailing addresses in the
   Repository of Student Information (ROSI), the Tribunal was satisfied
   that the Student had been given adequate notice of the hearing in
   compliance with the University Tribunal Rules of Practice and Procedure
   .

   The University tendered an affidavit from the Manager of the
   Universityâs Transcript Centre, which stated that the Transcript Centre
   had received an inquiry from a third party institution regarding the
   authenticity of a number of transcripts submitted as part of
   applications for admission to that institution, including an
   application from the Student. The third party sent the Manager a copy
   of the purported transcript and degree certificate submitted by the
   Student. Upon review of the transcript and degree certificate and the
   Studentâs academic record in ROSI, the Manager concluded that the
   documents were not authentic; the purported transcript was not issued
   by the University and the University had never issued a degree to the
   Student. The Tribunal was satisfied based on the evidence that the
   University had discharged its burden to establish that the academic
   offences charged had been committed by the Student. While it had no
   direct evidence that the Student personally forged the transcript and
   degree certificate, the Panel stated that in the absence of any
   evidence to the contrary, it was prepared to draw the inference from
   the evidence that the Student had knowingly forged both documents.

   The Panel stated that forging and circulating both a transcript and
   degree certificate are extremely serious offences. Forged certificates
   damage the Universityâs reputation, undermine the trust prospective
   employers and other academic institutions have in the University and
   its students, and harm students who have earned their degrees by
   forcing them to compete for positions against students who have not
   earned the qualifications they claim to hold. There was no evidence
   before the Tribunal of any factor mitigating against the imposition of
   a penalty consistent with the penalties imposed by the Tribunal in
   similar cases.

   The Tribunal imposed the following sanctions: immediate suspension for
   a period of five years; recommendation of expulsion from the
   University; and publication by the Provost of a notice of the decision
   and sanctions imposed with the Studentâs name withheld.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/28802
