UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
TRIAL DIVISIO~
IN THE i"1ATTER of charges of academic dishonesty made on July 21, 2009;
AND IN THE !HATTER of the University of Toronto Act, 1971, S.O. 1971,
c. 56 as amended S.O. 1978, c. 88;
At"ID l.t'I THE l'vlATTER OF the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on

Academic Matters, 1995;

BETWEEN:
UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
-and-

Members of the panel:

•
•
•

l'vlr. John A. Keefe, Chair
Professor Graeme Hirst, Faculty Member
Ms. Elena Kuzmin, Student Panel Member

Appearances:

•

l'vlr. Robert A. Centa, Assistant Discipline Counsel for the University of Toronto,
Patiare Roland Barristers

In Attendance:
•

Ms. Lucy Gaspini, Academic Affairs Officer, University of Toronto, Mississauga

•

l'vlr. I:al

wa the Student, not in attendance

2
REASONS FOR DECISION

1.

The University Tribunal was convened on Wednesday, September 16, 2009 to hear

D- w•

charges under the Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters, 1995 (the "Code") laid
against

(the "Student"). The Student was informed by letter dated July 21,

2009 from Professor Edith Hillan, Vice-Provost, Faculty & Academic Life, that he had
been charged with academic offences and was provided with particulars of those charges.

2.

Notice of Hearing was sent to the Student on September 4, 2009.

3.

The Student was not present at the hearing.

4.

At the outset of the hearing, the Tribunal was advised that the matter would proceed
based on an Agreed Statement of Facts dated September 9, 2009.

5.

Paragraph 3 of the Agreed Statement of Facts states as follows:

w•

... Mr.
acknowledges that he has received reasonable notice
for this hearing. Mr.
does not wish to attend the hearing
before the Tribunal and requests that the hearing proceeds in his
absence.

6.

wa

The Tribunal determined that it was appropriate to proceed in the absence of the Student
in these circumstances.

7.

The Tribunal noted that Mr. w8 was not represented at the hearing by counsel and that
he executed the Agreed Statement of Facts without legal representation.

8.

Paragraph 13 of the Agreed Statement of Facts provides as follows.

3

tvlr. WIii acknowledges that the Provost of the University of Toronto has
advised him to obtain independent legal advice before signing this
ASF. He acknowledges that he has either done so, or deliberately
has waived his right to do so.

9.

The Agreed Statement of Facts was executed on behalf of University by Robert A. Centa,
Assistant Discipline Counsel of the University of Toronto. He assured the Tribunal that,
on more than one occasion, tvlr.

w•

was advised to seek legal advice before

proceeding with the Agreed Statement of Facts and that he declined to do so. tvlr. Centa
also assured the Tribunal that the Agreement was executed with tvlr. w•• s full
knowledge and consent and without any undue pressure.

The Charge

I 0.

The Charge upon which the Student agreed to plead guilty (hereinafter referred to as
"Charge") is the following.
1.
On or about March 9, 2009, you knowingly represented as your own an idea or
expression of an idea, and/or work of another in an essay you submitted in POL 200,
contrary to section B.I.l(d) of the Code.

The Background Facts

11.

The Agreed Statement of Facts describes the background facts as follows:
1.
For the purposes of this hearing under the Code of Behaviour on Academic
,Hatters ("Code"), the University of Toronto (the "University") and D - \ ~ ('tvlr.
W•") have prepared this Agreed Statement of Facts ("ASF") and a joint book of
documents ("JBD"). The University and tvlr. w•agree that:
a.

each document contained in the JBD may be admitted into evidence
before the Tribunal for all purposes, including for the truth of the
document's contents, without further need to prove the document; and

4
b.

if a document indicates that it was sent or received by someone, that is
prima facie proof that the document was sent and received as indicated.

2.
This hearing arises out of charges of academic misconduct filed by the Provost
under the Code. A copy of the Charges, which were filed on July 21, 2009, is included in
the IBD at Tab 1. Mr. w•acknowledges that he received a copy of the Charges.
3.
The Notice of Hearing into the Charges is included in the IBD at Tab 2.
"tvfr. w • acknowledges that he has received reasonable notice of this hearing.
tvfr.
does not wish to attend the hearing before the Tribunal and requests that the
hearing proceed in his absence.

w•

wa

4.
In Fall/Winter 2008-2009, Mr.
registered as a student at the University of
Toronto. At all material times, tvfr. WIii remained enrolled at the University. A copy of
tvfr. w•'s academic record dated September 2, 2009, is included in the JBD at Tab 3.
5.
1n Summer 2008, "tvfr. ~ enrolled in POL 200 - lntroduction to Political
Theory, which was taught by Professor Len Ferry ("Course"). A copy of the syllabus for
the Course in included in the JBD at Tab 4. tvfr. w • admits that he received a copy of
the syllabus for the Course.
6.
One of the Course assignments was to complete a research essay, which was
worth 25% of the final grade in the Course. A copy of the assignment is included in the
JBD at Tab 5.
7.
For his research essay, on March 9, 2009, Nfr. w•submitted an essay titled "To
obey or not to obey that is the question" ("Essay") in partial completion of the course
requirements. A copy of the Essay is included in the JBD at Tab 6.
8.
Nfr. ~ submitted the Essay through Tumitin.com. The Turnitin Originality
Report for the Essay is included in the JBD at Tab 7. The Originality Report indicated an
overall similarity index of 31 %, which is high, and could indicate that the Essay
contained verbatim extracts from other sources found in the database.
9.

"tvfr. ~ admits that he knowingly, which includes ought to have known:
a.

included verbatim and nearly verbatim excerpts from an article titled
"Civil Disobedience" from the on-line Stanford Encyclopedia of
Philosophy, a copy of which is found in the JBD at Tab 8: and

b.

included verbatim and nearly verbatim excerpts from an article titled
"Locke's Political Philosophy" from the on-line Stanford Encyclopedia of
Philosophy, a copy of which is found in the J13D at Tab 9: and

c

failed to attribute those excerpts appropriately using quotation marks.

10.
1vfr. \ ~ admits that, in the Essay, he represented the work and expressions of
another as his own.

5

w•

11.
Nlr.
admits that he committed the academic offence of plagiarism as set
out in charge #1 of the Charges, which are included in the JBD at Tab 2.
12.

The Provost agrees to withdraw charges 2 and 3 of the Charges.

13.
Mr. ~ acknowledges that the Provost of the University of Toronto has
advised him to obtain independent legal advice before signing this ASF.
He
acknowledges that he has either done so, or deliberately waived his right to do so.

12.

It is important to understand some of the facts in order to understand the basis of the
Tribunal's conclusion. It is very clear that the Student's essay contained the exact words
from an article published on the Internet from the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy
entitled Locke's Political Philosophy. There was no attempt quote the source of the
words. In some cases, the Students did edit the words from the other publication and he
did include reference to the publication in his endnotes titled Works Cited.

13.

Unlike many other cases of plagiarism brought before the Tribunal, in this case there was
not a wholesale importing of all or a portion of the on-line publication into the work
submitted by the student.

Some sentences were imported from the other publication

without proper citation or attribution, but there was also some independent work and
independent thought put into the Student's work. In this respect, although there is a
breach of the Code, this particular offence is not at the higher end of the spectrum.

14.

Based on the Agreed Statement of Facts and the documents in the Joint Book of
Documents, the Tribunal concluded that it was prepared to make a finding of guilt to
count I of the Charges. Discipline Counsel then withdrew counts two and three of the
Charges.

6

Joint Submissions on Penaltv

15.

After the Tribunal concluded that it was prepared to make the finding of guilt on count 1
of the Charges, the Tribunal was presented with an Agreed Statement of Facts and Joint
Submission on Penalty ("Joint Submission of Penalty").

This was also executed on

September 9, 2009 by Mr. WIiiand University Discipline Counsel.

16.

Paragraph 7 of the Joint Submission on Penalty provides as follows:

wa

7.
N1r.
acknowledges that the Provost of the University
of Toronto has advised him to obtain independent legal advice
before signing this Joint Submission on Penalty. Mr. WIii has
either done so or has deliberately waived his right to do so.

17.

The Joint Submissions on Penalty provides as follows:
2.
Mr. wllll has previously admitted to committing two other academic offences for
which he received sanctions at the Divisional Level.

w•
w•

3.
On October 4, 2004, Mr.
admitted that he had committed plagiarism in a
paper that he had submitted for credit in POL 200.
4.

He received a mark of zero for the plagiarized paper as a sanction under the Code.

5.
On June 6, 2005, N1r.
admitted that he had committed plagiarism in an
assignment that he submitted for credit in PHL 300. He received the following sanction:
a.

a final grade of zero in the course;

b.

a suspension from the University of Toronto from September 1, 2005 to
December l, 2005; and

c.
an annotation of Mark of zero on the course due to academic misconduct
for one
year from June I, 2005 to May 31, 2005.

Guidelines on Penalty

I 8.

The Factors to be considered when determining penalty are well established:

1

19.

(a)

the character of the person charged;

(b)

the likelihood ofa repetition of the offence;

( c)

the nature of the offence committed;

(d)

any extenuating circumstances surrounding commission of the offence;

(e)

the detriment to the University occasioned by the offence;

(f)

the need to deter others from committing a similar offence. 1

The Tribunal, in determining the appropriate penalty, should consider various factors in
order to find a fit sentence for this offender, for this offence in this community. In doing
so, fairness, balance and proportion must be blended in.

20.

There should be some measure of uniformity or proportionality so that there should be
similar sentences in1posed for offences committed in similar circumstances.

The

sentencing should preserve and ensure fairness by avoiding disproportionate sentences
among similar sentencing processes so that there are not wide swings or inconsistencies
between like offences and like offenders, recognizing that there is never a like offence or
like offender.

21.

There should be a range of sentences for offences such as plagiarism "~th sentences
within that range moving up or down within that range depending on aggravating or
mitigating circumstances.

1

In the Matter of the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour and an Appeal by l\,[r, C., November 1976 pg 12.

8
Conclusion on Penaltv

22.

The Student was not in attendance at the hearing. No witnesses were called to present
character evidence. There was no evidence before the Tribunal concerning the Student's
personal or family background, his current activities or bis academic intentions.

23.

This makes it somewhat difficult for the Tribunal to weigh all the relevant factors
because the factors relating to the offender are not available to the Tribunal.

24.

The Tribunal examined the prior offences of the Student. In October 2004, the Student
plagiarised a paper in the same course POL 200 and received the mark of zero on the
paper. In June 2005, the Student committed plagiarism in an assignment. In that case he
received a grade of zero in the course and was suspended for a period from
September 5, 2005 to December 1, 2005.

Clearly, the Student was aware of the

seriousness of the offence of plagiarism having been disciplined on two prior occasions
and he suspended for the second offence. Although the circwnstances of this particular
offence are on the lower threshold of seriousness, nonetheless, it is still involves the
commission of the offence of plagiarism and it is bis third offence.

25.

The Tribunal was presented with the decisions of the Tribunal on other matters. One
such decision was a Tribunal decision in the matter of The University of Toronto and
S.i\,f This was a case involving a Joint Submission of PeI1alty and the principles to be

applied in accepting or rejecting a Joint Submission of Penalty. In that decision, the
Tribunal stated as follows:

9

A panel is not obliged to accept the Joint Submission on Penalty. Having said
that, we accept the principle set out in the decision of the Ontario
Court of Appeal in R. v. Michael Tsicos 2 dated October 6, 2006
that, generally speaking, a joint submission on penalty should be
accepted unless it would be contrary to the public interest or bring
the administration of justice into disrepute to give effect to the
joint submission.

26.

Based on this principle, even if the Tribunal concludes that the agreed upon penalty may
not be what it would impose in the circumstances, the Joint Submission on Penalty
should be accepted unless to do so would be contrary to the public interest or bring the
administration of justice into disrepute.

27.

The academic offence of plagiarism is a serious breach of the University's standards of
ethical behaviour.

The offence of plagiarism undermines the relationship of trust

between the University and its students. Given the access to the Internet and sources of
information, plagiarism has become a serious problem in the University environment.
Principles of general deterrence must be considered in determining the appropriate
penalty. As stated in The University of Toronto and Afr. S.B. (November 14, 2007):
It hardly needs to be said that the credibility and academic mission
of the University, and the degrees which it awards to its students,
can be greatly harmed by the commission of offences such as
plagiarism and concoction."

28.

In support of the submission that the proposed penalty was within the appropriate range,
University Discipline Counsel referred the Tribunal to a number of cases. One such case
was The University of Toronto and 1'.Ir. MHH. In that case, the student was charged

2

Her Majesty the Queen v. Michael Craig Tsicos, CAO, Oct. 11, 2006, Docket: C4553 l

10

with two counts of plagiarism, one committed on March 15, 2007 and one committed
June 19, 2007. The Student had not been disciplined before. Toe student did not appear
at the Tribunal hearing. After examining a number of other cases, the Tribunal concluded
that the consistent minimum penalty for a first time offence of plagiarism would be a two
year suspension. The Tribunal concluded that a three year suspension was warranted
having regard to the fact that the student was found guilty on two counts of plagiarism.

29.

University Discipline Counsel also referred the Tribunal to the case The University of

Toronto and 1\Ir. S.B. In this case, the Tribunal considered the appropriate penalty for
plagiarism for a third time offender. In that case, University Discipline Counsel was
seeking a three year suspension. The student appeared at the hearing, pleaded not guilty,
but was found guilty. There were extenuating personal circumstances presented by the
student and there had been considerable delay in prosecuting the offence. The Tribunal
concluded as follows:

(33) In our view, the case law of this Tribunal supports the
University's position in this case. On a purely numerical count,
previous cases of "first time offenders" in cases of plagiarism
and/or concoction have been met with suspensions of two years
(K., June 2006; A., September, 2004; B., April, 2004 and
February, 2006); three years (referred to as at the "most severe
end" in L., October 8, 2004); and four years (S.). Previous cases of
"repeat offenders" in such cases have resulted in suspensions of
four months [W., March 25, 1998); sixteen months (K., May
2003); three years (M.M., August 2005; and D., July, 2005); five
years (L., above); and expulsion (B., February, 2007).
'
[34]

This summary, of course, captures only a few of the factors

in lvlr. Sopinka's list, most notably the nature of the offence and
the degree and likelihood of repetition. A more detailed review of
the decisions reveals other important evidence, such as remorse,

l1

cooperation with the University, circumstances of the offence, results flowing
from different penalties, etc. Another factor seems to be a greater
recognition, as time has passed, of the need for significant specific
and general deterrence. In our view, we have reached a point
where a serious breach of trust such as plagiarism and/or
. concoction should evoke a response of at least a two-year
suspension for a first offence and a three year or longer suspension
on a subsequent finding.
[35] Here, a three year suspension for a third offence, having
regard to the range of other circumstances that we discussed above,
strikes a balance of punishment, compassion, rehabilitation and
deterrence.

30.

Based on this decision and the The Universily of Toronto and MHH., University
Discipline Counsel submits that a three and a half years suspension is appropriate in this
case. We note that although the suspension proposed in the Joint Submission on Penalty
is for three and a half years, it is effectively a suspension for four academic years.

3 I.

Although the Tribunal considered the proposed penalty to be on the high side, the
Tribunal concluded that it should accept the Joint Submission on Penalty. The Tribunal
concluded that the penalty was within the range of appropriate penalties for this offence
in these circumstances. The Tribunal concluded that accepting the Joint Submission on
Penalty would not be contrary to the public interest or bring the administration justice
into disrepute.

32.

Accordingly the Tribunal has determined that the penalty in the circumstances is as
follows:
(a)

Impose a fmal grade of zero in the course POL 200 - Introduction to Political
Theory;

12

wm

(b)

Suspend Mr.
from the University of Toronto from September 16, 2009
until March 16, 2013;

(c)

Impose a notation until September 16, 2013 on his academic record and transcript
stating that he has been found to have committed academic offences; and

( d)

Report this case to the Provost who may publish a notice of the decision of the
University Tribunal and the sanctions imposed with the Student's name "~thheld.

Dated November

\5761197

.lJ,i_, 2009
~eefi,

Vair (

