Case #568

   DATE: November 26, 2009
   PARTIES: University of Toronto v. D.W.
   Hearing Date(s): September 16, 2009
   Panel Members:
   Mr. John A. Keefe, Chair
   Prof. Graeme Hirst, Faculty Member
   Ms. Elena Kuzmin, Student Member
   Appearances:
   Mr. Robert Centa, Assistant Discipline Counsel for the University
   In Attendance:
   Ms. Lucy Gaspini, Academic Affairs Officer, University of Toronto
   Mississauga

   Trial Division т s.B.i.1(d) of Code т plagiarism т course work т
   Student did not attend Hearing т agreed statement of facts т joint
   submission on penalty т joint book of documents т Student acknowledged
   receipt of reasonable notice т Student advised to obtain legal advice
   finding of guilt тт sentencing factors in Mr. C т seriousness of
   offence т no mitigating factors or extenuating circumstances т need for
   proportionality and consistency in sentencing т principle for accepting
   or rejecting a joint submission on penalty in The University of Toronto
   and Mr. S.M and R. v. Michael Tsicos т range of sanctions for
   plagiarism is from two years for first time offences to three years or
   more for subsequent offences according to The University of Toronto and
   Mr. S.B. т Joint Submission on Penalty accepted -- University
   submission on penalty accepted т Tribunal ordered: a grade of zero in
   the course; a three and a half year suspension; a four year notation;
   and a report to the Provost

   The Student was charged under section B.i.1(d) of the Code . The charge
   stemmed from an allegation of plagiarizing an essay. The Student did
   not attend the hearing. The hearing proceeded based on Agreed Statement
   of Facts (ASF), Joint Book of Documents (JBD), and Joint Submission on
   Penalty (JSP). The Student acknowledged receiving reasonable notice of
   the hearing and requested that the hearing proceed in his absence. The
   Student had been advised to obtain independent legal advice but was
   unrepresented at the hearing. The Student admitted copying verbatim
   experts from online sources into his essay and failing to cite them.
   The Tribunal found that there was a breach of the Code but that it was
   not at the higher end of the spectrum due to the fact that the Student
   had shown some independent work. The Tribunal found the Student guilty
   of the charge. The Tribunal noted that the Student had committed two
   prior offences for which he was sanctioned. The Tribunal noted the
   sentencing factors identified in Mr. C (1976). The Panel found that the
   Student was aware of the seriousness of the offence. The Panel referred
   to the principles to be applied in accepting or rejecting a JSP noted
   in The University of Toronto and Mr. S.M and R. v. Michael Tsicos ,
   CAO, Oct. 11, 2006, Docket: C45531, which noted that a joint submission
   should be accepted unless it is contrary to the public interest or
   bring the administration of justice into disrepute. The Tribunal noted
   the seriousness of the offence and the detriment to the University as
   stated in University of Toronto and Mr. S.B. (November 14, 2007). The
   Tribunal considered The University of Toronto and Mr. M.H.H. and
   University of Toronto and Mr. S.B , which held that an appropriate
   minimum penalty for a first time plagiarism offence would be a two year
   suspension, and a three year or higher suspension would be warranted
   for subsequent offences. The Tribunal accepted the Joint Submission on
   Penalty and ordered: a grade of zero in the course; a three and a half
   year suspension; a four year notation; and a report to the Provost.

   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/13001
