Report #249

   DATE: August 14, 2000
   PARTIES: Ms. F. F. (the Student) v UTM
   Hearing Date(s): August 14, 2001
   Committee Members:
   Professor Ralph Scane, Acting Chair
   Professor Clare Beghtol
   Mrs. Jenny Carson
   Professor Vivek Goel
   Ms. Karen Lewis
   Secretary:
   Ms. Margaret McKone
   In Attendance:
   Mr. F.F., Appellant (the Student)
   UTM:
   No one appearing
   UTM â late withdrawal without academic penalty and request to defer
   oneâyear suspension â previous late withdrawal granted on condition
   that Student was expected to follow procedures and timelines in future
   â stress from financial and familial circumstances â Student knew drop
   dates and warning that Faculty would not accommodate requests if
   procedures not complied with â not reasonable to attempt to complete
   all courses given weak academic record â academic record did not
   corroborate the claim that grades were brought about by external
   circumstances â appeal dismissed
   Request for late withdrawal without academic penalty from three
   courses, and to defer a oneâyear suspension. The Student failed the
   three courses. The Student had served her suspension and sought the
   remedy for its practical future benefit. The Student had previously
   enrolled in one of the three courses at appeal and she had petitioned,
   and was granted, late withdrawal without academic penalty from the
   course. In granting the request, the Faculty advised the Student that
   she was expected to follow appropriate procedures and timelines in the
   future. The Student claimed that she was suffering stress from
   financial and familial circumstances, including stress derived from her
   resistance to agree to an arranged marriage.Â  The Committee found that
   the Student was suffering from adverse circumstances but that she knew
   about the existence of drop dates, and that she had been warned that
   the Faculty would not accommodate her further requests if she did not
   comply with its procedures. The Committee found that the gamble the
   Student took in attempting to complete all of her courses was not
   reasonable, given her weak academic record. The Committee found that
   given the Studentâs academic record, granting her relief would
   undermine the Universityâs drop date policy.Â  The Committee observed
   that the appeal was presented as an indirect appeal of the Studentâs
   failing grades in the three courses. The Committee found that the
   Studentâs academic record did not corroborate the claim that the grades
   in question might be an aberration brought about only by the external
   circumstances. Appeal dismissed.
   [1]View Report

References

   1. file:///media/12540
