UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
GOVERNING COUNCIL
REPORT NUMBER 249 OF THE ACADEMIC APPEALS COMMITTEE
August 14, 2000

To the Academic Board
University of Toronto
Your Committee reports that it held a meeting on Monday, August 14, 2000, at which the following
members were present:
Professor Ralph Scane (Acting Chair)
Professor Clare Beghtol
Ms Jenny Carson
Professor Vivek Goel
Ms Karen Lewis
Ms Margaret McKone, Acting Secretary
In attendance:

H•• F

Ms
the Appellant (the Student)
University of Toronto at Mississauga: No one appearing.
This is an appeal from the decision of the Academic Appeals Board of Erindale College, dated
December 9, 1999, which dismissed an appeal from the decision of the Committee on Standing,
dated August 24, 1999. The latter decision refused the Student's petition for late withdrawal from
the courses ECOIOOY, ECO244Y and POL208Y, and for lifting a one-year suspension imposed
following the 1999 Winter Term in which these courses were taken. The Student received a grade
of F in each of the courses from which she seeks late withdrawal. As the suspension has been
served, and the Student is again in attendance, the matter of the suspension is now moot. However,
granting the appeal would othe1wise be of practical future benefit to the Student.
The Student was admitted to Erindale College as a degree student in the 1996-97 Winter Session.
Following the 1997-98 Winter Session, she was placed on academic probation. The student
originally took the course ECO I 00Y in 1996-97. On January 27, 1998, the Committee on Standing
granted permission for late withdrawal from this course without academic penalty. At that time, the
Committee advised the Student, "The Committee on Standing has only considered this petition
because of exceptional circumstances. You are expected to follow appropriate procedures and
timelines in the future".
This Student has ce11ainly suffered from adverse circumstances during her time at the University.
Her parents come from a very poor country which has suffered :from civil wars, and have kin
remaining in that country who are themselves very poor. The parents' culture impels them to
contribute substantially from their own limited means to offer some supp011 to these kinsfolk. As a
result, not only were they unable to offer much suppot1 to the Student, but she felt it necessary to
work during her time at University to contribute to family supp011. She regularly worked about 25
hours per week outside her University obligations. Additionally, her father, who operated a small
family retail business, was in poor health, and the Student also had obligations in the store, and in

2
assisting with the care of younger siblings. She was under severe stress from these circumstances.
To add to her troubles, her parents were trying to get her to agree to an arranged marriage, in
accordance with their custom, to a man she has never met. Her resistance to this proposal strained
relations with her parents, and added to her stress.
Accepting the severe problems undergone by the Student, and the stress and fatigue under which
she must have been suffering, the question is whether the Student should have been granted late
withdrawal from the courses named, without penalty. It is the view of your Co111111ittee that the
tribunals below reached the correct decision. The Student decided to accept the risk of allowing the
cut-off date for withdrawing from these courses without penalty to pass without taking any action.
She knew from a previous decision of the Committee on Standing that cut-off dates existed, and had
been warned explicitly that she should not expect fi.uiher indulgence if she did not comply. The
gamble she took in attempting to complete all of the courses in which she was enrolled in the 199899 session was not reasonable, given her record to date. Even allowing for her difficulties, her
academic record was ve1y weak. Granting relief here would unde1mine the University's policy of
imposing deadlines for withdrawal without academic penalty.
The appeal before your Committee was presented in effect as an indirect appeal of the failing grades
in the courses mentioned. The accuracy of the grading was not challenged, but the thrust of the
argument was that her unsatisfactmy performance was explained by her circumstances, and that the
results she obtained should be cancelled. If your Committee were convinced that the University
could not safely rely upon the posted results in these courses in evaluating the Student and allowing
the consequences of the evaluation to flow according to its academic rnles, it might sanction a late
withdrawal as a means of affording a practical remedy. However, it is not so convinced. The
academic record of the Student to date is ve1y poor, even taking the surrounding circumstances into
consideration. It affords no corroboration for a suggestion that the grades in question might be an
aberration brought about only by the external circumstances.
The appeal is dismissed.

