Case No.: 1003
THE UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
IN THE MATTER OF charges of academic dishonesty made on September 10, 2018,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic
Matters, 1995,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Act, 1971, S.O. 1971, c. 56 as
amended S.O. 1978, c. 88
B E T W E E N:

UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
- and -

--

Q

H

REASONS FOR DECISION

Date of Hearing: November 22, 2018

Members of the Panel:
Ms. Amanda Heale, Chair
Prof. Margaret MacNeill, Faculty Panel Member
Ms. Ching Yi Cho, Student Panel Member
Appearances:
Ms. Tina Lie, Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg Rothstein LLP
Mr. Gianluca de Gasperi Delpino, Legal Representative for the Student (Downtown Legal
Services)

--

In Attendance:
Ms. Q
H
the Student
Hearing Secretary
Ms. Krista Osbourne, Administrative Clerk and Hearing Secretary, Office of the Appeals,
Discipline and Faculty Grievances, University of Toronto

\

2

Introduction
1.

A hearing before the University Tribunal (the “Tribunal”) was convened on

-

(the “Student”). The Student attended the hearing, and was represented by a

•

November 22, 2018 to consider the Charge (as defined below) against the Student, Q
H

caseworker from Downtown Legal Services.
The Charge
2.

The charges against the Student (the “Charges”) are as follows:
(a)

On or about September 28, 2016, the Student knowingly represented as
her own an idea or expression of an idea or work of another in an
assignment the Student submitted in CCT210H5F (Signs, Referents, and
Meaning) (the “Course”), contrary to Section B.I.1(d) of the Code.

(b)

In the alternative, on or about September 28, 2016, the Student knowingly
obtained unauthorized assistance in connection with an assignment the
Student submitted in the Course, contrary to section B.I.1(b) of the Code.

(c)

In the further alternative, on or about September 28, 2016, the Student
knowingly engaged in a form of cheating, academic dishonesty or
misconduct, fraud or misrepresentation not otherwise described in the
Code in order to obtain academic credit or other academic advantage of
any kind in connection with an assignment the Student submitted in the
Course, contrary to section B.I.3(b) of the Code.

Particulars
1.

At all material times the Student was a student at the University of Toronto
Mississauga.

2.

In Fall 2016, the Student enrolled in the Course, which was taught by Elizabeth
Peden.

3.

On or about September 28, 2016, the Student submitted an assignment in the
Course, which was worth 10% of the Student’s final grade in the Course (the
“Assignment”).

4.

The Student submitted the Assignment:

3

(a)

to obtain academic credit;

(b)

knowing that it contained ideas, expressions of ideas or work which were
not the Student’s own, but were the ideas, expressions of ideas or work of
others, including a student who had previously submitted an assignment in
the Course in Summer 2016 (the “Source”); and

(c)

knowing that the Student did not properly reference the ideas, expressions
of ideas or work that the Student drew from the Source.

(d)

The Student knowingly obtained unauthorized assistance from the Source.

(e)

The Student knowingly submitted the Assignment with the intention that
the University of Toronto Mississauga rely on it as containing the
Student’s own ideas or work in considering the appropriate academic
credit to be assigned to the Student’s work.

Agreed Statement of Facts
5.

The hearing proceeded on the basis of an Agreed Statement of Facts (the “ASF”),

which was marked as Exhibit 1. The parties also presented a Joint Book of Documents
(the “JBD”) that is referred to in the ASF, which was marked as Exhibit 2. A summary of
the agreed facts follows.
The Course
6.

In Fall 2016, the Student enrolled in the Course, which was taught by Elizabeth

Peden.
7.

A copy of the course syllabus for the Course was provided in the JBD. The course

syllabus included a section on Academic Integrity, in which the seriousness of cheating
and plagiarism was emphasized, a link to the Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters
on the Governing Council website was provided, and offences under the Code were
described as including the use of someone else’s ideas or words without appropriate
acknowledgement, submitting work in more than one course without the instructor’s
permission, or obtaining or providing unauthorized assistance on any assignment,
amongst other behaviour.

4

8.

Students in the Course were required to submit a short written assignment, worth

10% of their final grades, by September 28, 2016. They were required to submit their
essays in hard copy to Turnitin.com, a service that compares the submitted work with
works contained in the Turnitin.com database and available online.
9.

On September 28, 2016, the Student submitted the Assignment to Turnitin. The

Turnitin report identified a 30% similarity index with an assignment that had previously
been submitted by another student in the Course, in Summer 2016 (referred to as the
Source). A copy of the Turnitin.com report for the Assignment was provided to the Panel
in the JBD, as was a copy of the Source.
10.

Upon review, Ms. Peden determined that there were passages in the Assignment

that were taken verbatim or nearly verbatim from the Source, without attribution. This was
corroborated by the copies of the Turnitin.com report and the Source provided to the
Panel.
11.

On October 3, 2017, the Student met with Professor Catherine Seguin, Dean’s

Designate for Academic Offences. Professor Seguin gave the Student the warning that
is required to be given under the Code, and the Student was represented by a caseworker
from Downtown Legal Services. During the meeting, the Student read from a written
statement in which she admitted to obtaining unauthorized assistance from another
student in the Assignment. A copy of this statement was provided to the Panel in the JBD.
12.

At the meeting, the Student entered a guilty plea to the offence of unauthorized

assistance.
13.

The Student admitted that she knowingly included verbatim or nearly verbatim

passages from the Source in the Assignment, represented the ideas, expression of ideas
or work of another as her own in the Assignment, and committed plagiarism in the
Assignment.

5

Findings on Charges
14.

Following deliberations and based on the ASF and the JBD, the Panel concluded

that the first charge (as outlined in paragraph 2 above) had been proven with clear and
convincing evidence on a balance of probabilities, and accepted the guilty plea of the
Student in respect of that charge. The Panel was advised that if the Tribunal convicts the
Student on the first charge, the University would withdraw the alternative and further
alternative charges.
Penalty
15.

The University and the Student submitted an Agreed Statement of Facts (the “ASF

on Penalty”) and Joint Submission on Penalty (the “JSP”), which were marked as Exhibit
3 and Exhibit 4, respectively.
16.

The ASF on Penalty describes three prior offences committed by the Student. Two

of these offences, both of plagiarism, were committed in the same course, in Summer
2015. Sanctions in respect of these offences were imposed following a Dean’s designate
meeting in late 2015. The third offence, which took place contemporaneously with the
instant plagiarism offence, was of aiding another to commit the offence of unauthorized
assistance with respect to an assignment. The Student admitted to that offence and
sanctions were imposed in late 2016.
17.

In the JSP, the parties submitted that the Tribunal should impose the following

sanctions on the Student:
a) a final grade of zero in the Course;
b) a suspension from the University of Toronto from the day the Tribunal
makes it order for a period of three years, to November 21, 2021; and
c) a notation of the sanction on her academic record and transcript from the
day the Tribunal makes its order until graduation.

6

18.

The parties also submitted that this case shall be reported to the Provost for

publication of a notice of the decision of the Tribunal and the sanction imposed in the
University newspapers, with the name of the Student withheld.
19.

In the JSP, the Student undertook to complete at least six programs or workshops

offered by the University of Toronto Mississauga Robert Gillespie Academic Skills Centre
and/or the St. George Campus College Writing Centre within the first two terms in which
she is next registered for a course at the University of Toronto. In the event that such
workshops are not available at the time the Student attempts to complete them, the
University agreed, acting reasonably, to propose alternate and equivalent programs for
the Student to fulfil her undertaking.
20.

Both counsel provided submissions on the high threshold required for a Tribunal

to deviate from a joint submission on penalty. As set out in the Discipline Appeals Board
decision in S.F. and The University of Toronto (Case No. 690 – Appeal, dated October
20, 2014), only truly unreasonable or “unconscionable” joint submissions should be
rejected (para 22).
21.

In the Panel’s view, the joint submission in this case is reasonable. In this regard,

the Panel took into consideration the nature of the offence, as well as the prior, similar
offences committed by the Student.
22.

However, there were also mitigating factors to consider. The Student had

cooperated in the process and entered into the ASF and JSP, thereby showing that she
had accepted responsibility for her conduct. The Panel also noted that the Student’s
undertaking to complete programs or workshops to improve her academic and writing
skills upon her return to the University is a positive step.
Order
23.

For the foregoing reasons, the University Tribunal ordered:

7

a) THAT the Student is guilty of one count of knowingly representing as her
own an idea or expression of an idea or work of another in an assignment
that she submitted in CCT210H5F, contrary to section B.I.1(d) of the Code
of Behaviour on Academic Matters.
b) THAT the following sanctions shall be imposed on the Student:
i.

a final grade of zero in the course CCT210H5F in Fall 2016;

ii.

a suspension from the University of Toronto from the day the Tribunal
made its order for a period of three years, to November 21, 2021;
and

iii.

a notation of the sanction on the Student’s academic record and
transcript from the day the Tribunal made its order until graduation.

c) THAT this case shall be reported to the Provost for publication of a notice
of the decision of the Tribunal and the sanction or sanctions imposed, with
the Student’s name withheld.
Dated at Toronto, this 22 of February, 2019,

__________________________________________
Ms. Amanda Heale, Chair

