Case #1003

   DATE:Â Â Â Â Â Â Â Â Â Â Â Â Â  Â February 22, 2019
   PARTIES:Â Â Â Â Â Â Â Â Â University of Toronto v. Q.H.
   Hearing Date: November 22, 2018
   Panel Members:
   Ms. Amanda Heale, Chair
   Prof. Margaret MacNeill, Faculty Member
   Ms. Ching Yi Cho, Student Member
   Appearances:
   Ms. Tina Lie, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg
   Rothstein LLP
   Mr. Gianluca de Gasperi Delpino, Legal Representative for the Student,
   Downtown Legal Services
   In Attendance:
   Ms. Q. H., the Student
   Ms. Krista Osbourne, Administrative Clerk and Hearing Secretary, Office
   of Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances
   Trial Division â s. B.I.1(d) of Code â plagiarism â Agreed Statement of
   Facts â guilty plea âÂ  Agreed Statement of Facts on Penalty â three
   prior academic offences â Joint Submission on Penalty â undertaking by
   Student to complete academic and writing skills training upon return to
   University - final grade of zero in the course; three-year suspension;
   notation of sanction on transcript; publication of notice of decision
   and sanctions with Studentâs name withheld.
   The Student was charged with one offence of plagiarism contrary to s.
   B.I.1(d) of the Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters, 1995 (the
   âCodeâ) on the basis that she submitted an assignment in a course
   knowing that it contained ideas, expressions of ideas or work that were
   not her own, but were the ideas, expressions of ideas or work of
   others, including a student who had previously submitted an assignment
   in the same course. In the alternative, the Student was charged with
   one offence of unauthorized aid or receiving assistance under s.
   B.I.1(b) of the Code.Â  In the further alternative, the Student was
   charged with one offence of cheating for academic advantage under s.
   B.I.3(b) of the Code.
   Based on an Agreed Statement of Facts submitted by the parties, the
   Panel concluded that the charge of plagiarism under s. B.I.1(d) of the
   Code had been proven with clear and convincing evidence on a balance of
   probabilities.Â  The Panel accepted the Studentâs guilty plea in
   respect of the charge.Â  The University withdrew the remaining
   alternative charges.
   The parties submitted an Agreed Statement of Facts on Penalty setting
   out particulars of three prior academic offences.Â  Two prior offences
   involved plagiarism and were committed in the same course. The third
   prior offence, which took place contemporaneously with the instant
   plagiarism offence, was of aiding another to commit the offence of
   unauthorized assistance with respect to an assignment.Â  The Student
   admitted to that offence and sanctions were previously imposed.
   By way of a Joint Submission on Penalty (JSP), the parties submitted
   that the Tribunal should impose the following sanctions on the Student:
   a final grade of zero in the course; a 3-year suspension from the
   University; a notation of the sanctions on the Studentâs academic
   record until graduation; publication by the Provost of a notice of
   decision and sanctions imposed, with the Studentâs name withheld.Â  In
   the JSP, the Student also undertook to complete at least six programs
   or workshops offered by the University to improve academic and writing
   skills within the first two terms in which she was next registered for
   a course at the University.
   Noting the high threshold required for a Tribunal to deviate from a
   joint submission on penalty, the Panel concluded that the JSP was
   reasonable in light of the nature of the offence, as well as the prior,
   similar offences committed by the Student.Â  The Panel also stated that
   the Studentâs cooperation in the process and her undertaking to improve
   her academic and writing skills were both mitigating factors
   demonstrating that the Student had accepted responsibility for her
   conduct.Â  The Panel imposed a final grade of zero in the course; a
   3-year suspension from the University; a notation of the sanction on
   the Studentâs academic record and transcript until graduation;
   publication by the Provost of a notice of decision and the sanction
   imposed, with studentâs name withheld.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/13051
