Case 1416

   DATE:

   April 8, 2024

   PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v. T.P. ("the Student")

   HEARING DATE:

   August 14, 2023, via Zoom

   PANEL MEMBERS:

   Johanna Braden, Chair Professor Joseph Clarke, Faculty Panel Member
   Matthaeus Ware, Student Panel Member

   APPEARANCES:

   Tina Lie, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg
   Rothstein LLP Joseph Berger, Co-Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg
   Rothstein LLP

   HEARING SECRETARY:

   Samanthe Huang, Coordinator and Hearing Secretary , Office of Appeals,
   Discipline and Faculty Grievances

   The Student faced two sets of charges. The first set of charges (the
   ‚First Charges‚) were as follows. The Student was charged with one
   count under s. B.i.1(d) of the Code for knowingly representing as their
   own an idea or expression of an idea or work of another in connection
   with a final exam. In the alternative, the Student was charged with one
   count under s. B.i.1(b) of the Code for knowingly obtaining
   unauthorized assistance in connection with a final exam. In the further
   the alternative, the Student was charged with one count under s.
   B.i.3(b) of the Code, for knowingly engaging in a form of cheating
   academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or misrepresentation in order
   to obtain academic credit or other academic advantage of any kind in
   connection with a final exam.

   The second set of charges (the ‚Second Charges‚) were as follows. The
   Student was charged with two counts under s. B.i.1(a) of the Code for
   knowingly forging, altering, or falsifying a Verification of Illness
   Form (‚VOI‚) which was submitted in support of a petition to have the
   final exams for three courses deferred. In the alternative to both
   charges under s. B.i.1(a), the Student was charged under s. B.i.3(b) of
   the Code for knowingly engaging in a form of cheating academic
   dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or misrepresentation in order to obtain
   academic credit or other academic advantage of any kind in connection
   with the petitions submitted to defer writing of three final exams.

   Neither the Student nor a representative for the Student attended the
   Hearing. The University filed a consent form, signed by the Student, in
   which they attested, among other things, that they had signed an Agreed
   Statement of Facts (‚ASF‚), an Agreed Statement of Facts on Penalty
   (‚ASFP‚) and a Joint Submission on Penalty (‚JSP‚) and that they did
   not wish to participate further in the proceeding. Accordingly, the
   Panel proceeded with the hearing in the Student‚s absence.

   The Student admitted both sets of charges through the signed ASF. The
   parties submitted affidavit evidence to establish the charges. With
   respect to the First Charges, the Panel reviewed affidavit evidence of
   the Professor in the Course, which described the Professor‚s use of an
   online program which detected marked similarities between the work
   submitted by the Student as part of the final exam and the work
   submitted by three other Students.

   In respect of the Second Charges, the University provided affidavit
   evidence from an Academic Integrity Assistant in the Office of the
   Vice-Principal and Dean at the University of Toronto Scarborough, as
   well as the Doctor who purportedly signed the VOI form submitted by the
   Student. The Doctor‚s evidence was that the VOI was a forgery and that
   they had neither written nor authorized it. While the Student initially
   denied the allegation that the VOI was fraudulent at the Dean‚s
   Designate meeting, the Student admitted in the ASF that the VOI was, in
   fact, forged and that he had never been a patient of the Doctor.

   Based on the affidavit evidence as well as the Student‚s admissions and
   acknowledgements in the ASF, the Panel found that, on a balance of
   probabilities, the Student committed the offences as charged.
   Accordingly, the Student was found guilty of one count plagiarism,
   contrary to s. B.i.1(d) of the Code, and two counts of knowingly
   forging, altering or falsifying a VOI in support of the Student‚s
   petition for final exam deferrals. The remaining alternative charges
   were withdrawn by the University.

   In determining the appropriate sanction, the Panel considered the ASFP
   submitted by the parties. The ASFP documented that the Student had
   committed a prior offence of plagiarism and was sanctioned at the
   Departmental level. The Student also submitted a letter of apology,
   expressing remorse and regret. The Panel further considered the
   sanctioning factors set out in the decision of the University of
   Toronto and Mr. C (Case No. 1976/77-3). With respect to the character
   of the Student, the Panel noted that there was little evidence of the
   Student‚s character other than the Student‚s commission of several
   dishonest acts in five different courses but noted that the Student had
   accepted a degree of responsibility for his actions by admitting the
   charges against him. The Panel also expressed serious concern that the
   Student had exhibited a pattern of dishonesty that suggested that a
   significant sanction was required to ensure that the offence is not
   repeated. With respect to the nature of the offences committed and the
   detriment to the University, the Panel noted that the offences involved
   deliberate fabrication which variously undermined the University‚s
   system of grading and process of medical accommodation. The Panel did
   not find that the Student was facing any extenuating circumstances and
   was unwilling to accept the Student‚s explanation of feeling unwell
   given that the Student had failed, at the relevant time, to obtain a
   legitimate VOI. The Panel further considered the need for general
   deterrence and noted that significant sanctions are required to deter
   students from engaging in similar misconduct that has the potential to
   slip past University administrators and professors.¬ Finally, the Panel
   considered sanctions imposed in other decisions with similar fact
   patterns. The Panel reiterated that it can only depart from a JSP where
   it concludes that the agreement is so unreasonable or unconscionable
   that it would lead a reasonable observer to believe that the proper
   functioning of the justice system had broken down. Given the test, the
   Panel accepted the JSP.

   The Panel imposed the following sanction: a final grade of zero in the
   Courses; a three-year and four-month suspension from the University; a
   notation on the Student‚s academic record and transcript until
   graduation; and a report to the Provost for publication.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/31608
