Case 638

   [1]Case 638 - Sanction

DATE:

   September 23, 2013 and December 30, 2014

PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v M.F.E.

Panel Members:

   Michael Hines, Chair
   Richard Day, Faculty Member
   Eleni Patsakos, Student Member

Hearing Date(s):

   March 28, 2013; May 6, 2013; May 22, 2013; June 12, 2013; January 21,
   2014; and August 14, 2014

Appearances:

   Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel
   Adam Goodman, Counsel for M.F.E.
   Olivier Sorin, Invigilator
   Tamara Powell, Invigilator
   Christopher Yip, Course Instructor
   Jason Grenier, Course Instructor
   Mostafa Showraki, Psychiatrist
   M.F.E., The Student

In Attendance:

   John Carter, Deanâs Designate, Faculty of Applied Sciences and
   Engineering
   Natalie Ramtahal, Coordinator, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty
   Grievances
   Student charged under s. B.i.1(b) , s. B.i.1(e) , s. B.i.3(b) of the
   Code . The charges related to separate allegations that the Student
   knowingly possessed an unauthorized aid in a term test, that the
   Student submitted work for which credit had previously been obtained,
   and that the Student engaged in a form of academic dishonesty,
   misconduct, or fraud not otherwise described in order to obtain
   academic advantage by attempting to deceive the University through the
   alteration and falsification of documents submitted in her defence. The
   Student was present for the hearing and represented by counsel.
   The Student suffered from certain medical conditions which afforded her
   some accommodation and led expert testimony regarding her condition.
   The Student hoped to expand on the accommodation she had received ,
   however, as the evidence did not establish causation as a matter of
   probability, the Panel concluded it would be improper to do so and gave
   no weight to the testimony in reaching its decision.
   The first charge arose from a group assignment in which the Student was
   assigned a portion of the work. The Student submitted material which
   was essentially verbatim to a project that she had submitted over a
   year earlier. The instructor had given explicit instruction regarding
   academic offenses, required students to submit work through a
   plagiarism detection site and spoke on the issue in class.
   Additionally, all students were required to sign a âDeclaration of
   Original Authorshipâ certifying that the students understand all
   definitions of academic offense including all forms of plagiarism. The
   Student did not deny reusing material, rather she claimed that she was
   unaware of the existence of self-plagiarism. The Panel concluded that
   it was her assumption that one cannot plagiarize oneself, not her
   condition, which led to her failure to internalize the warnings and
   found that she knowingly submitted work in violation of s. B.i.(e) of
   the Code .
   The second charge arose from an email the instructor received from the
   Student notifying him that her assignment would be late. He noticed the
   email was forwarded from another email address. This and the wording of
   the email led him to believe that the assignment may have been authored
   by a different person (M). After meeting with the Deanâs Designate and
   the instructor the Student attempted further deception, claiming she
   sent the email to herself and altering versions of the email to prove
   this claim. The instructor noticed several discrepancies leading him to
   disbelieve the Student. The Student testified and called evidence that
   M had been a tutor to the Student though she herself had created the
   material submitted in the email. The Student had not provided this
   information earlier as she did not think corroborative evidence was
   allowed earlier in the proceeding. The Student also confirmed she
   attempted to mislead the University. For those reasons the Panel found
   the Student guilty of academic dishonesty not otherwise described in
   the Code .
   The final charge arose from an exam the Student took with
   accommodations entitling her to a semi-private writing space and
   certain time breaks. The Student took a washroom break during which two
   invigilators became suspicious of clicking noises coming from the
   washroom. This prompted them to check the Studentâs exam which was
   largely incomplete despite the exam being well underway. The Student
   returned after 22 minutes. The Student testified that she had taken a
   washroom break as she felt nauseous and while in the washroom had
   written notes on a pack of gum. She then used them on the exam. When
   approached by the invigilator, the Student asked him not to share the
   information with anyone. The instructor testified upon seeing the notes
   that they must have been written during the exam, and not prepared
   before, based on their structure. The Student claimed that while she
   knew she was in possession of an aid, she did not appreciate that it
   was unauthorized. However, based on her comments that she planned to
   âpeekâ at her notes to âsneak a lookâ the Panel found her guilty of
   knowingly possessing an unauthorized aid during an exam. The Panel
   concluded that even if the Student did not know she was in possession
   of an unauthorized aid, she ought reasonably to have known.
   The sanction phase of the hearing occurred on a separate day.
   With regard to the finding of guilt on the charge of submitting work
   for which credit had previously been obtained, the Panel concluded that
   although the Studentâs medical condition may well have contributed to
   her failure to follow the rule against seeking double credit, it did
   not prevent her from understanding that rule. Further, given that other
   offences were committed, this offence was factored into the imposition
   of a more serious sanction than would otherwise be given.
   With regard to the finding of guilt with respect to the possession of
   an unauthorized aid, Â the Panel noted that the information was created
   by the Student herself, without resort to external assistance, while
   she was on a washroom break. Â The Panel concluded that given the
   specific previous experience of the Student with the student discipline
   system, the Studentâs medical conditions that might otherwise impair
   her ability to internalize rules forbidding self-produced exam aids did
   not mitigate the sanction.
   With regard to the finding of guilt of academic dishonesty, the Panel
   noted that this was the most significant of the Studentâs offences.
   This charge involved a determined, persistent effort to mislead the
   University regarding the facts of an investigation through deliberate,
   calculated efforts that, but for the determination of the Professor,
   would not have been revealed. Despite medical evidence as to the
   Studentâs impaired judgment, the Panel found that the Studentâs
   behaviour on this occasion reflected weaknesses in her integrity as a
   student.
   Even taking the medical conditions into account, given the Studentâs
   prior experience with academic discipline, her failure to promptly
   admit her attempted deception demonstrated a troubling disregard for
   the standards of honesty and integrity expected of students of the
   University. The Panel also took into account the specific impact on the
   Student in light of her desire to resume her studies at the University
   at the graduate level. The Panel imposed a grade assignment of zero in
   the courses affected by her offences; a 2Â½-year suspension; and a
   2Â½-year notation on the Studentâs academic record and transcript (or a
   3Â½-year notation if the Student resumed her studies later than
   intended).
   [2]View Case

References

   1. http://live-the-office-of-the-governing-council.pantheonsite.io/media/12867
   2. file:///media/13071
