Case #652

   DATE: November 12, 2012
   PARTIES: University of Toronto v. M.O.
   Hearing Date(s): August 20, 2012
   Panel Members:
   Mr. Jeffrey Leon, Chair
   Prof. Pascal Van Lieshout, Faculty Member
   Ms. Fikir Haile, Student Member
   Appearances:
   Mr. Robert Centa, Assistant Discipline Counsel for the University
   Ms. Sierra Yates Robart, DLS for the Student
   In Attendance:
   Ms. M.O., the Student
   Ms. Denise Cooney, Articling Student, Paliare Roland Barristers
   Ms. Natalie Ramtahal, Coordinator, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty
   Grievances

   Trial Division â s. B.i.1(d) and s. B.i.1(f) of Code â plagiarism â
   passages from essay taken verbatim from secondary sources â Agreed
   Statement of Facts â guilty plea â finding of guilt â Joint Submission
   on Penalty â grade assignment of zero for course; three-year
   suspension; four-year notation on transcript or until graduation,
   whichever is later; report to Provost

   Student charged under s. B.i.1(d) and s. B.i.1(f) of the Code . The
   charges related to allegations that the Student submitted an essay
   containing passages taken verbatim from various sources. The Parties
   submitted an Agreed Statement of Facts in which the Student pleaded
   guilty to the charges. The Panel found the Student guilty under s.
   B.i.1(d) and s. B.i.1(f) . The Parties submitted a Joint Submission on
   Penalty. In discussing penalty, the Panel found it highly relevant that
   the Student had previously been suspended for one year for altering a
   University of Toronto medical certificate. The Panel accepted the Joint
   Submission, stating that it was mindful that a Joint Submission should
   be accepted unless to do so âwould be contrary to the public interest
   or bring the administration of justice into disreputeâ ( R. v. Tsicos
   ). The Panel found that the Student had accepted the seriousness of her
   conduct by pleading guilty and appearing at the hearing. Accordingly,
   the Panel concluded that the sanctions proposed by the Joint Submission
   were reasonable: a three-year suspension for a second offence is
   reasonable and promotes individual deterrence and general deterrence
   while allowing for the prospect of rehabilitation. The Panel imposed a
   grade assignment of zero for the course; a three-year suspension; a
   four-year notation on the transcript; and a report be issued to the
   Provost.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12789
