Case 976

DATE:

   January 25, 2019

PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v D.K.

Hearing Date:

   November 2, 2018

Panel Members:

   Ms. Michelle S. Henry, Chair
   Professor Pierre Desrochers, Faculty Panel Member
   Mr. Abdul Sidiqi, Student Panel Member

Appearances:

   Ms. Tina Lie, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg
   Rothstein LLP
   Mr. Robert Centa, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland
   Rosenberg Rothstein LLP

In Attendance:

   Ms. Tracey Gameiro, Associate Director, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty
   Grievances

Not in Attendance:

   The Student

   A hearing of the trial division of the University Tribunal (the
   âTribunalâ) was held on November 2, 2018 to consider charges brought by
   the University against the Student under the Code of Behaviour on
   Academic Matters , 1995, (the â Code â). The Student was charged with
   an academic offence pursuant to s. B.i.3(a) of the Code on the basis
   that she falsified her academic record by publicly misrepresenting that
   she held either a Doctor of Philosophy degree or a Doctorate in
   Education from the University.

   The Student did not attend the hearing, although affidavit evidence
   submitted by the University demonstrated that the Student had
   corresponded with Discipline Counsel about the hearing.Â  The Tribunal
   therefore concluded that the Student had received reasonable notice of
   the hearing in accordance with the notice requirements set out in the
   Statutory Powers Procedure Act and the University Tribunal Rules of
   Practice and Procedure .Â  The Tribunal proceeded to hear the case on
   its merits in the absence of the Student.

   Affidavit evidence submitted by the University explained that the
   Student had registered for the Doctor of Philosophy Program in
   Curriculum Studies and Teacher Development at the Ontario Institute for
   Studies in Education in 2010, but that the Student had not reached the
   stage of candidacy when her registration lapsed in 2016. The Studentâs
   registration remained lapsed at the time of the hearing.Â  Although the
   Student had not completed the academic requirements of her program, she
   nevertheless represented that she held either a Doctor of Philosophy
   degree or a Doctorate in Education from the University.Â  The
   misrepresentation appeared in her LinkedIn profile and in her resume
   posted on her website. The misrepresentation also appeared in an
   article the Student wrote and published online.

   Before considering the question of liability, the Tribunal considered
   whether the alleged misrepresentation could constitute falsification of
   an academic record under the Code .Â  The Tribunal referred to the
   Ontario Superior Court of Justice (Divisional Court) decision in Shank
   v. Daniels , 2002 Carswell 71 and concluded thatÂ the Code extends to
   the public misrepresentation of a studentâs academic history and status
   online.Â  In doing so, the Tribunal adopted the reasoning of the
   Divisional Court in Shank v. Daniels that the public has a stake in the
   integrity of the information contained in a studentâs academic record,
   and not merely in the integrity of an official piece of paper
   certifying the information.

   The Tribunal found the Student guilty of the academic offence of
   falsifying an academic record as defined in s.B.i.3(a) of the Code .Â
   Before making a decision on penalty, the Tribunal noted that the
   Studentâs correspondence demonstrated a blatant disrespect for the
   discipline process and that the Student continued to engage in the
   misrepresentation even when directed to cease and desist by the
   University. The Tribunal also noted, among other things, that there was
   no evidence of any mitigating or extenuating circumstances.Â  The
   Tribunal stated that it must send a strong message to other students
   that misrepresenting oneâs academic history and status is a serious
   offence that will lead to a recommendation of expulsion.

   The Tribunal imposed the following penalty: immediate suspension up to
   five years or until a decision is made on expulsion, whichever comes
   first; a corresponding notation on the Studentâs academic record and
   transcript; a recommendation of expulsion from the University; and
   publication by the Provost of a notice of decision and sanctions
   imposed, with name of Student withheld.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12981
