Case No.: 976

THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL

IN THE MATTER OF charges of academic misconduct fi led on May l 5, 2018,

AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code ofBehaviour on Academic Matters, 1995,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the Un iversity of Toronto Act, 1971, S.O. 1971, c. 56 as am. S.O. 1978, c.
88

BETWEEN:
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
(The "University")
- and -

~

(The "Student")

REASO~S FOR DECISION
Hearing Date: November 2, 2018
Panel Members:
Ms. Michelle S. Henry, Lawyer, Borden Ladner Gervais LLP, Chair
Professor Piene Desrochers, Faculty Panel Member
Mr. Abdul Sidiqi, Student_Panel Member
Appearances:
Ms. Tina Lie, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg Rothstein LLP
Mr. Robert Centa, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg Rothstein LLP
Hearing Secretary
Ms. Tracey Gameiro, Associate Director, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances,
University of Toronto
Not in Attendance:
Ms.

1=-~

' the Student

1. A Hearing of the Trial Division of the University Tribunal convened on November 2,
2018, to consider charges of academic dishonesty brought by the University against the
Student ·under the Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters, 1995 (the "Code"). The
Student was informed of the charges by letter dated May 15, 2018, from Professor Sioban
Nelson, Vice-Provost, Faculty & Academic Life.

PRELIMINARY ISSUE: PROCEEDING IN THE ABSENCE OF THE STUDENT
2. The hearing was scheduled to commence at 9:45 a.m. The Tribunal waited until 10:00
a.m. before commencing the hearing. The Student did not appear at the hearing.
3. Pursuant to sections 6 and 7 of the Statutory Powers Procedure Aci (the "Act"), and Rule
17 of the University Tribunal Rules of Practice and Procedure (the "Rules"), where
reasonable notice of an oral hearing has been given to a pa1ty in accordance with the Act
and the pa1ty does not attend at the hearing, the Tribunal may proceed in the absence of
the patty, and the patty is not entitled to any further notice in the proceeding. In this
case, the University requested that the Tribunal proceed with the hearing in the absence
of the Student.
4. Pursuant to Rule 9, a Notice of Hearing may be served on a student by various means,
including by: sending a copy of the document by courier to the Student's mailing address
contained in the Repository of Student Information ("ROSI"); or emailing a copy of the
document to the student's email address contained in ROSI.
5. The University's Policy on Official Correspondence with Students expressly states that
students are responsible for maintaining on ROSI a current and valid postal address and a
University-issued email account. The Policy also makes it clear that students are
expected to monitor and retrieve their mail, including electronic messaging account(s)
issued to them by the University, on a frequent and consistent basis.
6. Counsel for the Provost filed the Affidavit of Tracey Gameiro, sworn on July 12, 2018
("Gan1eiro Affidavit"). The Gameiro Affidavit confirmed that, on July 6, 2018, Ms.
Gameiro served the Student with the charges issued by Professor Sioban Nelson, ViceProvost, Faculty & Academic Life. She served the charges on the Student by e-mail to
the email addresses the Student had provided to the University in ROSI.
7. The Counsel for the Provost also filed the Affidavit of Janice Patterson, legal assistant to
Tina Lie at the law firm of Paliare Roland Rosenberg Rothstein LLP ("PRRR"), sworn on
October 23, 2018 ("Patterson Affidavit"). The evidence of Ms. Patterson was as follows:
a. Robert Centa, a partner at PRRR, was the Assistant Discipline Counsel who was
originally assigned to prosecute the charges filed against the Student.
2

b. The hearing into the charges filed against the Student was scheduled for August
14, 2018 at 5:45 pm.
c. On August 14, 2018 at 2:01 pm, Mr. Centa received an email from the Student,
which was also sent to the Law Society of Ontario (."LSO"), attaching a complaint ·
that she had filed to the LSO in respect of Mr. Centa's conduct.
d. That day, at 3:35 pm, Mr. Centa sent an email to Christopher Lang, Krista
Osbourne and Tracey Gameiro of the Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances
("ADFG") Office, with a copy to the Student, advising that them that he had
received a copy of a complaint filed at the LSO by the Student. Mr. Centa also
wrote: "While the Provost and I are both of the view that the complaint is
meritless, the Provost is requesting an adjournment so that another assistant
discipline counsel can continue the prosecution".
e. The Student responded to Mr. Centa's email at 3:44 pm, copying the LSO.
f.

At 4:05 pm, Ms. Gameiro of the ADFG Office sent an email to Mr. Centa and the
Student containing the Chair's ruling on the Provost's adjournment request, which
was granted.

g. At 4: 12 pm, the Student responded to Ms. Gameiro's email, copying the LSO as
well as michael.thomas3@torontopolice.on.ca.
h. In light of the Student's complaint to the LSO, Ms. Lie was assigned to continue
the prosecution of the charges against the Student..
1.

On August 15, 2018, at 3:03 pm, Ms. Lie sent an email to the Student introducing
herself and advising that she intended to schedule the Student's hearing for
November 2, 2018 at 9:45 am. Ms. Lie asked the Student to let her know by no
later than the end of the week if that date and time worked for her.

J.

That day, at 3:10 pm, the Student responded to Ms. Lie's email, copying the LSO
and mike.thomas3@torontopolice.on.ca. The Student wrote:
"Look you fuckin bitch, I have sent this to the Law Society again, plus to
the police. Fuck off! I did nothing wrong or I will criminally charge all of
you who are guilty.
'Nough said.
And that's Dr [Student's Name], EdD (LLB) you fucking cunt bitch!"

3

k. At 3:24 pm, Ms. Lie sent an email to Ms. Osbourne of the ADFG Office
requesting that the hearing be scheduled for November 2, 2018 at 9:45 am.

I.

On August 16, 2018 at 11 :29 am, Ms. Osbourne sent an email to the Student
attaching the Notice of Hearing. That day, at 1:41 pm, 1:42 pm and 1:44 pm, the
Student sent three emails in response to Ms. Osbourne's email.

8. Based on the Student's responses, I am satisfied that she received the Notice of Hearing
advising her that the hearing was scheduled for November 2, 2018.
9. Having reviewed the evidence and heard the submissions of counsel for the Provost, the
Tribunal concluded that the Student was given reasonable notice of the hearing in
accordance with the notice requirements set out in the Act and the Rules.. The University
has proven that it provided reasonable notice of the hearing to the Student. Accordingly,
the Tribunal proceeded to hear the case on its merits in the absence of the Student.

THE CHARGES
10. At all material times, the Student was a registered student at the University, registered in
the Doctor of Philosophy Program in Curriculum Studies and Teacher Development at
the Ontario Institute for Studies in Education ("OISE"). The University alleges that the
Student knowingly forged or in any other way altered or falsified an academic record,
and/or uttered, circulated or made use of such forged, altered or falsified record by
representing that she had either a Doctor of Philosophy- degree or a Doctorate in
Education from the University when she knew she did not, contrary to section B.i.3(a) of
the Code.
11. The particulars of the charges were as follows:
a. Since 2010, the Student has been enrolled in the Doctor of Philosophy program in
Cuniculum Studies and Teacher Development in the Department of Cuniculum,
Teaching and Learning at OISE at the University.
b. She did not receive a Doctor of Philosophy degree or a Doctorate in Education
from the University.
c. The Student has repeatedly claimed t~ have received a Doctor of Philosophy
degree or a Doctorate in Education from the University. For example, she
represented or continues to represent that she earned a Doctorate in Education
from the University on her Linkedln profile; she earned a "Doctorate in Education
from OISE I the University of Toronto in Cuniculum, Teaching and Learning
Development" on a resume she posted on the Donna Magazine website; and that
her a11icle, "Voices of Black Girls in Toronto", was "a dissertation submitted in

4

conformity with the requirements for the degree of Doctor of Philosophy
Graduate Department of Cuniculum, Teaching and Learning, Ontario Institute for
Studies in Education of the University of Toronto."
d. The Student knew that each of the representations listed above were false at the .
time she made them.
e. She was advised. that _these representations were false and the University
requested that she stop making such representations. She did not stop or take
down the representations.
f.

The Student knowingly and falsely represented her academic history and status.

g. She had an obligation to provide accurate and truthful information and not to
misrepresent her academic record.
THE EVIDENCE

12. The Tribunal received the evidence of Luc De Nil (."Prof. De Nil") on behalf of the
Provost. Prof. De Nil is the Acting Dean, School of Graduate Studies ("SGS") and _
Acting Vice-Provost, Graduate Research and Education, at the University. Prior to that,
he served as the Vice-Dean, Students at the University's SGS, a position which he held
from 2012 to 2018. His evidence as set out in his Affidavit sworn on August 2, 2018 was
as follows.
13. In the summer of 20 l 0, the Student registered in the Doctor of Philosophy Program in
Cuniculum Studies and Teacher Development at the Ontario Institute for Studies in
Education ("OISE"). The Student finished her comprehensive examinations in 2013 but
did not reach the stage of candidacy. She had a leave of absence starting in the fall of
2014, and her last registration was Summer 2016. After that session, she neither
registered nor asked for a leave of absence. Her registration status became and remains
lapsed, as she has not withdrawn from the program. The Student has not completed her
outstanding academic requirements. She did not receive a Doctor of Philosophy degree
or a Doctorate in Education from the University. A copy of her academic transcript-was
entered into evidence and confoms the cow-ses completed.
14. In May or June 2015, Professor Indigo Esmonde advised Prof. :Oe Nil that the Student
had been misrepresenting her academic record online and in at least one of her
publications. In particular, she was identifying herself as "Dr. [Student's Name]" and
claim,ing to have received a doctoral degree from the University in 2014.
15. On June 4, 2015, Prof. De Nil sent a letter to the Student setting out the basis for his ·
belief that the Student was misrepresenting her academic record, advising her that such

5

misrepresentations violated the Code, and requesting that she cease misrepresenting her
academic record and to take steps to correct the public record.
16. On June 12, 2015, the Student responded to his letter with an e-mail in which she
indicated that she would not cease the misrepresentation of her academic qualifications.
In her email, the Student stated that her decision to call herself "Dr." was because she had
a doctor of journalism degree "that is legal in Canada." The University has not been able
to locate any evidence that the Student has a doctoral level degree from any university.
17. There was no evidence before the Tribunal that the Student had a Doctor of Journalism
Degree at the time the representation was made.
18. On August 17, 2015, while Prof. De Nil was on a leave of absence, Elizabeth Smyth,
Vice-Dean, Programs at SGS ("Prof. Smyth"), obtained confirmation from Professor
Indigo Esmonde at OISE that the Student had removed the requested misrepresentations.
No additional steps were taken to address the academic misconduct of the Student at the
time.
19. On November 13, 2017, Prof. Smyth received a Linkedin invite from the Student. The
invite represented that the Student was a "Dr." who had received a Doctorate in
Education in 2016 from OISE. Prof. Smyth subsequently received Linkedin invites from
the Student on November 20, 2017, December 5, 2017, December 11, 2017 and March
18, 2018'. All the Linkedin invites made the Student appear as if she had acquired a
Doctorate in Education from the University. Prof. Smyth forwarded copies of the e-mails
containing the Linkedin invites to Prof. De Nil. These e-mails were entered into
evidence.
20. In or around February 2018, Prof. De Nil was advised by Prof. Smyth that the Student
had posted a document that she represented to be her "disse11ation submitted in
conformity with the requirements for the degree of Doctor of Philosophy" at the
University. The Student never submitted a thesis in conformity with the requirements for
the degree of Doctor of Philosophy. As such, the University's position was that this was
an inaccurate description of her work.
21. On February 28, 2018, Prof. De Nil confirmed through ROSI that the University had not
conferred a Doctor in Philosophy or a Doctorate in Education to the Student.
22. On March 2, 2018, Prof. De Nil received an e-ma~l from Dianne Snider-H~ximer,
Executive Assistant to the Vice-Provost, Graduate Research & Education and the Dean,
SGS, indicating that the Student had uploaded her resume to her Donna Magazine
website. The Student's resume stated that she has obtained a Doctorate in Education
from OISE. A copy of the resume was entered into evidence.
6

23. On March 19, 2018, an e-mail was sent to the Student requesting that she attend a
meeting with Prof. De Nil to discuss this matter. The Student did not respond despite
numerous attempts made by Ms. Snider-Heximer.
24. On April 3, 2018, the Student responded to Ms. Snider-Heximer's message by stating,
"Fuck off or I' ll sue!" The signature block of the Student's e-mail also contained the
representation that she had an EdD from OISE. A copy of the Student's e-mail was ·
entered into evidence.
25. On April 4, 2018, Ms. Snider-Heximer sent an e-mail to the Student confirming her
meeting with Prof. De Nil on April 9, 2018. The Student responded stating, "Fuck off or
I' ll sue! Don't you have better fucking things to do! I do!" A copy of the Student's email was entered into evidence.
26. On April 9, 2018, the Student did not appear at the meeting with Prof. De Nil to discuss
the matter. Consequently, the matter was referred to the Provost to consider laying
charges under the Code.
27. On April 10, 2018, Pro. De Nil sent a letter to the Student and informed the Student that
he had referred the matter of her academic misconduct to the Provost's Office. The letter
was sent via email by Ms. Snider-Heximer.
28. On April 12, 2018, the Student replied to Ms. Snider-Heximer and stated "Honestly, fuck
off or I' ll sue." A copy of the Student's e-mail was entered into evidence.
29. As of July 26, 2018, the Student still claimed that she has received her Doctorate in
Education from the University on both her Linkedin page and the Donna Magazine
website. A screen-shot, taken July 26, 2018, of the Student's Linkedln page and her
resume from the Donna Magazine website were entered into evidence.
DECISION OF THE TRIBUNAL ON CHARGES
-Whether the Charges are appropriate under subsection B.1(3)(a) of the Code

30. The first issue before the Tribunal was whether the offence alleged against the Student,
.that she repeatedly misrepresented and claimed to have received a Doctor of Philosophy .
degree or a Doctorate in Education from the University, could constitute an offence under
the Code.
31 . Section B.i.3 of the Code sets out the definition of an Offence and reads in part as
follows:

It shall be an offence for a faculty member and student alike knowingly:
7

(a) to forge or in any other way alter or falsify any academic record, or to utter,
circulate or make use of any such forged, altered or falsified record, whether the
record be in print or electronic form;
32. In Shank v. Daniels, 2002 Carswell 71, the Ontario Superior court of Justice (Divisional
C.o mt) considered an application for judicial review of a decision of the Dean of the
University's Faculty of Law that the applicant had committed an academic offence under
t he Code and the penalty of a one-year suspension with a notation on record. The offence
alleged against the student in that case was that she provided prospective employers with
information that inaccurately repmted her first-term results in a manner that violated ss
B.i.3 (a) and (b) of the Code. In that case, the student's conduct at issue was that of
sending a letter representing that her marks were as set out in the letter, when, in part,
they were not. She did not purpo1t to send a copy of any official University document.
One of the issues before the Comt was whether her conduct was a falsification of an
academic record. In other words, whether sending the letter in question containing the
inaccmate grades could constitute an offence under the Code, and whether there was
falsification of a University record.
33. In finding that the Code extends to the act complained of, and that the .alleged offence, if
proven, would constitute a violation of B.i.3 (a) and ·(b) of the Code, the Court reasoned
at paragraph 33 as follows:
.. .It is surely of fundamental impo1tance that students not misrepresent their
achievements.' Other students, the business community and the University alike
have a stake in the integrity of the record of achievement and the University's
Code of Conduct can properly extend to such communications by students to the
outside world. There is nothing in the language of s. B.I.3(a) to confine its scope
to communications within the University.
At paragraph 36, the Court concluded:
In our view, it is the information in the official record, and not merely the
integrity of an official piece of paper ce1tifying as to that information that is
protected by the Code in this section. If tampering with such a ce1tificate were
the only way to commit the offence, it would .be entirely covered by the word
"forge," but the Code goes on to use the language " or in any other way alter or
falsify, any acaqemic record. Unquestionably, the applicant's letter constituted
the circulation or making use of a false statement of the contents of the
University's records.

8

34. Having regard to the above, the Tribunal concludes that the Code extends to the conduct
complained of in this case, that is, the public misrepresentation of the Student's academic
history and status online.
Finding

35. Having considered all the evidence heard during the hearing and the Affidavit evidence,
the Tribunal found that the Student knowingly forged or in any other way altered or
falsified an academic record, and/or uttered, circulated or made use of such forged,
altered or falsified record by representing that she had either a Doctor of Philosophy
degree or a Doctorate in Education from the University of Toronto ("University") when
she knew she did not, contrary to section B.i.3(a) of the Code.
36. Consequently, the T~ibunal finds that the Charge #1 (as outlined in paragraph 10 and 11)
above had been proven with clear and convincing evidence on a balance of probabilities.
Accordingly, the Tribunal entered a finding of guilty with respect to the Charge.

PENALTY
37. The University sought the following penalties:
a. The Student shall be immediately suspended from the University of Toronto for a
period of up to 5 years from November 2, 20 18, or until Governing Council
makes its decision on expulsion, whichever comes first, and that a corresponding
notation be placed on her academic record and transcript;
b. The Tribunal recommends to the President of the University that he recommend
to the Governing Council that the Student be exp~lled from the University; and,
c. That the case shall be reported to the Provost for publication of a notice of the
decision of the Tribunal and the sanctions imposed, with the Student's name
withheld.
38. The Provost called no further ·evidence.

9

DECISION OF THE TRIBUNAL ON PENALTY
39. The Tribunal considered the principles and factors relevant to sanction set out in
University of Toronto and Mr. C (Case No. 1976/77-3, November 5, 1976).
a) The character of the Student. As the Student did not participate in the
proceeding, there was no evidence before the Tribunal regarding the Student's
character other than the facts relating to this offence and the email responses
from the Student, some of which was quoted above. The email correspondences
from the Student ce1iainly demonstrated a blatant disrespect for the discipline
process and for those involved. Counsel for the Provost also submitted that the
act was an act of deliberate dishonesty.
b) The likelihood of a repetition of the offence. The Student did not have a prior
record of academic offences. However, this was not the first time the Student
was directed by the University to remove misrepresentations of her academic
qualifications from the public record, and advised that such misrepresentations
violated the Code. In the past, she had taken steps to correct the record, as such
the Student was aware of her actions and the University's position. on such
representations. On this occasion, having been directed to cease and desist
making such representations by the University, and even when faced with the
possipility of being charged with an offence, the Student continued to engage in
the misrepresentation.
c) The nature of the offence committed. As noted in a number of Tribunal
decisions, including University of Toronto v. A.P. (Case No 913, January 16,
2018) (at para 39), and University of Toronto v. T.C. (Case No 856, October 6,
2016) (at para 17), misrepresentation of one's academic qualifications and
forgery of an academic record are considered a most serious offence. As such, in
the absence of mitigating factors,.such an offence warrants a recommendation of
expulsion.
d) Any extenuating circumstances surrounding the commission of the offence.
The Student did not paiticipate in this hearing. Accordingly, there is no evidence
before the Tribunal of mitigating or extenuating circumstances ..

e) The detriment to the University occasioned by the offence. Such offences
pose a serious concern and are detrimental to the academic integrity of the
University.

f) The need to deter others from committing a similar offence. General
deterrence is an impo1tant factor in these cases. The Panel accepts that the
10

University and the Tribunal must send a strong message to other students that
misrepresenting one's academic history and status is a serious offence which will
lead to a recqmmendation of expulsion.
40. As established in University of Toronto and Mr. C, supra and other cases to follow, the
determination of an appropriate penalty in every case by the Tribunal will depend on an
assessment of these principles and factors in the individual circumstances of the case.
However, the Discipline Appeals Board has stressed the importance of a general
consistency in the approach of Tribunals to sanction, so that the students are treated fairly
and equitably. (Discipline Appeal Board, University of Toronto v. D. S., Case No 451,
August 24, 2007).
4 1. A review of similar cases provided by Counsel to the University indicates that a student
who commits such an offence wa1rnnts a recommendation of expulsion. With respect to
the length of the suspension, a five-year suspension is generally consistent with the
sanctions granted in similar circumstances.
42. Having regard to the cases, the submissions of the University, and the relevant factors
outlined above, the Panel ~grees that the recommended sanctions are appropriate.
43. At the conclusion of the hearing, the Panel made the following order:
a. That the hearing may proceed in the absence of the Student;
b. That the Student is guilty of charge #1, that she knowingly falsified her academic
record and circulated and made use of such falsified academic record, contrary to
section B.I.3(a) of the Code;
c. That the following sanctions shall be imposed on the Student:
i. the Student shall be immediately suspended from the University of
Toronto for a period of up to 5 years from the date of this order or until
Governing Council makes its decision on expulsion, whichever comes
first, and that a conesponding notation be placed on her academic record
and transcript; and
ii. the Tribunal recommends to the President of the University that he
recommend to the Governing Council that the Student be expelled from
the University; and
111.

That this case shall be reported to the Provost for publication of a notice of
the decision of the Tribunal and the sanction or sanctions imposed, with
the name of the Student withheld.

11

44. An Order was signed at the hearing by the Panel to this ~ffect.

DATED at Toronto, January 25, 2019.

12

