Case #04-05-02

   DATE: October 8, 2004
   PARTIES: University of Toronto v. Mr. L.
   Hearing Date(s): September 29, 2004
   Panel Members:
   Ronald G. Slaght, Q.C., Co-Chair
   Ellen Hodnett, Faculty Panel Member
   Asma Khan, Student Panel Member
   Appearances:
   Mathew Lewans, agent for Mr. L.
   Robert A. Centa, Assistant Discipline Counsel, for the University
   Trial Division - s. B.i.1(d) of Code â plagiarism â paper and
   introduction to Masterâs thesis â guilty plea â Agreed Statement of
   Facts â decanal sanction for prior academic offence - three-year
   suspension at most severe end of sanction in circumstances - no
   fraudulent intention â disclosure that balance of paper also
   plagiarized despite no obligation to admit fact -Â  Joint Submission on
   Penalty accepted - grade assignment of zero for course; three-year
   suspension; five-year notation on transcript; and report issued to
   Provost
   Student charged with two offences under s. B.i.1(d), and alternatively,
   two offences under s. B.i.3(b) of the Code. The charges related to
   allegations that the Student submitted a plagiarized paper in one
   course and that he submitted a plagiarized introduction to his Masterâs
   thesis. The Student pleaded guilty to the charges under s. B.i.1(d) of
   the Code. The parties submitted an Agreed Statement of Facts. The
   Student had previously been sanctioned at the divisional level for a
   prior plagiarism offence. The Panel accepted the Studentâs guilty
   pleas. The Student admitted that the entire paper was plagiarized, when
   only the first half had been identified as such. The Panel considered
   whether or not the submitted three-year suspension was adequate in
   light of the previous plagiarism incident and whether the Student had
   learned from his previous divisional sanction. The Panel observed that
   a three-year suspension was at the most severe end of what was afforded
   in such cases. The Panel found that there was no fraudulent intent on
   the part of the Student. The Panel stated its appreciation that the
   Student admitted that the balance of the paper was also plagiarized.
   The Panel accepted the Joint Submission on Sanction and imposed a grade
   of zero in the course; a three-year suspension; a five-year notation on
   the Studentâs academic record; and that a report be issued to the
   Provost.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12990
