Report 391

DATE:

   December 8, 2017

PARTIES:

   Y.A. (âthe Studentâ) v. the University of Toronto, Mississauga (UTM)

Hearing Date(s):

   November 6, 2017

Committee Members:

   Ms. Sara Faherty, Chair
   Professor Andrea Sass-Kortsak, Faculty Governor
   Ms. Mala Kashyap, Student Governor

Secretary:

   Ms. Krista Osbourne, Administrative Clerk and Hearing Secretary,
   Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances

Appearances:

For the Student Appellant:

   Mr. Y.A. (the Student)

For the UTM:

   Professor Michael Lettieri, Vice Dean, Undergraduate Programs
   Ms. Renu Kanga Fonseca, Director, Student Recruitment and Admissions

   Student appeal from a decision of the Fee Consideration Committee at
   the UTM Registrarâs Office, which disallowed the Studentâs request for
   a fee refund and reversal of charges placed on the Studentâs account.
   The disputed charges related to a year-long course that the Student
   dropped after the relevant add/drop deadline. The Student dropped the
   course after the last date to which he would have been entitled to get
   even a partial refund of his fees.

   The Committee declined to review the Fee Consideration Committeeâs
   ruling because Section 2.1 of the Terms of Reference that govern the
   Academic Appeals Committee of the Governing Council permits the
   Committee to âhear and consider appeals made by students against
   decisions of faculty, college or school councils (or committees
   thereof) in the application of academic regulations and requirementsâ
   and a decision by a registrarial fee refund committee is not a decision
   that applied an academic regulation to a student. The Committeeâs
   decision is aligned with the fact that the Committee is limited to
   academic remedies (e.g. late withdrawal without academic penalty,
   reinstatement into a program) and not the kind of financial relief
   requested by the Student.

   The Committee nonetheless considered the fairness of the practice of
   imposing add/drop deadline because, broadly understood, it is an
   academic regulation. There were two potential grounds for review. The
   first is that the policy was not applied consistently. On this ground,
   the Committee found that the goal of the add/drop deadline was not tied
   to a Studentâs ability to predict whether they would succeed in the
   course, rather, it was to allow Students the opportunity to drop a
   course once they have an idea of what the course is about, whether they
   are able to understand and connect with the instructor, and the amount
   of time they should be expected to devote to the course. Even when a
   student encounters an unforeseen problem that arose after the add/drop
   deadline had passed, and the Committee permits late withdrawal without
   academic penalty, the Committee does not have the authority to reverse
   the associated tuition and fees ( Report #302 ).

   On the second ground of review, the fairness of the add/drop deadline
   as an academic regulation, the Committee agreed that the common
   understanding of the word ârefundâ tends to relate exclusively to money
   that has already been paid and that it would be clearer to expressly
   remind students who drop year-long courses that they will still be
   responsible for any future payments. Nonetheless, the Committee
   concluded that the policy was sufficiently communicated to the Student,
   and the Universityâs use of the term ârefundâ did not cause the Student
   to take an action he otherwise would not have taken.Â  Appeal
   dismissed.
   [1]View Report

References

   1. file:///media/12638
