Report 373

DATE:

   June 5, 2014

PARTIES:

   Ms. R.S. (the Student) v. the School of Graduate Studies

Hearing Date(s):

   March 19, 2014

Committee Members:

   Ms. Emily Orchard (Chair)
   Professor Andrea Sass-Kortsak
   Mr. Adrian De Leon

Secretary:

   Ms. Sinead Cutt, Administrative Assistant, Office of Appeals,
   Discipline and Faculty Grievances

Appearances:

For the Student Appellant:

   Ms. Andrea Wobick, Counsel for the Student
   Ms. R.S., the Appellant (âthe Studentâ)

For the School of Graduate Studies:

   Mr. Robert Centa, Lawyer for the Division
   Professor Jane Alderdice, Director, Quality Assessment and Governance
   Professor Alan Saks, Professor of Organizational Behaviour and HR
   Management, UTM
   Ms. Deborah Campbell, Access/Information Services Specialist, Robarts
   Library

   Appeal from the School of Graduate Studiesâ (SGS) decision to terminate
   the Studentâs enrolment in her Program, and a request for late
   withdrawal without academic penalty from five courses. The Student
   relied on her uncontested serious personal and medical problems,
   together with the Facultyâs alleged failure to sufficiently accommodate
   them, as the basis for her failure to perform satisfactorily in the
   courses. The Student was terminated from the Program as a result of her
   failure to maintain a mid-B average. At issue in this case was whether
   the Student's disabilities were sufficiently accommodated by the
   Faculty and whether any alleged failure to accommodate the Studentâs
   disabilities justified the extraordinary relief of late withdrawal
   without academic penalty and substitution of aegrotat standing five
   years after the earliest courses were undertaken.

   The Committee denied the Studentâs request to admit additional
   documents on the eve of the Continuation Hearing, noting that the
   Studentâs failure to make this request in a timely fashion was
   unreasonable (especially given that the matter was adjourned for six
   months).

   The Committee rejected the Studentâs assertion that she was unaware of
   her right to appeal grades in various courses and that the Faculty had
   a duty to personally inform her of this right, emphasizing that
   students have a duty to familiarize themselves with their rights and
   responsibilities and the policies of their respective programs and to
   act in a timely fashion to avail themselves thereof, and further that
   the Student was made aware of her right to appeal in the SGS Calendar.

   With respect to the first Course, the Committee found that the
   extraordinary relief of late withdrawal without academic penalty was
   warranted because the Studentâs already-existing circumstances became
   significantly more severe and could not have been reasonably
   anticipated by the Student. The Committee also noted that the Studentâs
   ability to perform well in other courses and her decision to drop
   courses before the drop date cannot be relied upon to suggest that she
   was well enough to perform well in all of her courses or assess the
   severity of the impact of an FZ on her status in the program. The
   Committee stated that is did not aim to establish a precedent that
   would empower students to turn a willfully blind eye to University
   policies only to later seek late withdrawal without academic penalty on
   the basis that they were unaware of such policies; students are not
   absolved of their obligations to familiarize themselves with relevant
   rights and responsibilities, even if they are entitled to special
   accommodation. The Committee also noted that students are not entitled
   to monetary refunds of courses for which they are granted late
   withdrawal without academic penalty.

   With respect to the second, third, fourth, and fifth courses, the
   Committee dismissed the Studentâs appeals for late withdrawal without
   academic penalty and aegrotat standing as untimely and without merit.
   [The courses were taken between Winter 2009 and Winter 2012, and though
   the exact circumstances differ in the reasoning for each course, the
   reasoning will be discussed together here.] The Committee noted its
   disappointment at the administrative error that led to the failure of
   Accessibility Services to assess the Student; however, such a failure
   must have a temporal limit. The Student cannot rely on that failure to
   explain away the FZs she received in courses taken months and years
   after her initial attempt to enlist the officeâs support. The Student
   was aware of her tenuous academic and personal circumstances and ought
   to have sought relief in a timely fashion; there was no satisfactory
   explanation of her failure to inform Accessibility Services of her
   injuries and issues. The duty to accommodate students can only be
   imposed upon the University in circumstances in which it is made aware
   of a studentâs disability. There was also no evidence to support the
   Studentâs allegations that the Professors in one of her courses were
   biased against her.

   The Committee concluded that the SGSâs decision to terminate the
   Studentâs registration was entirely reasonable, particularly as the
   record indicated that this decision followed numerous accommodations
   and several clear written warnings to the Student that her academic
   standing was in jeopardy.

   Appeal dismissed in part.
   [1]View Report

References

   1. file:///media/12619
