THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
THE GOVERNING COUNCIL
Report #373 of the Academic Appeals Board
June 5, 2014
To the Academic Board
University of Toronto

Your Committee reports that it held a hearing on March 19, 2014 (the "Hearing") and May 2,
2014 (the "Continuation Hearing"), at which the following members were present:
Ms. Emily Orchard, Chair
Professor Andrea Sass-Kortsak
Mr. Adrian De Leon
Secretary (April 19, 2014 Hearing): Mr. Christopher Lang, Director, Office of Appeals,
Discipline and Faculty Grievances
Secretary (May 2, 2014 Continuation Hearing): Ms. Sinead Cutt, Administrative
Assistant, Office of Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances

Appearances:
For the Student:
Ms. Andrea Wobick, Counsel for the Student (April 19, 2014 Hearing)
The Student (May 2, 2014 Continuation Hearing)
For the School of Graduate Studies:
Mr. Robert Centa, Lawyer for the Division
Professor Jane Alderdice, Director, Quality Assessment and Governance
Professor Alan Saks, Professor of Organizational Behaviour and HR Management,
Department of Management, University of Toronto Scarborough
Ms. Deborah Campbell, Access/Information Services Specialist, Robarts Library

Appeal
This is an appeal from the decision of the Graduate Academic Appeals Board (the "Board")
dated March 11, 2013, denying the student's appeal from the decision of the School of Graduate
Studies ("SGS") to terminate the Student's enrollment in the Master oflndustrial Relations and
Human Resources Program (the "Program") for failure to maintain the required mid-B average.
The Board denied the Student's request for late withdrawal without academic penalty from
IREIOl0H (Fall 2008), IREI 126H (Winter 2009), IREIOIOH (Fall 2010), IRE1126H (Winter
2012) and the substitution of aegrotat standing in IRE1338H (Winter 2009).
The appeal is dismissed in part.
In what follows, the Committee has addressed each of the forms of relief sought by the Student
in this appeal. The Committee notes that Student's submissions touched upon several recurring
themes. The Committee has addressed these overarching themes, together with some procedural
issues, at the outset and, even though we are a reviewing body, we have reiterated many of the
facts that were before the Board.
Representation

The hearing in this matter was initially held on March 19, 2014. However, as a result of a
scheduling conflict, the matter was not heard in its entirety on that date. The Committee
reconvened on May 2, 2014 (the "Continuation Hearing") in order to hear the Student's reply,
the Respondent's response thereto, and the parties' closing submissions.
The Student was, at first instance, represented by counsel who aptly made submissions on her
behalf. By email dated May 1, 2014, however, the Student advised the Office of Appeals,
Discipline and Faculty Grievances, that she would not be represented by counsel at the
Continuation Hearing. In this email, she further sought permission to admit an additional ten
(10) decisions of the Academic Appeals Committee (the "AAC") and a document that addressed
issues relating to procedural fairness. The Committee did not have the benefit of reviewing these
decisions in advance of the Continuation Hearing. The parties were invited to make submissions
regarding whether these documents ought to be admitted and considered by the Committee. The
Student argued that the decision would be of assistance to the Committee in rendering its
decisions, but was unable to elaborate on their subject matter or relevance to the issues under
consideration, submitting only that they would be referred to briefly. The Respondent objected
to their admission on the basis that the reply materials filed by the Centre for Industrial Relations
and Human Resources (the "Centre") had been prepared in response to the materials relied upon
by the Student at the time. Counsel to the Respondent further noted that it was late in the day to
be admitting cases which it had not had the opportunity to consider, particularly in light of the
fact that the Student was unable to identify upon which cases she intended to rely and for what
purpose.

2

In preparing for this appeal, this Committee exhaustively reviewed previous decisions of the
AAC in which late withdrawal without academic penalty has been sought. The principle applied
by this Committee in cases of this sort is well-established and clear; the remedy is an
extraordinary one that is only granted in extremely limited circumstances and in such cases
where a very high threshold is met. The Committee is bound to apply the facts of this case to
the principles established by this body.
Your Committee notes that the hearing of this matter was adjourned for approximately six
weeks. Despite this fact, the Student waited until the eve of the Continuation Hearing to request
permission to file additional materials, which request was not made known to this Committee
until the start of the Continuation Hearing. On hearing and considering the submissions made by
both parties, your Committee made a finding that the Student would not be permitted to admit
the additional documents. The Committee notes that the Student's failure to make this request in
a timely fashion was unreasonable. Further, she did not seek to admit any new evidence or cases
with which this Committee is unfamiliar, nor, as stated above, could she identify upon which
cases she intended to rely and for what purpose. Given that your Committee is a reviewing
body, and that the Student presented no new evidence, this Committee's role was to review the
review the reasonableness of the Board's decision taking into account the facts before us and the
well-established legal principles from prior AAC cases.
Procedural Fairness

The Committee went to great lengths at the commencement of the Continuation Hearing to
explain the scope of an appropriate reply to the Student, including reminding her of the fact that
her counsel had already made submissions on her behalf in this matter and that she would not,
accordingly, be permitted, nor was it necessary, to make her case a second time. Despite these
instructions, the Chair was required to provide the student with guidance and repeated reminders
about the appropriateness of her submissions throughout the Continuation Hearing. The
Committee notes that the Student was specifically reassured that the Committee had thoroughly
reviewed all of the materials submitted in this matter and that she needn't, and indeed would not
be permitted, to repeat those submissions made by her counsel.
No Knowledge of a Right of Appeal

The Committee repeatedly heard from both counsel to the Student and the Student herself that
she was unaware of her right to appeal her grades in various courses. According to the Student,
the Centre had a duty to personally inform her of the right to appeal the grades which are the
subject of this appeal and in the absence of such reminders following, the Centre should be
precluded from objecting to the Student's request for late withdrawal.
Your Committee does not agree with this submission and notes (1) that students have a duty to
familiarize themselves with their rights and responsibilities and the policies of their respective
programs and to act in a timely fashion to avail themselves thereof and (2) that the Student was
3

made aware of her right to appeal. The SGS Calendar which the Student received in each of her
years of study clearly sets out the timeline for departmental level appeals and beyond. 1

Overview
The Program at the Centre is a course-based graduate degree program that can be pursued in one
of two formats: a two year program that requires students to earn 18 half-course credits over two
academic years, and a 12-month program requiring students to earn 14 half-course credits over a
12-month period (during three sessions of study between September and August). The 12-month
program, in which the Student was enrolled, is intended for students who have experience in the
field. Students can elect to pursue the degree on a full or part-time basis in both the 12-month
and two-year program formats. However, students are not permitted to switch from the 12month program to the two-year program following commencement thereof.
Students who are enrolled in the 12-month program are required to take 7.0 full-course
equivalents (FCE) of which the following 3.5 FCE are required2 :
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

IRE1010H: Economic Environment of Industrial Relations and Human Resources
IRE1126H: Labour Market Policy
IRE 161 lH: Sociology of Industrial Relations
IRE2001H: Foundations and Current Issues in Industrial Relations and Human Resources
IRE2002Y: Research Methods in Industrial Relations and Human Resources
IRE1270H: Law of Labour Relations
IRE1338H: Law in the Workplace

The SGS Calendar further provides that students are required to achieve a mid-B average in the
first two sessions of the program in order to continue into the third session and that if a student
fails to complete a graduate course in a satisfactory manner (i.e. by earning a failing grade of FZ
or one which is below the declared minimum requirement), the graduate unit may recommend to
SGS the termination of the Student's participation in the Program. As will be described in
greater detail below, it is unclear on the face of the record whether the latter policy appeared in
the 2008/2009 SGS Calendar, upon which the Student would presumably have relied in making
decisions about the impact of the FZs earned during the 2008/2009 academic year on her
progress in the Program. 3
The Student was admitted into the 12-month full-time Program in 2008 and commenced her
studies in September 2008. In the ordinary course, therefore, she would have completed the
Program in August 2009. However, as will be set forth in greater detail below, the Student
experienced a lengthy period of serious personal and medical problems, which impacted her

1 SGS 2008/2009 Calendar, Tabs 1-4 of the Respondent's Book of Documents
2 SGS 2008/2009 Calendar, Tab 1 of the Respondent's Book of Documents
3 Ibid.

4

successful completion of the following half-courses and resulted in her taking two leaves of
absence:
•
•
•
•

Fall 2008: the Student earned an FZ in IRE1010H
Winter 2009: the Student earned an FZ in IRE1126H and INC in IRE1338H
Fall 2010: the Student earned an FZ in IRE1010H (for a second time)
Winter 2012: the Student earned an FZ in IRE1126H (also for a second time)

The Student relies upon her personal and medical problems, together with the Centre's alleged
failure to sufficiently accommodate them, as the basis for her failure to perform satisfactorily in
the courses in respect of which she now seeks late withdrawal without academic penalty
(IRE1010H: Fall 2008 and 2010 and IRE1126H: Winter 2009 and 2012) and substitution of
aegrotat standing (IRE1338H).
By letter dated June 18, 2012, from the SGS Director of Student Services, the Student was
advised that her registration in the Program was terminated as a result of her "failure to maintain
good academic standing and a mid-B average".

Duty to Accommodate
As noted above, both the Student and the Respondent acknowledge that disability is a protected
ground under the Ontario Human Rights Code and that the University is, as a service provider,
under a duty to accommodate students to the point of undue hardship. Where the parties
disagree, however, is whether the Student was sufficiently accommodated by the University.
The Respondent submits that the Student was not discriminated against, that the
accommodations put in place were sufficient and that her failure to familiarize herself with and
leverage SGS policies, and to take an active role in ensuring her academic success, account for
her predicament. It further notes that had the Student alerted the Centre to certain of her medical
issues while enrolled in the Program or sought relief in respect of her failing grades in a timely
fashion, the Centre might have been in a position to consider further accommodations. However,
the Committee cannot, it says, attempt to sift the sand of time and grant such extraordinary relief
years after the window to appeal the foregoing grades has closed. The Student, however, argues
that the personal and medical issues from which the Student was suffering between 2008 and
2012 impacted her ability to perform academically, and to properly interpret and apply the SGS
policies regarding grade appeals. According to the Student, the Board ought to have examined
the Student's failure to seek appropriate relief in respect of her courses through the lens of
disability, which, it alleges, it failed to do in dismissing her appeal. The Student further submits
that the Centre did not adequately accommodate the Student's disability. The Committee will
address each of these submissions in tum below.

5

The Student's Personal Circumstances
To say that the Student's personal circumstances during the academic years at issue were
difficult would be to grossly understate the issues with which she was wrestling. The Student
and her family were embroiled in legal matters related to their attempt to escape an abusive
father and to ensure that measures were in place to restrain his repeated attempts at reconciliation
with the family. The Student's mother suffers from severe asthma, which the evidence confirms
flares up when she is under stress. The Student's younger sibling also suffers from a debilitating
medical condition which is exacerbated by stress. During the period 2008-2010, the Student
appears to have assumed, likely with little choice, responsibility for retaining and instructing
counsel in the criminal matters relating to her father, caring for her mother and siblings,
including by assuming responsibility for many domestic duties, pursuing full-time academic
studies and working. In addition, in February 2009 she fell down a flight of stairs and in June
2009 was in a car accident. She sustained relatively severe injuries from both incidents, which
required ongoing medical attention and care.

The Issues
The Panel, like the Board before it, accepts the Student's description of her personal situation
and does not dispute the fact that it likely negatively impacted her ability to perform to the
academic standard demanded by the Program and to which she was accustomed. The Centre
similarly does not dispute the fact that the Student suffered from considerable difficulties during
the course of her studies.
At issue in this case is whether the Student's disabilities were sufficiently accommodated and
whether any alleged failure to accommodate the Student's disabilities justifies the extraordinary
relief of late withdrawal without academic penalty and substitution of aegrotat standing as many
as five years after the earliest courses were undertaken.
The Student submits that the Centre failed to accommodate her and seeks the following
remedies:
•
•
•
•
•

Removal of the FZ mark for IRE1010H (Fall 2008)
Removal of the FZ mark for IREIOIOH (Fall 2010)
Removal of the FZ mark for IRE1126H (Winter 2009)
Substitution of aegrotat standing in IRE1126H (Winter 2012)
Substitution of aegrotat standing in IRE 13 3 8H (Winter 2009)

The Centre submits that the Student's appeals are grossly out of time in respect of all of the
courses taken before the 2011/2012 appeal and should, in any event, be dismissed on their
merits.
6

IRE1010H (Fall 2008) and IRE1126H (Winter 2009)
As described above, the Student's personal situation during Fall 2008 was incredibly difficult, a
fact which is not disputed by the Centre. The Student's father, who had been convicted of
assault in May 2008, made repeated attempts to reconcile with the family, breaching a court
imposed restraining order in so doing. Each such attempt required the Student to engage the
family's lawyer to take steps to enforce the restraining order and ensure that adequate
precautions were in place to prevent his having any contact with them. The affidavits submitted
by the Student, her mother and her brother in response to her father's Motion to Change the
terms of the restraining order confirm that the Student and her family lived in constant fear that
the restraining order would be lifted and their safety compromised. The affidavits further
confirm that the Student's mother had been hospitalized several times between 2008 and 2010
and was, as a result of the stress caused by her involvement in the legal matters, instructed by her
doctor to limit her involvement therein and not to attend court. As a result, the burden of
overseeing this legal matter and that of being the primary caregiver and provider of emotional
support for her family members were shifted to the Student. The evidence also suggests that in
or around Fall 2008, the Respondent's father became extremely angry regarding the court
ordered division of finances and the Student feared increasingly for the safety of her family at
this time. 4
During this same time, the Student was undertaking her first tenn of the Program. The evidence
confirms that from the very beginning the Student struggled with the course load and had
difficulty coping with the volume of work. She initially enrolled in five half courses during the
Fall 2008 term, but dropped two courses before the October 31, 2008 drop date, having
recognized her inability to complete them successfully. On October 23, 2008, while writing her
midterm examination, the Student experienced chest pains and was excused from completing the
exam. She went straight to Ms. Campbell's office where the latter contacted the University's
Psychiatric Service office and scheduled an emergency appointment, presumably because she
was sufficiently concerned about the Student's well-being to consider immediate action
necessary. Dr. Masson's letter to Ms. Campbell following his assessment of the Student notes
that the Student would continue to receive assistance from the office and encourages her to take a
reduced course load and receive "any possible flexibility/consideration regarding assignments
given." The Centre was responsive to this recommendation and the record confirms that the
Student sought and received several extensions in IRE1630H and IRE1645, both of which she
completed successfully. The Centre also permitted the Student to rewrite the mid-term exam in
IRE 101 OH twice and to write a 100% final examination. Your Committee finds that these efforts
were a good faith attempt by the Centre to provide the Student with sufficient accommodations.
The Student's troubles did not abate and, in November 2008, while still under the care of Dr.
Masson, she applied to Accessibility Services for an accommodation. However, as a result of an
4 Student Service Consultation Report dated November 27, 2008, Tab 6, Page 6

of the Student's Book of

Documents.

7

administrative error, she never received a response from that office. Your Committee can only
speculate as to what accommodations, if any, Accessibility Services would have recommended
be put in place to support the Student. The Student did not pursue Accessibility Services, did not
drop IRE 101 OH, and ultimately failed the course. The Student now seeks late withdrawal
without academic penalty.
The ability to obtain late withdrawal without academic penalty is an extraordinary remedy 5 ,
reserved for the most serious and unique of situations. The very existence of "drop dates"
indicates that the University takes seriously the ability of a student to choose whether or not to
continue in a course for any number of reasons personal to the student. By that date each term,
the student is expected to have assessed his or her situation and made a decision. But once the
date has passed, the University takes the position that the student has decided, no matter what
situation may have existed before the drop date or may arise after the drop date, to continue on in
the course. 6 A student is not to be allowed a substantially risk free gamble that anticipated
difficulties will be overcome7 • Although exceptions to the drop date regime are rare, the AAC
has said that it is appropriate to grant this remedy "when unanticipated circumstances arise after
the 'drop date', when then existing circumstances unexpectedly become more severe, or where
then existing circumstances were reasonably expected to abate but did not." 8 Exceptions to this
policy have also been made on medical and compassionate grounds. 9
The Board found that although troubling, Accessibility Services' administrative error was not
responsible for the Student's failure in IRE1010H. It further held that the Centre adequately
accommodated the Student and rejected her submission that she could not have anticipated her
father's continuing breach of the no-contact order after the drop date. 10 It found, instead, that the
material filed by the Student suggests that her father was never inclined to comply with this order
and that the circumstances were, therefore, entirely foreseeable.
Your Committee disagrees with the Board and finds that this is a situation in which the
extraordinary relief of late withdrawal without academic penalty is warranted on the basis that
already-existing circumstances became significantly more severe and could not have been
reasonably anticipated by the Student. In support of this finding, we accept the testimony and
evidence presented on behalf of the Student regarding the effect of her family conditions and
injuries upon her academic performance in IRElOlOH. To suggest that the only circumstances
which the Student ought to have anticipated having an impact on her academic success was the
likelihood that her father would breach the restraining order is an overly simple characterization
of her situation and the many variables at play during this time frame. Your Committee does not
find it necessary to make a finding on whether the Student could or should have predicted her
father's actions in this regard in order to grant the relief sought by the Student in respect of this
5 AAC Report

338

6 AAC Report 275
7

AAC Report 264

8 AAC Report 264
9 AAC Report 275

10 Board Decision, Page 4.

8

course. We note that regardless of whether the Student could have predicted her father's actions,
it would have been extremely difficult for her to foresee the extent to which she would have to
assume responsibility for the care of her mother and sibling (in the wake of her father's ongoing
threats), and the impact of this responsibility on her studies and mental health. Although your
Committee recognizes that we have no expertise on the implications of domestic violence on
victims , we have no doubt that such effects are incredibly complicated, at times severe and
likely difficult for a victim to fully assess while still effectively under the influence of the abuser.
Your Committee has previously held that "if, due to intense psychological stress, a student is in
no position to weigh competing considerations reasonably at the time the election must be made,
the policy which underlies rigorous protection of drop dates is not engaged." 11 It is clear that the
Student understood and exercised her right to drop courses before the "drop date" in October and
to seek accommodations from her faculty with respect to deadlines for assignments, as
necessary. In response to this appeal, the Centre pointed out that the Student had done
comparatively well in two others courses taken during the fall 2008 term, which might be
expected to have been equally adversely affected by the circumstances at play. It further relies
upon the fact that she dropped courses during the fall term to suggest that she was capable of
making rational and considered decisions at the time. This approach has been previously
referred to by this Committee as "the problem of selectivity". 12 The argument, as this
Committee interprets it, is that if the Student was well enough to pass these other courses during
the term, the illness could not have been so severe as to justify relief in the course failed. Put
another way, if the Student could avail herself of certain SGS policies during the period of her
alleged disability, the disability could not have been so severe as to justify her failure to seek
relief in respect ofIRElOl0H. Your Committee is unconvinced by the "selectivity" argument.
Your Committee does not believe that the Student's ability to perform well in two courses and to
drop courses before the drop date can be relied upon to suggest that she was well enough to
perform well in all of her courses or assess the severity of the impact of an FZ on her status in
the program. In making this finding, the Committee notes that the Student was not evaluated by
100% final exams in the courses in which she succeeded and that she received numerous
extensions on her written work in those courses, which extensions may have accounted for her
success.
In allowing the Student's appeal with respect to IRE1010H, your Committee further notes the
Student never had the benefit of an assessment by Accessibility Services and cannot assume in
the absence of such an assessment that the provision of a 100% final exam was an appropriate
accommodation. Indeed, the evidence suggests the Student did not receive the accommodations
she required to support her to be successful. 13 Further, it is not clear from the record that the
Student was in a position to understand that one FZ grade or a grade that was below a mid-B
average was sufficient to trigger her termination in the Program. The 2008/2009 SGS Calendar
11

AAC Report 280, page 2.

12 AAC Report 283.

13 Letter dated August 13, 2012 from P. White to the Board, Tab 36 Student's Book of Documents.

9

does not describe the circumstances under which a Student's enrolment in the Program could be
terminated (though calendars from subsequent years do) and the Centre did not notify the
Student of the severe impact such a grade could have on her status until February 2011. Had the
Centre provided the Student with a warning letter of the sort she received in February 2011, she
may have elected to appeal the grade at an earlier date. Your Committee does not believe that a
Student who accepts the favourable results and decides to leave well enough alone with respect
to them is being in any way unreasonable, nor does it believe that such student is being
inconsistent or unreasonable in appealing other results which were unfavourable. 14
Applying the foregoing facts and analysis to the present case, your Committee accepts the
student's contention that her already-existing circumstances became significantly more severe.
Your Committee believes that the circumstances faced by the Student at the end of October,
shortly before what your Committee was advised was the "drop date" lasted longer than could
reasonably be expected as of the "drop date" and, indeed, became more severe thereafter. In
making this finding, the Committee notes that it does not absolve the Student of the obligation to
assume an active role in her academic success and to familiarize herself with relevant rights and
responsibilities; nor is its finding meant to be a negative reflection on the Centre or SGS. The
Committee does not aim to establish a precedent that would empower students to tum a wilfully
blind eye to University policies only to later seek late withdrawal without academic penalty on
the basis that they were unaware of such policies. The Committee's decision with respect to this
course is based entirely on a recognition of the fact that the Student was suffering from
diagnosed acute stress disorder at the time, and is an acknowledgment of the unique and serious
nature of the circumstances faced by the Student during the Fall of 2008.
In summary, the appeal is allowed. The grade of"FZ" recorded in the course IREIOl0H (Fall
2008) will be vacated.
The Student also asked the Committee to refund the money she spent on any course in respect of
which we grant the relief sought. The Committee believes that it does not have the jurisdiction in
this matter and that it is a matter of policy to be decided by individual divisions. However, we
wish to state for the record that in our opinion, students are not entitled to refunds of courses for
which they are granted late withdrawal without academic penalty 15 • In this case in particular, the
student had the benefit of attending all of the classes and writing the mid-term and final exam in
IRE1010H (and the faculty member the burden of grading these exams). In the Committee's
opinion while the student is entitled to relief from a failure on her transcript for a course she did
not successfully complete, she is not entitled to monetary relief. 16

14 AAC Report 283.
15 AAC Motion Decision 359-1 and AAC Report 363.
16 AAC Report 302.

10

IRE1126H (Winter 2009)
Despite having failed IRE1010H during the Fall term, the Student returned to the Program
during the winter 2009 term and enrolled in five courses (IRE1126H, IRE1338H, IRE1611H,
IRE1635H, and IRE2001H). In addition, she was completing coursework from classes in which
she had received extensions during the fall term. The Centre continued to provide the Student
with accommodations and she was granted several extensions in the courses in which she was
enrolled in winter 2009, which enabled her to submit assignments in these classes into the
summer of 2009. The Student earned an A- in IRE2001H and a B+ in IRE1611H. She withdrew
from IRE1635H on the February 27, 2009 drop date. The Student seeks late withdrawal without
academic penalty from IRE1126H.
The circumstances surrounding the Student's failure in IREl 126H are addressed in the Board's
decision and your Committee adopts the facts therein as a correct and fair representation of the
evidence before it. The Student did not adduce any new evidence at the Hearing or Continuation
Hearing. During the winter term and throughout the summer, the Student continued to attend to
all matters related to legal proceedings initiated by her father, including liaising with Crown
counsel, the Office of Victim Services, and Toronto Police Services, amongst others. Although
the facts appear to suggest that her father may have initiated new proceedings at some point
during the 2008/2009 academic year, there is no evidence to suggest that these new proceedings
drastically impacted the burden borne by the Student. In February 2009, the Student fell down a
flight of stairs and was unable to write the mid-term examination. The Centre advised the
Student that her final examination would be worth 100% of her grade. During that exam, she
experienced a panic attack and failed. To make matters worse, before she had the opportunity to
re-write the exam, which the Centre had given her permission to do, she was injured in a car
accident on June 30, 2009. The Student never sought further accommodation in the course or the
opportunity to rewrite the final exam and did not appeal the grade ofFZ in the class until the
commencement of this appeal, almost four years later.
Your Committee notes that although the Student continued to receive care from Dr. Masson
throughout the 2008/2009 academic year, at no point during the winter term did she again seek
the assistance of Accessibility Services or enlist Dr. Masson's assistance in advocating for
additional or different accommodations on her behalf, even though at that point she was clearly
aware of the need to do so. The Committee has noted its disappointment at the administrative
error that led to the failure of Accessibility Services to assess the student during the fall 2008
term. However, the Committee was unanimously of the view that such failure must have a
temporal limit. In other words, the Student cannot rely on that failure to explain away the FZs
she received in courses taken months and years after her initial attempt to enlist the office's
support.
The Student submits that the Centre did not reasonably accommodate her disability and that the
11

FZ earned in IRE1126H is not indicative of the academic excellence of which she was capable.
Had she been provided with extra time and a private space in which to write the exam, she
argues, she would have performed at a higher level. The Respondent submitted that these
accommodations would have had no impact on the Student's success in the class because the
Student never wrote the exam. Your Committee believes that the Respondent is correct in this
instance. The Committee agrees that it cannot speculate as to whether the accommodations
made by the Centre were sufficient because the Student never wrote the exam and failed to seek
relief from the Centre in a timely fashion. It is irrelevant whether the accommodations in place
were sufficient because the Student never wrote the exam and therefore never exercised the
accommodations.
The Committee further notes that the mere fact that the Student may have been entitled to special
accommodation does not absolve her of the responsibility to comply with the university's
policies regarding the commencement of appeals in a timely fashion and, in this case, the
obligation to seek accommodation to write the final exam at a later date. 17 Students entitled to
special accommodation nevertheless have an obligation to familiarize themselves with
University policy and to assume responsibility for advocating on their own behalf In addition to
arguing that she was insufficiently accommodated in this course, the Student argued that the
Centre had a duty to inform her of the right to appeal a grade. The Committee disagrees with
this suggestion and, in any event, notes that the 2008/2009 SGS Calendar clearly sets out the
steps and timelines associated with academic appeals. 18 In addition, before commencing her
studies the Student was provided with a letter dated August 2008 from Dr. Heathcote, enclosed
with which was a copy of the 2008/2009 Graduate Handbook (the "Handbook"). The letter
specifically provides "the following materials have been prepared to assist you as you start the
new academic year. Please read them carefully." 19 The Policy on Standing and Grade Appeals
contained in the Handbook provides that students must obtain a minimum grade ofB- in all
courses and notes that an explanation of the academic appeals process can be found on the SGS
website. Finally, by email dated September 18, 2009, Professor Heathcote notified the Student
of the appeal provisions. Though the commencement of an appeal in respect of this course
would still have been arguably out of time in September 2009, the Centre would have been in a
better position to consider a request for accommodations at that point.
Your Committee finds that the Board was correct in its reasons and its decision. By the "drop
date" the Student was only too well aware of the burdens being placed upon her by her family
situation and the physical injuries she had sustained as a result of her fall. Her decision to drop a
course during this term lends credence to the fact that she, too, was aware of her ongoing
struggle to juggle her familial responsibilities with her school work and the additional
complications borne of her injuries. She also knew, or ought to have known, that she had failed
a course during the Fall term and could not afford to earn any grades below the mid-B threshold
17 AAC Report 287.
18 SGS 2008/2009 Calendar, Page 26, Tab 1, Respondent's Book of Documents.
19 Letter from Dr. Joanna Heathcote dated August 2008, Tab 5, Respondent's Book of Documents.

12

during the winter term. Although the Committee is sympathetic with the Student's plight, we
believe that the Student "gambled" that she would be able to pull herself together sufficiently by
the end of the term so as to be able to write and perform sufficiently well on the final exam. This
is precisely what the University's policy on dropping courses is intended to prevent. The record
also suggests that the Student's decisions with respect to dropping courses were at least in part
influenced by financial considerations20 , which although a reasonable motivation, may have
undermined more important considerations.
The Student submitted that the car accident in which she was involved was an unforeseen
circumstance that mitigates in favour of the relief sought. The Committee agrees with the
position taken by the Board on this submission and finds that although the accident in June 2009
was an unforeseen circumstance that might justify late withdrawal without academic penalty,
there is nothing in the record to indicate that the Student sought the remedy from the Centre in a
timely way. This Committee has recognized that an otherwise meritorious appeal may be
dismissed where a student fails to request relief in a timely fashion. 21 The Committee further
notes that the by Winter 2009, the Student was only too well aware of the tenuous position she
was in academically, the implications of her personal circumstances and ought, given the
foregoing, to have advised the Centre of her injuries and sought relief to accommodate the
injuries. Finally, the Committee was not presented with a satisfactory explanation of the
Student's failure to do so.
We see no reason to disagree with the decision of the Board to dismiss the appeal as untimely
and without merit.
IRE1338H (Winter 2009)
Although it was the Committee's understanding that the Student had abandoned her request for
relief in respect of IRE 13 38H, the Student made submissions with respect to this course during
the appeal and thus the Committee has addressed it in these reasons.
The Student was enrolled in IRE1338 during the winter 2009 term. She completed some of the
coursework, but was unable to complete the final paper which was worth 50% of the grade by
the original deadline. The Centre gave the Student an extension until June 2009 and a further
extension until the end of August 2009. As noted above, the Student was injured in a car
accident in June 2009 and was unable to complete the final paper. She asked to be evaluated on
the basis of the work she had completed in the course, but the Centre elected instead to award her
an INC report. The Student took no steps to appeal in respect ofIRE1338.
During the hearing of this appeal, the Student's counsel argued that it was unreasonable that she
be awarded an FZ in IREl 126 (Winter 2009) and an INC in IRE1338 given that in both courses
20 Student's Appeal Statement, page 4.

21 AAC Report 337.

13

she failed to complete the required course work. The Respondent, however, argued that the
distinction between the two courses is that she had completed a sufficient amount of coursework
in IRE1338 to justify an INC (rather than an FZ), whereas she had not completed any
coursework in IRE1126H. An INC, or incomplete, is a non-grade report given where "work is
not completed but where there are not grounds for assigning a failing grade." An INC has no
impact on the calculation of a student's average.
It is unclear to this Committee whether the Student made submissions in respect oflRE1338
because she wants this Committee to substitute aegrotat standing in this course or purely as a
means of encouraging the Committee to award the relief sought in respect of the IREl 126
(Winter 2009) by effectively arguing that it is unreasonable that two courses taken at the same
time have different results. Regardless, this Committee is of the view that the Board's
dismissal of the appeal as untimely and without merit is reasonable and ought to be upheld. The
Committee further finds that an INC report is the appropriate "grade".

IRE1010H (Fall 2010)
The Student took a one term leave during the Fall of 2009. When she returned to the Program,
she pursued her studies on a part-time basis, taking one or two courses per term. Indeed, during
the winter and summer 2010 terms, the Student successfully earned credits in three courses
(IRE1260H, IRE1650H, and MGT2615H).
The Student took IREI0I0H for the second time during the Fall of 2010. This was the only
course she pursued during this term, having dropped IRE1002H at the drop date. The Student
wrote the mid-term exam in the course and earned a 62%. The record reflects that in July 2010
and December 2010 the Student was assessed by neurologist, Dr. Farouk Dindar, who observed
that the Student was experiencing multiple symptoms that could be associated with a concussion,
including headaches, dizziness, and lightheadedness. There is no evidence to suggest that the
Student advised the Centre that she was experiencing these symptoms or sought to have
accommodations put in place for her final exam. She experienced a panic attack during the final
exam and was given additional time to write the exam by Professor Duhey. The Student submits
that the extra time was not of assistance to her because she was distracted by the noise made by
those students who had completed the exam. The Student seeks late withdrawal without
academic penalty.
Before this Committee, the Student's counsel argued that the Student's performance in the
course is not reflective of her academic abilities, which were compromised as a result of not
having adequate accommodations in place. There is no evidence that the Student did any of the
following:
•

Visit Accessibility Services to enlist their support in having accommodations put in place
(which could have been done at any point during her studies and certainly during the

14

•
•
•

summer of 2010 when her symptoms were ongoing, if not immediately upon her return to
the Program in Winter 2010);
Complain of the volume of noise in the exam room;
Notify the Centre of the medical symptoms she was experiencing and seek
accommodations; or
Ask to rewrite the exam under different conditions.

Your Committee agrees with the finding of the Board. The Centre cannot be expected to
accommodate a condition of which it was unaware. Further, the Committee finds that the
Student ought to have taken steps to ensure her academic success while she was on leave,
including, but not limited to:
•
•

•

familiarizing herself with the appeal procedures and program requirements (of which she
was personally made aware in September 2009);
meeting with Accessibility Services to have the required accommodations, if any, put in
place (which could have been done before her return to campus and certainly not later
than July 2010 at which point she knew that she was continuing to experience symptoms
of a possible concussion); and
working with the Centre to ensure that they were aware of her medical condition and
required accommodations.

The Student must abide by the consequences of her failures in this regard.
The Committee finds that the Student was well aware of the personal and medical circumstances
when she resumed her participation in the Program in the winter term of 2010. Further, and
assuming that her medical symptoms worsened after her return to the Program (which conclusion
the Committee cannot definitively draw based on the evidence), the Student was certainly
experiencing those symptoms and receiving treatment therefor before commencing this class in
the Fall of 2010. The Committee submits that the Student could or should have foreseen the
impact of these symptoms on her studies and was in a position to respond accordingly by taking
one or more of the steps identified above. The duty to accommodate students can only be
imposed upon the University in circumstances in which it is made aware of a student's disability.
In this case, the Student did not tell the Centre that she was experiencing symptoms of a
concussion and thus it could not be expected to have surmised what accommodations she
required. For all of the foregoing reasons, the Committee finds the position of the Board to be
reasonable and dismisses the Student's appeal in respect ofIRElOlOH (Fall 2010) on the basis
that it is untimely and, in any event, without merit.
Winter 2011 Leave of Absence
The Student took a second leave of absence from the Program during the Winter 2011 term.
15

!'"

By letter dated February 23, 2011 from Frank Reid, Graduate Program Coordinator, the Student
was notified that her participation in the Program was in jeopardy. The letter provides as
follows:
Satisfactory performance in a degree program requires the completion of
every course taken for graduate credit with a grade of at least B-, some
graduate units may require a minimum grade above a B- for some or all
courses. If a student fails to complete a graduate course in a satisfactory
manner (i.e. receives a grade report of 'FZ' or 'NCR' in a course, receives a
grade report below the minimum acceptable by the graduate unit, or receives a
non-grade report of 'INC'), then the graduate unit in which the student is
registered may recommend to the School the termination of registration and
eligibility of that student. If the student is permitted to continue, he or she
must repeat the relevant course, or an alternative course recommended by the
graduate unit and approved by the School, and obtain a satisfactory grade.
(The report for the course that was not completed in a satisfactory manner as
well as the report for the repeated or alternative course will appear on the
student's academic record).
You have received an FZ in IRE1010H, which you have attempted twice, FZ
in IRE11 26H and INC in IRE1338H. Currently, your academic performance
is below the minimum required to continue in the program. Your average is
B- (B minus) and students in the 12-monthMIRHR require a mid-B average in
their first 5.0 FCE (full course equivalents) in order to continue. In addition, a
mid-B average overall is needed to be recommended for the degree.
We have approved your request for a temporary withdrawal from the program
until September 2011. During the 2011-201 2 academic session you will be
required to repeat both IREI 0I0H and IRE1126H and achieve a satisfactory
grade in each course. Should you fail to receive a satisfactory grade in either
course, the Centre will recommend to SGS that your registration be
terminated. Such a recommendation would also be made if you fail to achieve
a satisfactory grade in any further required or elective courses, or if you are
unable to maintain a mid-B average. 22
Further, by email dated August 22, 2011, prior to the Student's return to the Program, Ms.
Deborah Campbell, Manager of Academic and Administrative Services at the Centre, reminded
the Student of her need to achieve a satisfactory grade in every course in IRE1010 and IREl 126
in order to remain in the Program and encouraged her to "take only those courses that you need
to take ... and postpone the others until next year."23 In response to this email, the Student
acknowledged this requirement and advised that she had taken steps to ensure her academic
success and would continue to receive ongoing support throughout the academic year.24 It is
clear, therefore, that at the start of the 2011-2012 academic year, the Student was well aware of
22
23
24

Letter from F. Reid to R. Sdated February 23, 2011, Tab 17, Student's Book of Documents.
Email dated August 22, 2011 from D. Campbell to R. S_
, Tab 19, Student's Book of Documents.
Ibid.

16

,..

the need to maintain a mid-B average and pass IREl0lOH and IRE1126H. The record confirms
that the Student met with Dr. James Kleiman on September 12, 2011, who recommended certain
accommodations be put in place, and with Accessibility Services in October 2011.25 These steps
are presumably illustrative of some of the steps the Student was taking to ensure her success.
The Student took IREl0l0H for the third time in the Fall of 2011 and earned a B-.
IRE1126H (Winter 2012)
The facts suirounding the Student's appeal in respect of this course are as follows. The Student
took IRE1126H for the second time during the winter of 2012. She initially registered for
Professor Dhuey's section ofIREl 136, but later transferred to Professor Krashinsky's section in
order to accommodate conflicts with her work schedule. Shortly after making this change, in or
around late January 2012, the Student complained to the Centre that Professor Krashinsky was
biased against her, and asked that Professor Dhuey grade her mid-term exam. The Student
received a 57% on her mid-term exam, which was marked by Professor Dhuey. Upon receiving
her grade, the Student complained that Professor Dhuey's grading scheme was different than
Professor Krashinsky's and queried why he had not been more involved with marking her exam.
By email dated February 7, 2012, Professor Saks presented the Student with several options,
including: (1) that she remain enrolled in Professor Krashinsky's class and have her exam
marked by him on a "blind" basis, (2) switch to Professor Dhuey's class and write her exams, (3)
switch to Professor Dhuey's class while continuing to attend Professor Krashinsky's class, or (4)
remain enrolled in Professor Krashinsky's class, attend his class and write his exams, but have
them graded by Professor Dhuey. The Student accepted the last option, seemingly without
objection.26 Also on February 7, 2012, the Student also received a second later advising her of
27
the need to maintain a mid-B average in order to continue in the program . As noted above, the
first such notice was provided in February 2011.
The record reveals that despite the Student's acceptance of this option, the dialogue surrounding
her performance in the class and with whom to address certain questions continued into late
February. The Student's Book of Documents includes several emails between the Student and
Professors Krashinsk:y and Dhuey in which the latter two attempt to explain the way in which her
exam was marked, provide her with guidance regarding with whom to speak about how to
improve her performance on the final exam, explain the way in which the exam is graded
(namely, by Professor Dhuey using Professor Krashinsky's grading scheme), and offer to meet
with her to review her mid-term exam.28 The discussion regarding which faculty member would
grade the Student's exam continued until a week before the exam, at which point Professor Saks
wrote to the Student and asked her to advise the Centre which faculty member she elected to
25

Tab 21, Student's Book of Documents.
Email from Professor A. Saks to R. Sdat ed February 7, 2012, Tab 24, St udent's Book of Documents.
27
Tab 23, Student's Book of Documents.
28
Tabs 25 and 27, Student's Book of Documents.
26

17

have grade her exam. The response he received was less than clear and, in an effort "to ensure
continuity" and address the Student's many concerns regarding bias and a fair application of the
grading scheme, the Centre agreed to permit both Professor Dhuey and Krashinsky to grade her
final exam, awarding her the higher of the two grades. There was a difference of one mark
between the grades awarded by the two faculty. The Student was awarded the higher grade of
105/150 (70%). The Student's final grade was a 64.8%, which is a failing grade.
The Student alleges that both professors were biased against her and failed to provide her with
the assistance and support she required in the course because they knew her status in the Program
was in jeopardy and didn't believe she could or would succeed in the class. As a remedy, she
asks this Committee to substitute her grade ofFZ with aegrotat standing. The Centre submits
that aegrotat standing is not available to graduate students, and that the appeal should, in any
event, be dismissed on its merits on the basis that the Student did not experience any bias or
unfair treatment. Indeed, the Centre characterizes her allegations as unfounded, reckless and
untrue. The Board was reluctant to dismiss the appeal solely on the basis that SGS practice is
not to grant aegrotat standing. However, the Board found that the appeal should be dismissed on
its merits.
The facts of this case are replete with examples of the Centre's attempts to accommodate the
Student. However, it is in this course particularly that the Committee is of the opinion that little
else could have been done to respond to and address her concerns and allegations. Your
Committee finds that there is no evidence to support the Student's allegations that Professors
Dhuey and Krashinsky were biased against her. In fact, the Committee is of the opinion that
both the faculty members and the Centre did everything they could to accommodate the
Student's various requests, to indulge her repeated demands for explanations about the manner in
which her various exams would be graded, to ensure that her exams were graded fairly and
without bias, and that she benefited from the highest grade.
The Committee finds agrees with the decision of the Board. The Student's request for aegrotat
standing in IRE1126H (Winter 2012) is dismissed on its merits. The Committee does not believe
that a reasonable person would find that the Professors Dhuey and Krashinsky were biased
against the Student and that her performance in the course was compromised as a result of the
alleged bias.
Other Issues
With respect to the Student's complaints that the Centre did not permit her to transfer from the
12-month program to the two-year Program, the Committee adopts the reasoning and decision of
the Board, and notes that the Student failed to demonstrate that a transfer of this sort would have
been a better accommodation than the combination of program leaves and part-time studies that
she adopted. Further, the Committee notes that this complaint is untimely.

18

Finally, the Student complains that the Centre failed to review her status in the Program in 2008,
2009, and 2010 and that its failure in that regard ought to be relied upon to grant her the relief
sought. The Committee again adopts the reasons of the Board on this issue and finds that there is
no substance to the Student's complaint. Students are, as noted exhaustively above, deemed to
be aware of the requirements of their programs. The expectation that she maintain a mid-B
average was clearly disclosed and communicated to the Student both in the School of Graduate
Studies program materials and by letters in 2011 and 2012. The Student cannot, at once,
complain of the Centre's failure to review her program status in certain years and the timing of
its review during others (namely, in February 2012).
Conclusion
The Committee unanimously allows the Student's appeal in respect oflRElOlOH, but dismisses
the Student's appeal with respect to IRE1126H (Winter 2009), IRElOlOH (Fall 2010),
IRE1126H (Winter 2012) and IRE1338 (Winter 2009) on the basis that the appeal is well out of
time and without merit in each case. The Committee does so having thoroughly reviewed all of
the Student's written and oral submissions and having exhaustively considered the body of
decisions rendered by this Committee previously.
At the hearing, the Respondent's counsel cogently summarized the reasons in support of the
Respondent's decision to terminate the Student's registration in the Program, and the basis for
the conclusion that the Board's decision was reasonable and supported by the evidence. We
agree with the Respondent in all but IRElOlOH in Fall 2008. The Committee finds that the
Student raised no new evidence in her oral or written submissions that persuaded the Committee
that the relief sought in respect of the remaining courses was reasonable. The evidence raised
had either been addressed in the Board's decision or was irrelevant to the reasonableness of the
Centre's decision to terminate her registration in the Program. The Panel found the decision of
the Respondent to terminate the Student to be entirely reasonable, particularly as the record
indicates that this decision followed on the heels of numerous accommodations and several clear
written warnings being issued to the Student that her academic standing in her program was in
jeopardy.
Your Committee sympathizes immensely with the Student, whose life during the period at issue
in this case was, without question, rife with challenge. However, the body of case law rendered
by this Committee clearly establishes the circumstances under which a Student will be granted
the extraordinary remedy of late withdrawal without academic penalty and those circumstances
are not met in respect oflRE1126H (Winter 2009), IRE1338H (Winter 2009), IREIOIOH (Fall
2010), and IRE1126H (Winter 2012).
Notwithstanding the fact that the Committee has granted the Student's appeal in respect of
IRElOlOH, the Committee finds that the tennination of the Student's registration in the Program
is still justified by both the Centre's policies and those of SGS, which provide that a student's

19

registration in the Program can be terminated if a student fails to complete even one graduate
course in a satisfactory manner. The Student's termination in the Program is, therefore, upheld.
For all of these reasons, the Committee rejects the Student's appeal with respect to all but
IREl0l0H (Fall 2008) in respect of which is orders that the grade ofFZ be vacated.

20

