Case #1033

   DATE: July 29, 2020

   PARTIES: University of Toronto v.Â T.L.Â (âthe Studentâ)

   HEARING DATES: December 11, 2019 and January 30, 2020

   Panel Members:
   Mr. Andrew Pinto, Chair (as he then wasÂ âÂ after the decision was
   made, the Chair was appointed a JudgeÂ of the Superior Court
   ofÂ Justice ofÂ Ontario)
   Professor Ken Derry, Faculty Panel Member
   Ms. Natasha Brien, Student Panel Member

   Appearances:
   Ms. Lauren Pearce, Discipline Counsel,Â PaliareÂ Roland Rosenberg
   Rothstein LLP
   Ms. Angela Guo, Mandarin Legal Services, Paralegal for the Student

   In Attendance:
   Mr. Christopher Lang, Director, Office of Appeals, Discipline and
   Faculty Grievances, University of Toronto

   TheÂ University filed two sets of charges against the Student.Â The
   first set involves two counts underÂ s.Â B.i.3(a)Â of theÂ CodeÂ of
   Behaviour on Academic Matters, 1995Â (âCodeâ)Â forÂ knowingly
   forgingÂ or in any other way alteringÂ or falsifyingÂ an academic
   record, and/or uttering, circulatingÂ orÂ makingÂ use of such forged,
   altered or falsified record, namely,Â two documentsÂ that purported to
   be reference lettersÂ fromÂ twoÂ of his professors,
   whichÂ heÂ submitted to Kingâs College London.â¯Alternatively,Â the
   StudentÂ was chargedÂ with two countsÂ underÂ s.Â B.i.3(b) of
   theÂ Code.Â The second set of charges pertained toÂ one count
   underÂ s.Â B.i.3(a)Â forÂ knowingly forgingÂ or in any other way
   alteringÂ or falsifyingÂ an academic record, and/or uttering,
   circulatingÂ orÂ makingÂ use of such forged,Â altered or falsified
   record, namelyÂ a document that purported to be a transcript of
   consolidated academic record from the University of Toronto,
   whichÂ heÂ submitted to Kingâs College London.Â For this offence, he
   wasÂ alsoÂ chargedÂ alternativelyÂ underÂ s.Â B.i.3(b.

   TheÂ parties provided aÂ partial Agreed Statement of Facts (âASFâ), a
   Joint Book of Documents (âJBDâ), as well as a Joint SubmissionÂ on
   Penalty (âJSPâ). TheyÂ agreedÂ that both sets ofÂ charges should be
   consolidated and heard together.

   The issueÂ in disputeÂ was whether the Student knowingly participated
   in the submission of falseÂ documents to Kingâs College London, or
   alternatively,Â whether the Student knew, orÂ ought to have known, that
   false documents had been submitted in his name as part of
   theÂ application, and he did nothing to correct the problem.Â In the
   Panelâs view, theÂ StudentâsÂ exceptionally weak and
   circumstantialÂ evidence did notÂ support his claim thatÂ only his
   parents were involved in the application to KingâsÂ College London
   together with GESG China and thatÂ heÂ was not involved in anyÂ way and
   had no knowledge of this arrangement or
   application.Â TheÂ UniversityâsÂ circumstantialÂ evidence, on the other
   hand,Â was compelling andÂ highlighted several key
   inconsistencies,Â unexplained coincidences and problems with the
   Studentâs arguments.

   CitingÂ theÂ Discipline Appeals Board decision inÂ The University of
   Toronto and M. A.Â (Case No. 837, December 22, 2016),Â the
   PanelÂ reiteratedÂ thatÂ a joint submission on penalty âmay be rejected
   by a panel only in circumstances where to give effect to it would be
   contrary to the public interestÂ or would bring the administration of
   justice into disreputeâ (para 25).Â ItÂ indicated that the threshold
   for rejecting a jointly proposed sanction is highÂ andÂ concluded that
   theÂ thresholdÂ hadÂ notÂ beenÂ met in this case. ItÂ accepted
   theÂ partiesâÂ JSP.Â According to the Panel, the seriousness of
   theÂ offences required a significant sanction for the purposes of
   general and specific deterrence. It held thatÂ the jointly proposed
   sanctions were within a rangeÂ that was consistent with other similar
   casesÂ andÂ wereÂ not unreasonable.Â RegardingÂ the mitigating factors,
   the Panel noted the Studentâs cooperation by entering into a partial
   ASF andÂ hisÂ acceptance, insight and remorse exhibitedÂ at the
   sanction phase, after being found guilty, by apologizing and entering
   into a JSP.

   The Tribunal imposed the following sanctions:Â up to
   four-yearÂ suspension, until December 31, 2023;Â up to
   five-yearÂ notation on the Studentâs academic record and transcript,
   until December 31, 2024;Â report to the Provost for publication of the
   decision and the sanctionsÂ imposed, with the name of the Student
   withheld.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/29393
