Report #259

   DATE: December 14, 2002
   PARTIES: Mr. R.N. v. UTSC
   Hearing Date(s): November 26, 2001
   Committee Members:
   Assistant Dean Jane Kidner, Acting Chairperson
   Professor Philip Byer
   Professor Olga Pugliese
   Professor Donna Wells
   Ms. Wendy Swinton
   Secretary:
   Mr. Paul Holmes, Judicial Affairs Officer
   In Attendance:
   For the Student:
   Mr. R.N. Mr. Craig Coughlen, Downtown Legal Services
   For UTSC:
   Professor Ian McDonald, Associate Dean
   UTSC â late withdrawal without academic penalty and request to defer a
   threeâyear suspension â chronic illness and depression â insufficient
   medical evidence â consequences of failing the course known â remained
   in course while dropping another â not probable that depression was
   cause of failed exam or decision not to withdraw from course â appeal
   dismissed
   Request for late withdrawal without academic penalty from one course,
   and to defer a threeâyear suspension, based on medical and
   compassionate grounds. The Student failed the course and he was
   subsequently placed on threeâyear suspension. The Student had a
   previous threeâyear suspension deferred. During the relevant time
   period the Student suffered a series of setbacks in his personal and
   professional life. The Student claimed that his chronic sinusitis, in
   conjunction with his depression caused him to fail the final exam and
   interfered with his ability to make the rational decision to withdraw
   from the course. The Committee considered the medical and other
   evidence submitted by the Student and found that the medical evidence
   did not meet the test for granting the remedy of late withdrawal. The
   Student had been warned in writing and knew the consequences of failing
   the course, and the Student had decided to drop another course in which
   he had been enrolled during the term, yet decided to remain in the
   course at appeal. The Committee was not satisfied on a balance of
   probabilities that even if the Student had been suffering from a
   depression, that the depression was the cause of his failed exam or his
   decision not to withdraw from the course prior to the course deadline
   for withdrawal. Appeal dismissed.
   [1]View Report

References

   1. file:///media/12542
