Case #951

   DATE: May 8, 2018
   PARTIES: University of Toronto v. J.L. (âthe Studentâ)
   Hearing Date(s): March 9, 2018
   Panel Members:
   Ms. Sara Zborovski, Barrister and Solicitor, Chair
   Professor Graeme Hirst, Faculty Panel Member
   Mr. Daniel Lazzam, Student Panel Member
   Appearances:
   Ms. Tina Lie, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland, Barristers
   Ms. Sana Kawar, Manager, University of Toronto Transcript Centre
   In Attendance:
   Ms. Krista Osbourne, Administrative Clerk & Hearing Secretary, Office
   of Appeals,
   Discipline and Faculty Grievances (âADFGâ)
   Mr. Sean Lourim, Technology Assistant, Office of the Governing Council
   Ms. Christina Di Matteo, Academic Integrity Officer, Office of Student
   Academic Integrity,
   Faculty of Arts & Science (âOSAIâ)
   Ms. Laurie OâHandley, Front-line Administrator, OSAI
   Not in Attendance:
   The Student
   Trial Division - s. B.i.3(a) â forged or falsifying documents â
   falsified transcript and accompanying letter in an application for
   admission to another University âÂ  hearing not attended âÂ  reasonable
   notice provided â recommendation of expulsion, five-year suspension
   pending expulsion, permanent notation on transcript, report to the
   Provost with the Studentâs name withheld.
   The Student was charged with two charges of falsifying or forging an
   academic record contrary to s. B.i.3(a) of the Code , or in the
   alternative, two charges of academic dishonesty not otherwise described
   contrary to s.B.i.3(b) of the Code .Â  The charges related to a letter
   and a forged transcript that the Student submitted to the Australian
   National University (ANU) in an application for admission.
   The Student did not attend the hearing. The Panel found that the
   Student had been provided with reasonable notice of the hearing on the
   basis of evidence that the University had sent the Student a number of
   emails and made phone calls, one of which the Student responded to
   indicating her availability for the hearing. The Panel found that the
   University was entitled to rely on its policy in communicating with
   Students, and that the Universityâs attempts to contact the Student by
   email and telephone were sufficient given that the Student had not
   provided a home address in ROSI.
   The Panel heard evidence from the manager of the Universityâs
   transcripts centre, who testified that she had been asked to verify a
   transcript and accompanying letter that had been submitted in an
   application for a postgraduate program at ANU.Â  She testified that the
   letter and the transcript were forgeries. Based on this evidence, the
   Panel found the Student to be guilty of both counts of forging an
   academic record contrary to s.B.i.3(a) of the Code.
   The University requested the penalty that: (1) the Panel recommend that
   the Student be expelled; (2) a suspension of up to five years pending
   the decision on expulsion; (3) that a notation be placed on the
   Studentâs transcript; and (4) the decision be published with the
   Studentâs name withheld. In determining the appropriateness of the
   proposed penalty, the Panel was referred to a number of cases that set
   out that the forgery or falsification of an academic record, including
   a transcript, is a very serious offence because it undermines the
   credibility of the University and students who have legitimately earned
   their grades and degrees. The Panel ordered: (1) that the Student be
   expelled; (2) a suspension of up to five years pending the decision on
   expulsion; (3) a notation be placed on the Studentâs transcript; and
   (4) the decision be published with the Studentâs name withheld.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12967
