UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
GOVERNING COUNCIL
Report 390 of the Academic Appeals Committee
December 4, 2017
To the Academic Board
University of Toronto
Your Committee reports that it held a hearing on Tuesday, October 31, 2017, at which the
following members were present:
Professor Hamish Stewart, Senior Chair
Professor Avrum Gotlieb, Faculty Governor
Ms. Mama Nii Owoo, Student Governor
Hearing Secretary: Mr. Christopher Lang, Director, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances
Appearances:
For the Student Appellant:
Mr. G.B. (the Student)
Professor Donald Wiebe, Representative for the Student
For the Toronto School of Theology:
Mr. Robert A. Centa, Paliare Roland Rosenberg Rothstein LLP
In Attendance:
Professor Elizabeth Smyth, Vice-Dean, Programs, School of Graduate Studies. University of
Toronto
Dr. Jaroslav Skira, Director, Graduate Centre for Theological Studies (Toronto School of
Theology), Associate Professor of Historical Theology, Regis College
The Appeal
The Student appeals from a decision of the Academic Appeals Committee (AAC) of the
Graduate Centre for Theological Studies (GCTS) of the Toronto School of Theology (TST),
dismissing his appeal from a decision of the acting Director of the GCTS, removing Professor
Donald Wiebe as the chair of the Student’s Ph.D. supervisory committee.
Overview of the Facts
The Student is a third-year student in the conjoint Ph.D. program in Theological Studies at TST.
Professor Wiebe is a member of the Faculty of Divinity, Trinity College. Initially, Professor

2

Wiebe served as Chair of the Student’s Ph.D. supervisory committee. On October 13, 2016, on
behalf of the acting director of GCTS, the GCTS administrator emailed Professor Wiebe a letter
appointing him to the GCTS graduate faculty. Within the hour, Professor Wiebe replied that “I
do not wish to be a member of the GCTS …” In a series of email exchanges over the following
week, Professor Wiebe affirmed that he did not want to be appointed to the GCTS. In an email of
October 19, the acting Director summed up these exchanges as follows (emphasis in the
original):
As you know, the Toronto School of Theology’s Memorandum of Agreement with the
University of Toronto requires that all faculty involved in TST graduate work of any kind
must have a GCTS appointment. To date, TST has made no exceptions to this policy.
Last week, I, as Acting Director of the GCTS, sent you a letter appointing you to the
GCTS for a term of five years. You have refused this appointment both in writing and in
my own presence.
Therefore, I am writing to inform you that you now are without GCTS status, effective
today, 19 October 2016.
As of today, all of your GCTS graduate responsibilities have been terminated. You … no
longer have the status required to be involved in any GCTS graduate supervision,
graduate teaching or advising. … You will be replaced on all doctoral PhD and ThD
supervisory committees.
As a result, Professor Wiebe was removed as the chair of the Student’s Ph.D. supervisory
committee.
The Student appealed the decision removing Professor Wiebe to the AAC of the GCTS. In a
decision dated May 3, 2017, the AAC of the GCTS dismissed his appeal. The AAC of the GCTS
held that it was clear from the relevant policy documents that “all faculty members engaged in
conjoint graduate degree programs must hold appropriate membership in the [GCST] and work
within the academic policies established by TST/GCTS.” The AAC of the GCTS found that
Professor Wiebe was not eligible to supervise the Student and that there were no grounds to
overturn the acting Director’s decision.
Relevant Policies
Paragraph 32 of the Memorandum of Agreement between the University of Toronto, the TST,
and the TST’s Member Institutions (in effect as of July 1, 2014) provides:
All faculty members engaged in conjoint graduate degree programs much hold
appropriate membership in the TST’s Graduate Centre for Theological Studies,
equivalent to the U of T’s School of Graduate Studies categories of Full, Associate or
Associate Restricted and conforming to the standards of the U of T.
In accordance with this term of the MoA, the TST’s Guidelines for Graduate Faculty
Appointments states (at p. 2):

3

At TST, members of teaching staff do not automatically have teaching and supervisory
privileges in graduate … programs. To be eligible for graduate faculty members, an
individual must hold a faculty appointment … at one of the TST colleges or its affiliates.
Faculty members must also have been approved by the TST Director to teach in the TST
consortium in accordance with the Policy on TST Academic Appointments.
(See also the GCTS’s Graduate Conjoint Degree Handbook at p. 1.)
These policies are consistent with the policies of the University’s School of Graduate Studies
(SGS). No-one may serve as a Ph.D. supervisor or as a member of a Ph.D. committee unless
they are a member of the graduate faculty. Membership in the graduate faculty must be approved
by SGS (on the recommendation of the Chair of the relevant SGS unit) (see
http://www.sgs.utoronto.ca/facultyandstaff/Pages/Graduate-Faculty-Memberships.aspx ).

Decision
On behalf of TST, Mr. Centa submitted that these provisions are clear on their face. Moreover,
he submitted that to order TST to depart from them would be effectively to rewrite the MoA,
which the AAC has no jurisdiction to do.
On behalf of the Student, Professor Wiebe submitted that the policies, though seemingly clear on
their face, should be applied with a measure of discretion, and that this discretion should have
been exercised to permit him to continue supervising the Student notwithstanding his explicit
refusal to be appointed to the GCTS.
Your Committee agrees with TST that the relevant policies are clear on their face and do not
permit persons who are not members of GCTS to serve on doctoral supervisory committees.
Thus, the acting Director did not exercise any discretion and there is no need to consider whether
any exercise of discretion was reasonable. In short, the acting Director applied the relevant
policies correctly.
Nevertheless, your Committee would like to comment on the Student’s argument that the acting
Director should have exercised a discretion to allow Professor Wiebe to continue supervising the
Student. It is conceivable that a policy that on its face permits no discretion might in practice be
applied with a measure of discretion. If so, then your Committee might well consider (in
accordance with its terms of reference) whether that discretion had been exercised fairly in
particular cases. But the evidence available to your Committee established beyond any doubt that
neither TST nor SGS exercises any discretion on the kind of decision at issue here. The TST
states, and your Committee accepts, that since the conjoint Ph.D. program was established in
2014, there has been no instance where someone who is not a member of GCTS has been
permitted to serve on a doctoral supervisory committee. Moreover, Professor Elizabeth Smyth,
Vice-Dean of Programs for SGS, states, and your Committee accepts, that she has not and would
not approve a person to act as a Ph.D. supervisor if that person was not a member of the
University’s graduate faculty. Under the SGS policy cited above, there are several ways in which
a person, including a faculty member from another university, can be appointed as a member of

4

the graduate faculty for the purpose of serving on a doctoral supervisory committee, but an
appointment to the graduate faculty is essential for this purpose. Professor Smyth has served as
Vice-Dean for nine years and during that time has approved more than 8,000 Ph.D. supervisory
committees. Professor Smyth is the faculty member to whom the University has entrusted the
important responsibility, among others, of carrying out the University’s policies concerning the
composition of doctoral supervisory committees. To the extent that the practices of SGS serve as
a model for those of GCTS, her statement is powerful evidence that there is no discretion in the
GCTS’s policy on membership in the graduate faculty.
The Student was able to point to only one case where it might be said that the SGS relaxed its
policy requiring Ph.D. supervisors and committee members to be members of the graduate
policy. It appears from the material filed by the Student that in the academic year 1993/94, a
Ph.D. student in the University’s Centre for the Study of Religion was permitted to retain on his
committee a faculty member who had recently resigned from the Centre and was therefore,
according to SGS policy, no longer eligible. Curiously, that faculty member was Professor
Wiebe. Your Committee cannot say why or on what basis that decision was made or whether it
was correct, reasonable, unreasonable, or simply wrong at the time it was made. But it is
inconsistent with SGS practice of the past decade and, more significantly, inconsistent with the
TST policies and practices that are applicable here. This anomalous and dated incident does not
establish the existence of any discretion in the application of TST’s policy regarding eligibility to
serve on a doctoral supervisory committee.

Conclusion
The appeal is dismissed. Your Committee notes that, as of the date of the hearing, TST remained
willing to offer Professor Wiebe an appointment to GCTS.

