Report 390

DATE:

   December 4, 2017

PARTIES:

   G.B. (‚the Student‚) v. the Toronto School of Theology (‚TST‚) and
   Graduate Centre for Theological Studies (‚GCTS‚)

Hearing Date(s):

   October 31, 2017

Committee Members:

   Professor Hamish Stewart, Senior Chair
   Professor Avrum Gotlieb, Faculty Governor
   Ms. Mama Nii Owoo, Student Governor

Secretary:

   Mr. Christopher Lang, Director, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty
   Grievances

Appearances:

For the Student Appellant:

   Mr. G.B. (the Student)
   Professor Donald Wiebe, Representative for the Student

For the School of Theology:

   Mr. Robert A. Centa, Paliare Roland Rosenberg Rothstein LLP

In Attendance:

   Professor Elizabeth Smyth, Vice-Dean, Programs, School of Graduate
   Studies, University of Toronto
   Professor Jaroslav Skira, Director, Eastern Christian Studies Program,
   Associate Professor of Historical Theology, Regis College

   Student appeal from a decision of the Academic Appeals Committee (AAC)
   of the Graduate Centre for Theological Studies (GCTS) of the Toronto
   School of Theology (TST), dismissing his appeal from a decision of the
   acting Director of the GCTS, removing the Chair of the Student‚s Ph.D.
   supervisory committee.

   The Chair of the Student‚s Ph.D. supervisory committee had been removed
   by the acting Director of the GCTS because he refused to be appointed
   as a member to the GCTS. The acting Director of the GCTS was exercising
   her authority pursuant to Paragraph 32 of the Memorandum of Agreement
   between the University of Toronto, the TST, and the TST‚s Member
   Institutions (in effect as of July 1, 2014), the TST‚s Guidelines for
   Graduate Faculty Appointments (at p. 2) and the GCTS‚s Graduate
   Conjoint Degree Handbook (at p. 1) which collectively provide that all
   faculty members engaged in conjoint graduate degree programs do not
   automatically have teaching and supervisory privileges. Faculty members
   must be approved by the TST Director, and be appointed as members of
   the GCTS. This policy is consistent with the policy at the School of
   Graduate Studies‚ (SGS) policy that provides that no-one may serve as a
   Ph.D. supervisor or on a committee unless they are a member of a
   graduate faculty and approved by the SGS. The Committee held that these
   policies are clear on their face and do not permit individuals who are
   not members of a graduate faculty to serve on doctoral supervisory
   committees. The Committee found that the acting Director applied the
   relevant policies correctly. The Committee went on to comment that
   while it is possible that a policy that is clear on its face that it
   permits no discretion might, in practice, be applied with a measure of
   discretion, they found no evidence that the SGS or the TST exercises
   any discretion with respect to their policy on membership in a graduate
   faculty. Appeal dismissed.
   [1]View Report

References

   1. file:///media/12636
