Case 1307

   DATE:

   August 4, 2022

   PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v. J.L. ("the Student")

   HEARING DATE:

   May 3, 2022, via Zoom

   PANEL MEMBERS:

   Ms. Sabrina Bandali, Chair
   Professor Alexander Koo, Faculty Panel Member
   Mr. Branden Cave, Student Panel Member

   APPEARANCES:

   Ms. Tina Lie, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg
   Rothstein LLP
   Mr. William Webb, Co-Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg Rothstein LLP

   NOT IN ATTENDANCE:

   The Student

   HEARING SECRETARY:

   Ms. Krista Kennedy, Administrative Clerk & Hearing Secretary, Office of
   Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances

   On two occasions the Student was charged with knowingly representing as
   their own, an idea or expression of an idea, or work of another in an
   assignment, contrary to s. B.i.1(d) of the Code of Behaviour on
   Academic Matters, 1995‚Ø(the ‚Code‚). In the alternative, the Student
   was charged with two counts of knowingly obtaining unauthorized
   assistance in connection with an assignment, contrary to s. B.i.1(b) of
   the Code. In the further alternative, the Student was charged with two
   counts of knowingly engaging in a form of cheating, academic dishonesty
   or misconduct, fraud or misrepresentation not otherwise described in
   the Code in order to obtain academic credit or other academic
   advantage, contrary to s. B. i.3(b) of the Code.

   The hearing was scheduled to commence at 9:45AM and the Panel waited
   until 10:05AM before commencing the hearing. The Student did not
   appear. The Panel noted that s. 6 and 7 of the Statutory Powers
   Procedure Act (‚SPPA‚) and Rule 17 of the University Tribunal Rules of
   Practice and Procedure (‚Rules‚) outlines that a tribunal may proceed
   in the absence of a party provided that reasonable notice of an oral
   hearing has been given to the party in accordance with the SPPA, and
   where a party does not attend the hearing and reasonable notice has
   been given, a party is not entitled to further notice. The Panel
   further noted that pursuant to Rule 9 of the Rules, a Notice of Hearing
   may be served on a Student by various means including emailing a copy
   of the document to the Student‚s email address as recorded in the
   Repository of Student Information (‚ROSI‚). The University‚s Policy on
   Official Correspondence with Students expressly states that students
   are responsible for maintaining a current and valid postal address and
   email account in ROSI, and they are expected to monitor and retrieve
   all mail, including emails, on a frequent and consistent basis. The
   University requested that the Panel proceed in the absence of the
   Student. The University filed evidence that the Student was served with
   the Charges, the Notice of Electronic Hearing, and disclosure to the
   Student‚s email address as contained in ROSI. The University also filed
   evidence that Assistant Discipline Counsel‚s office attempted to reach
   the Student by telephone at the telephone number contained in ROSI, and
   that a package containing, among other things, copies of the Notice of
   Electronic Hearing and Charges was couriered to the Student‚s physical
   address in ROSI. Additionally, the University filed evidence that the
   last time someone accessed the email account of the Student was
   approximately one week prior to the hearing date. In light of the
   evidence, the Panel was satisfied that the Student received the Notice
   of Electronic Hearing and that reasonable notice had been provided in
   accordance with the Rules and the SPPA. Therefore, the Panel determined
   that there was no reason not to proceed in the absence of the Student
   in accordance with s. 7(3) of the SPPA. The Panel proceeded to hear the
   matter on its merits in the absence of the Student.

   Regarding the charges under s. B.i.1(d) of the Code, the Panel received
   affidavit evidence of the Professor who taught the course in which the
   assignments in question were submitted. The Professor‚s affidavit was
   supplemented by oral evidence. The Panel noted that the Professor
   explained that the Student submitted two assignments via Turnitin.com
   which indicated a 38% and 45% similarity index, respectively. The
   Professor confirmed that there were passages in the assignments that
   were taken verbatim or nearly verbatim from sources without proper
   attribution. The Professor emailed the Student about these allegations.
   After not hearing from the Student, the Professor forwarded the
   allegations to the Student Academic Integrity (‚SAI‚) office. After the
   allegations were forwarded to the SAI office, the Student responded to
   the Professor‚s email and the Professor advised the Student that the
   matter has already been forwarded to the SAI office. The Panel noted
   that the University must establish on a balance of probabilities, using
   clear and convincing evidence, that the academic offence charged was
   committed by the Student. The Panel found that the course clearly
   articulated the academic integrity expectations for the assignment and
   accepted the evidence of the Professor. The Panel reviewed the two
   assignments submitted by the Student, the alleged source articles, and
   the Professor‚s comparison charts. Based on the evidence, the Panel
   concluded that there was clear and convincing evidence that the Student
   knowingly represented as their own, an idea or expression of an idea,
   or work of another in two assignments, contrary to s. B.i.1(d) of the
   Code. The University withdrew the charges made in the alternative and
   the further alternative.

   In determining sanction, the Panel considered the factors and
   principles related to sanction outlined in University of Toronto and
   Mr. C. (Case No. 1976/77-3, November 5, 1976). In considering the
   aforementioned factors, the Panel outlined that there was little
   character evidence available, however, the Panel noted that the Student
   made no effort to engage with the discipline process. The Panel
   considered the two offences committed by the Student in close proximity
   to one another and noted that the Panel considered these to be more
   akin to concurring offences rather than indicative that repetition of
   the offences was likely. The Panel considered the serious nature of the
   offence, and the need for general deterrence which is significant in
   the context of plagiarism offences and online courses. The Panel
   reviewed previous plagiarism cases of the Tribunal and noted that in
   cases where there was no prior offence, the sanctions included
   suspensions of at least two years and a notation of at least three
   years. Based on the relevant factors and case law, the Panel agreed
   that the sanctions proposed by the University were appropriate in the
   circumstances.¬  The Panel imposed the following sanctions: a grade of
   zero in the course; suspension of just under two years and four months;
   notation on the transcript of just under three years and four months;
   and a report to the Provost for publication.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/30617
