UNlVERSITY TRIBUNAL
UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO

IN THE MATTER of charges of academic dishonesty made on May 24, 2013
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code ofBehaviour on Academic Matters, 1995,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Act, 1971, S.O. 1971, c. 56 as amended S.O.

1978,c. 88
BETWE EN:
UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO

-and-

Hearing Date: October 22, 2013
Panel Members:
Ms. Julie Rosenthal, Barrister and Solicitor, Chair
Dr. Maria Rozakis-Adcock, Faculty Panel Member, Faculty of Medicine
Mr. Afshin Ameri, Student Panel Member
Appearances:
Ms. Tina Lie, Assistant Discipline Counsel for University, Paliare Roland Barristers
Mr. Damon Chevrier, Registrar, St. Michael's College, University of Toronto
Ms. Janice Patterson, Legal Assistant, Paliare Roland Barristers
In Attendance:
Dr. Kristi Gourlay, Manager of Office of Academic Integrity, Faculty of Arts and Science
Mr. Christopher Lang, Director, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances
Ms. Sinead Cutt, Administrative Assistant, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances
Not in Attendance:
Mr. ~ ~
. the Student

-2-

Preliminary Matters - Service on the Student and Reasonable Notice
1. The Trial Division of the Tribunal held a hearing on Tuesday, October 22, 2013 to

consider charges brought by the University a g a i n s t ~ ~ (referred to in the
balance of these reasons as "the Student") under the Code ofBehaviour on Academic
Matters . The Student did not attend the hearing, nor did anyone attend on his behalf.

2. The Tribunal waited several minutes after the appointed time for the start of the hearing.
Neither the Student nor any representative of his arrived.

3. The University introduced affidavit evidence of Janice Patterson, a legal assistant to the
discipline counsel who was acting in the matter. Ms. Patterson's evidence established
that the Student was served with notice of the charges against him on May 24, 2013.
Service was effected by emailing a copy of the charges, along with a covering letter, to
two email addresses, one of which was the email address on file with the University's
Repository of Student Information (known informally as "ROSI"), the other of which
was a Gmail address, being ~.k@gmail.com.
4. Ms. Patterson's evidence further established that notice of the charges came to the
Student's attention, as the Student subsequently exchanged emails with discipline counsel
(on which Ms. Patterson was copied) with respect to the charges and with respect to
scheduling of the hearing.
5. After the Office of Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances wrote to the Student
suggesting a number of possible dates for the hearing, the Student responded via email on

-3-

August 19, 2013, and said that October 22, 2013 at 9:45 was a "suitable schedule" for
him. The email address used by the Student in this correspondence was the Gmail
address referred to above. Two days later, the discipline hearing coordinator at the
university sent to the Student (at the same Gmail address as above) a formal Notice of
Hearing, which set out the date and time selected by the Student- i.e., Tuesday, October
22, 2013 at 9:45 a.m. - as the appointed time for the hearing. The Notice of Hearing and
the letters enclosed with it set out the following:
(a)

a statement of the date, time and place of the hearing;

(b)

a statement that, if the Student did not attend the hearing, the hearing could
proceed in his absence and without any further notice in the proceeding;

(c)

a statement of the charges against the Student pursuant to the Code of Behaviour
on Academic Matters; and

(d)

a statement that the hearing was to proceed according to the procedures set out in
section C.II of the Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters.

6. The Tribunal finds that the foregoing constituted reasonable notice of the hearing, in
accordance with section 6 of the Statutory Powers Procedure Act.

7. In addition, the Tribunal considered the fact that a further email was sent to the Student
six days before the time appointed for the hearing, using the same Gmail address as
before, which again set out the time for the hearing (and also provided further
information to the Student with respect to the conduct of the hearing). Evidence as to the

-4-

sending of this further email was provided by Ms. Patterson, who testified via
teleconference. A copy of the email itself was introduced as an exhibit.
8. Ms. Patterson also testified that she was not aware of any response being sent by the
Student indicating that he was unable to attend on the appointed date (which, as noted
above, he had selected as his preferred date).

9. In light of all of the foregoing, the Tribunal determined that, pursuant to section 7(1) of
the Statutory Powers Procedure Act, it was appropriate to proceed with the hearing in the
absence of the Student.
The Charges
10. The charges against the Student were as follows:
1.
On or about October 24, 2012, you knowingly forged or in any
other way altered or falsified documents or evidence required by the
University of Toronto, or uttered, circulated or made use of any such
forged, altered or falsified documents, namely your personal statement,
which you submitted in support of your request for academic
accommodations or relief in CHM139Hl, MAT135Hl and BIO271Hl,
contrary to Section B.l.l(a) of the Code.

2.
On or about October 24, 2012, you knowingly forged or in any
other way altered or falsified documents or evidence required by the
University of Toronto, or uttered, circulated or made use of any such
forged, altered or falsified documents, namely a University of Toronto
Student Medical Certificate, purportedly prepared and signed by Dr. J.
Klein of Greenwood Walk-In Clinic, dated April 11, 2012, which you
submitted in support of your request for academic accommodations or
relief in CHM139Hl, MAT135Hl and BIO271Hl, contrary to Section
B.l.l(a) of the Code.
3.
On or about October 24, 2012, you knowingly forged or in any
other way altered or falsified documents or evidence required by the
University of Toronto, or uttered, circulated or made use of any such
forged, altered or falsified documents, namely a University of Toronto

-5-

Student Medical Certificate, purportedly prepared and signed by Dr. J.
Klein of Greenwood Walk-In Clinic, dated April 16, 2012, which you
submitted in support of your request for academic accommodations or
relief in CHM139Hl, MAT135Hl and BIO271Hl, contrary to Section
B.I.l(a) of the Code.
4.
On or about October 24, 2012, you knowingly forged or in any
other way altered or falsified documents or evidence required by the
University of Toronto, or uttered, circulated or made use of any such
forged, altered or falsified documents, namely a University of Toronto
Student Medical Certificate, purportedly prepared and signed by Dr. J.
Klein of Greenwood Walk-In Clinic, dated April 19, 2012, which you
submitted in support of your request for academic accommodations or
relief in CHM139Hl, MAT135Hl and BIO271Hl, contrary to Section
B.I.l(a) of the Code.
5.
On or about October 24, 2012, you knowingly forged or in any
other way altered or falsified documents or evidence required by the
University of Toronto, or uttered, circulated or made use of any such
forged, altered or falsified documents, namely a University of Toronto
Student Medical Certificate, purportedly prepared and signed by Dr. J.
Klein of Greenwood Walk-In Clinic, dated April 30, 2012, which you
submitted in support of your request for academic accommodations or
relief in CHM139Hl, MAT135Hl and BIO271Hl, contrary to Section
B.I.l(a) of the Code.
6.
On or about October 24, 2012, you knowingly forged or in any
other way altered or falsified documents or evidence required by the
University of Toronto, or uttered, circulated or made use of any such
forged, altered or falsified documents, namely a University of Toronto
Student Medical Certificate, purportedly prepared and signed by Dr.
Nerina Garcia of Brooklyn Medical Complex, dated October 19, 2012,
which you submitted in support of your request for academic
accommodations or relief in CHM139Hl, MAT135Hl and BIO271Hl,
contrary to Section B.I. l(a) of the Code.
7.
In the alternative, on or about October 24, 2012, you knowingly
engaged in a form of cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud
or misrepresentation not otherwise described in order to obtain academic
credit or other academic advantage of any kind by submitting falsified or
forged document(s) to the University of Toronto in support of your request
for academic accommodations or relief in CHM139Hl, MAT135Hl and
BIO271Hl, contrary to Section B.I.3(b) of the Code.

-6-

The Evidence
11. The University led the evidence of one witness, Mr. Damon Chevrier. For the last seven
years, Mr. Chevrier has worked as the Registrar at St. Michael's College, where the
Student was registered. Prior to that, he worked for over twenty years as the Registrar at
W oodsworth College. As part of his duties, Mr. Chevrier is involved in what he referred
to as the "petition process" - which is a process whereby a student can ask that an
accommodation be granted with respect to certain rules governing the completion of
work. Such accommodations include the granting of an extension of time for the
submission of work and, pertinent to the present case, the deferral of an examination.

12. Mr. Chevrier explained that, in order to obtain the desired accommodation, a student
must fill out a petition form and provide a letter in support, along with all relevant
documentation. The petition form along with the supporting material is reviewed by
personnel in the Registrar's office and is then forwarded on to the central Office of the
Faculty of Arts & Science, which makes the decision on whether or not to grant the
petition.

13. In cases where the student is seeking an accommodation on the grounds of ill health, Mr.
Chevrier explained that the petition form must be accompanied by a University of
Toronto Student Medical Certificate-which is a form found on the Faculty of Arts &
Science website and which must be completed by a physician.

14. In the event that the Faculty rejects the petition, the student has a right to appeal for a
reconsideration of his or her petition. As part of this reconsideration process, the student

-7-

can provide a further explanation as to why he or she is asking for the accommodation,
and can provide additional supporting documentation.

15. Mr. Chevrier testified that, on May 7, 2012, his office received a petition from the
Student. As set out in the petition form, the Student sought the following
accommodations:

(a) deferral of the final examination in BIO271H1S, which had been scheduled for
April 11, 2012; and

(b) a second deferral of the final examinations in CHM139H1F and MAT135H1F.

16. With respect to the two deferrals referred to in subparagraph (b) above, the Student had,
in the preceding term, already sought and been granted deferrals of the examinations in
the courses in question. He was now seeking a further deferral for both of these already
deferred exams. Those exams (as originally deferred) in CHM139H1F and MAT135H1F
had been scheduled for April 19, 2012 and April 30, 2012, respectively.
17. In support of his petition, the Student submitted a document entitled "Absent declaration
letter", which detailed what he described as a "severe viral infection", which he said had
begun on April 3, 2012. In the letter, the Student said that, while sick, that he had
"referred to a health care clinic on Bay Street". He said that the attending physician had
prescribed "several types of antibiotics" and "recommended several anti-viral
medications" and "prescribed at least 10 days of treatment time to rest in order to
recover". The letter went on to say that the Student had attended at a further appointment
(which he described as a "follow up session"), in which the attending physician
prescribed "additional medications and three weeks of treatment and recovery time".

-8Finally, the letter stated that the Student's physician had filled out the requisite University
of Toronto medical certificates, which were attached to the petition. The two certificates,
one dated April 4, 2012 and the other dated April 23, 2012, both show the attending
physician's name as "Dr. Lei". And they each show a stamp from "Bay College Medical

& Lockwood Diagnostics".
18. Mr. Chevrier reviewed the petition and the supporting documentation and forwarded it on
to the central Office of the Faculty of Arts & Science on May 8, 2012.

19. On May 25, 2012, the Office of the Faculty Registrar of the Faculty of Arts & Science
refused the Student's petition. In its reasons for denying the petition, the Faculty
focussed on two things: first, the time elapsed between the dates of the medical
certificates (which were April 4 and April 23) and the dates of the examinations (which
were April 11, 19 and 30); second, the fact that the student saw his physician on April
23 rd , was able to write two other examinations held on April 25 th and 2ih respectively,
but claimed to be unable to write a third examination held on April 30th . The Faculty's
reasons for the refusal of the deferral include the following statements:
The time intervals between the times you sought medical attention to the
actual dates of the three (3) examinations are unreasonably apart and
cannot be considered to adequately justify your inability to write the
examinations as scheduled.
You first sought medical attention on April 4th for an acute illness you
reported to have started on March 2i\ and the BIO271HIS 20121
examination was held on April 11 th and the CHM 13 9H 1F deferred
examination was on April 19th . You then saw your physician again on
April 23 rd and did not write the MAT135H1F 20119 deferred examination
held on April 30th, yet you were able to write two (2) other examinations
on April 25 th and 2ih.

-9-

20. Mr. Chevrier testified that, approximately five months later, on October 24, 2012, his
office received a further petition from the Student, which consisted of an appeal from the
Faculty's denial of his request for a deferral of the three exams. As with the original
petition, the documentation submitted in support of the appeal consisted of:
(a) a completed petition form;

(b) an absent declaration letter; and

(c) supporting documentation, specifically, University of Toronto Student Medical
Certificates.
21. However, there were significant differences between the contents of the supporting
documentation submitted with the October 24, 2012 appeal, and what the Student had
submitted in support of his original petition filed in May 2012.
22. First, the "Absent Declaration Letter" submitted in October 2012 stated that, "over the
course of one month from early April to May", the Student was seen by "2 different
physicians on 6 different occasions (family doctors)" and stated that "on one occasion"
the Student "was also admitted to Emergency department of hospital due to [his] viral
infection". This appears to be inconsistent with the Student's original Absent Declaration
Letter, submitted in May 2012, which had mentioned only one physician (not two), had
mentioned only two doctor's visits (not six) and had made no mention of any admission
or visit to an emergency department.

23. Second, the October 2012 petition attached four University of Toronto Student Medical
Certificates which had not been attached to, or referred to in, the Student's initial petition.

- 10 These Certificates indicated doctor's visits on April 11, April 16, April 19 and April 30.
The Certificates showed the physician's name as "Dr. Klein", showed a hand-written
College of Physicians and Surgeons of Ontario Registration Number that appears to be
10455, and were stamped "Greenwood walk-in clinic", showing the address for the
purported clinic as 1100 Sheppard Ave. East.

24. Third, the petition attached one further University of Toronto Student Medical
Certificate, showing the name "Dr. Nerina Garcia", with a "NY License# 0181063", and
stamped "Brooklyn Medical Complex", with an address of 350 13 th Avenue, Brooklyn,
NY. This final certificate indicated that the nature of the treatment was "psychological",
stating that "the patient has been undergoing psychotherapy since 1O/June/2012 on
scheduled basis". It also states, "The patient wishes not to disclose the details of his
problems, the circumstances and problems he has been going through since February
2012 have prevented him to properly focus on his academic life."
25. It should be noted that the dates on three of the Certificates are the precise dates of the
three examinations in respect of which the Student was seeking a deferral, namely, April
11, April 19 and April 30.

26. Mr. Chevrier testified that, when he reviewed the appeal petition and the supporting
documentation, he thought that the matter warranted further investigation before
submitting the materials to the central Office of the Faculty of Arts & Science. Among
his reasons for concluding that the matter warranted further investigation were the
following:

- 11 (a) He thought that the language used in the Medical Certificates signed by "Dr.
Klein" did not sound like the type of language a physician would use. For
example, the Certificate dated April 11, 2012, under the heading, "Nature and
timeline of the problem and its treatment", stated as follows:

Nature of the Disease: Non-life threatening contagious Cold and sinusitis
Mr. Chevrier said that it struck him as odd for a physician to describe a cold as
"non-life threatening". He also found it odd for the physician to write, "The
nature of his disease is contagious and his presence among students can cause
others to be infected."

(b) He said that it was unusual for the physician to have typed the information onto
the Certificates, rather than to have written it by hand.

(c) He said that it struck him as unusual that the physician recorded the Student's
temperature in Fahrenheit, rather than in Celsius.

27. Because his suspicions were aroused, Mr. Chevrier testified that he conducted a search on
the website of the College of Physicians and Surgeons of Ontario for the registration
number that was written on the Certificates. The search results - a copy of which was
entered into evidence - revealed that the number, 10455, was not associated with any
physician in Ontario.

28. Mr. Chevrier testified that he used the website of the College of Physicians and Surgeons
of Ontario to conduct a search for the name of the physician that was typed onto the
Certificates. That search revealed a number of physicians in Ontario whose surname was

- 12 "Klein", but none of those had a registration number that was the same as or similar to
the registration number that appeared on the Certificates. A copy of the search results
was entered into evidence.

29. Mr. Chevrier testified that he also telephoned the College of Physicians and Surgeons of
Ontario. He was told that the registration number set out on the Certificates had never
been associated with any physician in Ontario.

30. Then, on October 29, 2012, Mr. Chevrier emailed the Student, saying that he would like
to see him "to discuss the medical documentation" that the Student had submitted in
support of his petition. Mr. Chevrier' s email suggested two possible times that week for
a meeting. The Student responded the next day to say that he was "out of Toronto",
returning on December 11.

31. Mr. Chevrier testified that, some time later, he continued his investigation into the
medical Certificates submitted by the Student. Specifically, he telephoned the phone
number that was shown on the Certificates purportedly signed by "Dr. Klein". He
testified that his call went to an automated voicemail system, wherein the caller was
prompted to press particular numbers on his or her telephone to reach the desired
physician. Mr. Chevrier testified that he pressed the number indicated for "Dr. Klein"
and left a message with his name and phone number, asking for information about the
clinic's hours of operation.

32. He received a return call several days later. The call was received at 9: 15 p.m. Mr.
Chevrier was not in his office at that time, and the caller left a message on his voicemail.
In that message, a person identifying himself as "Andrew Ashford" stated as follows:

- 13 (a) that he was calling from the "Vancouver branch" of the "Greenwood Walk-In
Clinic";

(b) that the hours of operation for the Toronto branch were Monday to Friday, 10
a.m. to 6 p.m. and Saturdays from 1 p.m. to 5:30 p.m.;

(c) that the Toronto branch was "currently closed" and that it would "resume its
normal operations" beginning on the 25 th of April, 2013;

(d) that the phone and fax number of the Toronto branch was still "active";

(e) that if Mr. Chevrier required "verification of any documents or just prescription or
prescription-related documents issued by our clinic," he should fax the documents
in question to the telephone number that he had originally called and that "we will
try to provide you with a response within 48 hours".

33. Mr. Chevrier testified that he was struck that the person who left him the message should
specifically mention the possible need for the "verification of documents". Mr. Chevrier
thought that this was peculiar, because, when he had left his message for "Dr. Klein", he
had simply asked for the clinic's hours of operation; he had not asked any questions or
made any comments with respect to the need for any documents to be verified.

34. After having received the message, Mr. Chevrier did a Google search for a "Greenwood
Walk-In Clinic" in Toronto. His search returned no hits.

35. He then travelled to the address noted on the Certificates for the "Greenwood Walk-In
Clinic", namely 1100 Sheppard Avenue East. He testified that the building was several

- 14 stories high and had a number of medical offices in it. However, the building directory
showed no reference to a "Greenwood Walk-In Clinic".

36. Mr. Chevrier made inquiries of two women who worked in a pediatric walk-in clinic on
the building's main floor. However, they told him that they did not know of any
Greenwood Walk-In Clinic, nor did they know of any physician named Dr. Klein
working in the building.

37. Mr. Chevrier also undertook certain investigations relating to the fifth medical Certificate
submitted by the Student, which named "Dr. Nerina Garcia", as the treating physician.

38. Specifically, Mr. Chevrier conducted an internet search for the name "Nerina Garcia" and
found a "Licensee List" from the New York State Office of Professions database for a
psychologist named Nerina Garcia. The licensee number listed for Dr. Garcia was 68
018106. This was very close to the licensee number indicated on the Certificate
submitted by the Student, which was 0181063, with the only differences being that the
number submitted by the Student omitted the digits "68" at the beginning of the number,
and had an additional "3" at the end.
39. Mr. Chevrier then found contact information for Dr. Garcia and spoke with her on the
telephone. Mr. Chevrier testified that Dr. Garcia confirmed that she was a psychologist,
but said that she had no recollection of treating a patient with the Student's name. Mr.
Chevrier then testified that he sent Dr. Garcia a scanned copy of the fifth Certificate
submitted by the Student, which had Dr. Garcia's name on it. Dr. Garcia responded by
email as follows:

- 15 This document is not legitimate. I have never worked with this student, I
have never worked at Brooklyn Medical Complex [i.e. the name of the
medical facility listed on the Certificate], my license number is incorrect
(additional 3 at the end) and that is not my signature.
40. Following these further investigations, Mr. Chevrier exchanged a series of emails with
the Student. In those emails, Mr. Chevrier told the Student that he believed that the
medical Certificates were "not legitimate". More specifically, he told the Student that:

(a) he could not find any evidence of a Dr. Klein with the College of Physicians and
Surgeons of Ontario Registration Number 10455; and

(b) he had spoken with Dr. Garcia, who said that she had not signed the Certificate
submitted by the Student.

41. The Student responded via email on January 7, 2013 that he was "very confused" and that
he did not know "what is going on with Dr. Klein's CPSO number". He also said,
"[R]egarding Dr. Garcia, I am sure that there must have been some kind of administrative
or clarical [sic] mistake." The Student said that he would call "both of the clinics", and
would get back to Mr. Chevrier as soon as he had received the clinics' "explanations and
clarifications". Lastly, he asked that Mr. Chevrier not submit the matter to the Office of
Student Academic Integrity, until he had had an opportunity to seek further information
from the clinics in question.

42. Mr. Chevrier responded that he would wait until the end of the day on January 18th to
submit the matter to the Office of Student Academic Integrity ..

43. At 4 pm on January 18th, the Student sent an email to Mr. Chevrier. In that email, the
Student said that he had attended "in person" at Dr. Garcia's clinic, and that the secretary

- 16 "clearly explained that they never verify any documents over the phone, she said that the
proper protocol for document verification is via Fax." The Student continued:

She asked me to inform you that if you would like to verify the
authenticity of the medical certificate, you need to fax the document to
their clinic's Fax line ... and they will reply to you via Fax.
44. With respect to the issues regarding the Certificates purportedly signed by "Dr. Klein",
the Student said that he had left "more than 15 messages" with the clinic and that he had
not yet heard back.

45. Lastly, the Student said that he would be back in Toronto on February 1 to "sort this
problem out" and again asked Mr. Chevrier not to forward the matter on to the Office of
Student Academic Integrity until that date.

46. Mr. Chevrier next wrote to the Student on February 15 as follows:

In your last e-mail, you wrote that you would be returning to Toronto on
February 1 specifically to address my concerns about the Greenwood
Clinic medicals.
I have not heard from you since.
I am now forwarding your file to the Office of Student Academic
Integrity.
4 7. The Student responded - not with any explanation with respect to either the Certificate
allegedly signed by Dr. Garcia or the Certificates allegedly signed by "Dr. Klein" - but
rather with a statement that he would attend at Mr. Chevrier's office on Monday,
February 18 to "discuss the details". The Student then sent a further email, asking Mr.
Chevrier again not to involve the Office of Student Academic Integrity and again stating

- 17 that he would "certainly" attend at Mr. Chevrier's office on Monday, February 18,
However, Monday, February 18 was a statutory holiday.

48. On Tuesday, February 19, Mr. Chevrier wrote to the Student, pointing out that the
university had been closed the preceding day. He said that he was available to see the
Student on short notice on that day - i.e. Tuesday - should the Student wish to come in.

49. The Student responded the following day on Wednesday, February 20, asking whether
the matter had been forwarded to the Office of Student Academic Integrity. He said:
If the documents have not be [sic] submitted to the office of student
academic integrity (OSAI) I would like to see you and provide you with
my explanations that I have obtained from Greenwood walk-in clinic
regarding the concerns you had previously addressed.

50. Mr. Chevrier responded that same day that the file had already been sent to the Office of
Student Academic Integrity.
51. Mr. Chevrier had no further contact with the Student.

Analysis and Factual Findings
52. The Tribunal accepts the evidence of Mr. Chevrier with respect to the steps he took to
investigate the medical Certificates submitted by the Student, and the information that he
obtained as a result of those investigations. However, to the extent that Mr. Chevrier's
testimony included his own views as to whether the Certificates were falsified, the
Tribunal attaches no weight to that testimony. This is not due to any inherent frailties in
Mr. Chevrier's testimony, but simply to the Tribunal preferring to reach its own

- 18 conclusion as to the authenticity of the Certificates, without reliance on, or reference to,
Mr. Chevrier's opinion.

53. Based on Mr. Chevrier's testimony and the documentary evidence tendered in
connection with it, the Tribunal finds that the four medical Certificates submitted by the
Student with the physician's name noted as "Dr. Klein" were all falsified, within the
meaning of Section B.I.l(a) of the Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters, 1995. In
reaching this conclusion, the Tribunal relies in particular on the following.

(a) No physician with the family name of "Klein", with a CPSO Registration Number
of 10455 (or any number close to it), was identified through Mr. Chevrier's search
on the College of Physicians and Surgeons of Ontario website.

(b) No physician at all with a CPSO Registration Number of 10455 was identified
through Mr. Chevrier's search on the College of Physicians and Surgeons of
Ontario website.

(c) Mr. Chevrier' s telephone inquiry to the College of Physicians and Surgeons of
Ontario revealed that no physician in Ontario has ever been associated with the
CPSO Registration Number of 10455.

(d) A visit by Mr. Chevrier to the address noted on the medical Certificates revealed
no evidence of any "Greenwood Walk-In Clinic".

(e) The Certificates themselves raise questions as to their authenticity. For example,
the language used on the Certificates does not ring true to the type of language
that one would expect to be used by a physician (for example, the use of phrases

- 19 such as "non-life threatening", and "the nature of his disease is contagious", when
used to describe a common cold). As a further example, the stamp bearing the
clinic's name and address has improper capitalization, with "Greenwood" bearing
a capital "G", but "walk-in clinic" being entirely in lower case letters. In
addition, all of the references to "Tylenol" in the certificates purportedly signed
by Dr. Klein show the word "Tylenol" entirely in upper case letters, followed by
the trade-mark symbol "®" - a legal convention that we would not expect a
practising physician to use on a medical certificate.

(f) The Student's first "Absent declaration letter", submitted in May 2012, referred to
visits to a single physician at a "health care clinic on Bay street", but made no
mention of any visits to any other physician, and certainly no mention of any
visits to any health care clinic on Sheppard A venue East. The Student's second
"Absent declaration letter", submitted in October 2012, contains no explanation as
to why the first letter made no mention of these four alleged visits to the
"Greenwood Walk-In Clinic" and no explanation as to why the first "Absent
declaration letter" had referred only to a single physician, rather than to two
different treating physicians.

(g) The Student's first petition, submitted in May 2012, did not include any of the
four Certificates from the "Greenwood Walk-In Clinic". This is particularly
noteworthy, since these four Certificates are all dated from April 2012 and were,
therefore, ostensibly in the Student's possession at the time that he submitted his
first petition. The Student's second petition, submitted in October 2012, contains
no explanation as to why the Certificates were not included in the first petition.

-20 (h) The reason given to the Student for the rejection of his first petition was that the
two medical Certificates that he had submitted (dated April 4th and April 23 rd ,
respectively) were not close enough in time to the dates of the exams in respect of
which he sought a deferral (which dates were April 11 th , April 19th and April 30th ,
respectively). When the Student submitted his second petition in October 2012,
of the four additional medical Certificates submitted from "Dr. Klein", three were
dated April 11 th , April 19th and April 30th , respectively - the very same dates on
which the exams were to have been written. The Tribunal finds this apparent
"coincidence" to be highly suspect.

(i) When Mr. Chevrier called the phone number indicated on the Certificates for the
"Greenwood Walk-In Clinic", and left a message inquiring about the clinic's
hours of operation, the return message indicated that the clinic was "currently
closed", but stated that if the caller required "verification of any documents", the
clinic's Vancouver office would be able to assist. This offer of assistance with
respect to the "verification of documents" was highly suspect in the
circumstances.
54. With respect to the Certificate purportedly signed by Dr. Nerina Garcia, based on Mr.
Chevrier's testimony and the documentary evidence in connection with it, the Tribunal
finds that the Certificate was falsified, within the meaning of Section B.l. l(a) of the Code
of Behaviour on Academic Matters, 1995. In reaching this conclusion, the Tribunal relies
in particular on the following:
(a) Dr. Garcia's email to Mr. Chevrier stated that she had never worked with the
Student, that she had never worked at the "Brooklyn Medical Complex" (which

- 21 was the clinic name stamped on the Certificate submitted by the Student), and that
the signature on the Certificate was not hers.

(b) When Mr. Chevrier told the Student that Dr. Garcia had told him that she had not
signed the Certificate, the Student's response was that "the secretary [at the
alleged clinic] clearly explained that they never verify any documents over the
phone", and that the "proper protocol for document verification is via Fax". The
Student then suggested that Mr. Chevrier fax the Certificate to a number that was
listed as the phone number for the Brooklyn Medical Complex on the Certificate
submitted by the Student - the same Brooklyn Medical Complex where Dr.
Garcia had told Mr. Chevrier that she had never worked. The Tribunal finds the
Student's reaction to Mr. Chevrier's advice that Dr. Garcia had denied signing the
Certificate to be highly suspect. Among other things, the Student did not, as one
might have expected, insist that Dr. Garcia had in fact treated him on the date
indicated on the Certificate, nor did he insist that she had in fact completed and
signed the Certificate. Rather, he simply attempted to distract Mr. Chevrier away
from his inquiries made directly of Dr. Garcia herself and instead to redirect those
inquiries to a fax line that would not appear to have any connection with Dr.
Garcia.
55. Finally, the Tribunal finds that the Student knowingly engaged in a form of fraud or
misrepresentation not otherwise described in order to obtain academic advantage by
submitting the "Absent declaration letter", dated October 23, 2012, contrary to Section
B.I.3(b) of the Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters, 1995.

- 22 56. The Tribunal finds that the Absent Declaration Letter contained a number of
misrepresentations, notably, the statements:

(a) that he was seen by "2 different physicians on 6 different occasions", when the
evidence is that he was only seen by one physician on two separate occasions;

(b) that the attached Certificates had been filled out by the Student's doctor (when the
evidence is that the "physician" whose name is indicated on the four impugned
Certificates likely does not exist and, certainly, is not a physician licensed to
practise medicine in Ontario); and

(c) that one of the attached Certificates had been completed by the Student's
psychologist, who had been treating the Student for the past several months (when
the evidence is that the psychologist whose name appears on the Certificate had
never treated the Student).
57. The Tribunal notes that the University argued that the misrepresentations in the letter fell
within the scope of the Section B.Ll(a) of the Code and constituted a "forgery or
falsification". We note that the letter itself was not forged nor had it been falsified,
although it contained false information.
58. An instructive decision on this issue is that of the University Tribunal in The University

of Toronto and ~ ~ (Case# 714; October 11, 2013). In that case, the
student sent a series of emails which contained false information. The Tribunal
considered whether the emails constituted "forgeries" or "falsifications" such as would
fall within the scope of Section B.l. l (a). The Tribunal held that the emails did not

- 23 constitute forgeries or falsifications, since "the documents themselves are not forged,
altered or falsified":

The information contained in the documents is false, fraudulent and a
misrepresentation, but the documents themselves are not falsified.
59. We agree with that analysis and adopt it in this case. Accordingly, with respect to the
"Absent declaration letter", the Tribunal finds that the Student violated Section B.I.3(b)
of the Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters, 1995, as the letter contains information
that is false, fraudulent and a misrepresentation.
Penalty

60. The penalty sought by the University in this case was as follows:

(a) that the Student be awarded a grade of zero in the three courses in respect of
which he sought the exam deferrals, being CHM139Hl, MAT135Hl and
B1O271Hl;
(b) that the Tribunal recommend to the President that he recommend to Governing
Council that the Student be expelled;
(c) that, pending the decision of Governing Council, the Tribunal suspend the Student
for five years; and
(d) that the matter be reported to the Provost.
61. In considering the appropriate penalty, the Tribunal is guided by the principles
enunciated In the Matter of Mr. C. ( at page 12 of the decision; Case# 197 6/77-3;
November 5, 1976), which explained that the penalty should serve the three goals of

- 24 reformation, deterrence and "protection of the public". In trying to meet these goals, the
Tribunal must consider the following factors:

(a) the character of the person charged;

(b) the likelihood of repetition of the offence;

(c) the nature of the offence committed;

(d) any extenuating circumstances surrounding the commission of the offence;

(e) the detriment to the University occasioned by the offence; and

(f) the need to deter others from committing a similar offence.

62. The Tribunal has considered all of these factors.

63. First, with respect to the character of the Student, because the Student did not appear at
the hearing, the Tribunal knows little of his character beyond that revealed by the nature
of the offence that he committed. In that regard, the evidence is that he was prepared to
be dishonest. He submitted five forged medical certificates, along with an explanatory
letter that contained false statements. Those certificates, combined with the suspect
voicemail message received by Dr. Chevrier (in which the caller offered assistance in
"verifying documents"), suggest an involved and intricate scheme by the Student to
mislead the University. That scheme was furthered by the Student's response to Dr.
Chevrier's expressed doubts about the certificate allegedly signed by Dr. Garcia, whereby
the Student instructed Dr. Chevrier to send a fax to a number at an alleged clinic (with

- 25 which clinic Dr. Garcia had already confirmed that she had no association), in order to
"verify" the medical certificate submitted by the Student.

64. Certainly, the Tribunal has seen no evidence of any remorse by the Student.

65. Second, with respect to the likelihood of repetition of the offence, it was the Student's
first offence. However, the Student's failure to appear at the hearing and the lack of any
other expression of remorse do nothing to provide any indication that the Student will not
re-offend.

66. Third, with respect to the nature of the offence, the offence is very serious. It involved
the forging of multiple documents and required planning and deliberation, extending over
a number of months.

67. Fourth, with respect to any extenuating circumstances, the Tribunal is aware of none.

68. Fifth, with respect to the detriment to the University, it is important that the University be
able to rely on the process that it has put in place to enable students to seek indulgences
for the sitting of exams.

69. Sixth, with respect to the need to deter others from committing a similar offence, the
Tribunal agrees that it is important to convey a strong message to the University
community at large that this sort of behaviour will not be tolerated and will be met with a
strong disciplinary measure.

70. The Tribunal also reviewed a number of other decisions referred to by the University. In
the University andXD decision (Case# 636; January 24, 2012), the Tribunal
recommended expulsion for a student who had committed one forgery and had submitted

- 26 a false personal statement. In the University and -

decision, the Tribunal

recommended expulsion for a student who admitted having submitted a number of forged
medical notes, as well as other false documentation.
71. The Tribunal also reviewed a number of decisions (including in the University and
~ (Case #681; May 14, 2013), the University and

2013), the University and ~
~

1'111 (Case #702; April 15,

(Case# 562; January 20, 2010), the University and

(Case# 696; September 12, 2013), the University and ~

(Case #690;

September 5, 2013), the University and _ , _ (Case #642; June 10, 2011),
and the University and QW (Case #633; March 22, 2012), in which the student was found
to have committed the offence of forgery and in which the penalty imposed was a fiveyear suspension. We note that, in each of those decisions, the student had admitted guilt
and the penalty had been agreed upon by the accused student and the University.
72. Considering all of the foregoing, the Tribunal is persuaded that this is an appropriate case
in which to recommend to the President that he recommend to Governing Council that
the Student be expelled.
73. For all of these reasons, the Tribunal imposes the following sanction:
(a) The Student receive a grade of zero in the three courses in respect of which he
sought the exam defenals, being CHM139Hl, MAT13 5Hl and B1O27 1Hl;
(b) The Tribunal recommends to the President that he recommend to Governing
Council that the Student be expelled from the University;

- 27 (c) Pending the decision of Governing Council, the Student be suspended for five
years; and
(d) That this case shall be reported to the Provost for publication of a notice of the
decision of the Tribunal and the sanctions imposed, with the name of the Student
withheld.

Dated at Toronto, this

~

day of March, 2014.

J ~ C ~

