Case 1308

   DATE:

   April 12, 2022

   PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v. Q.Z. ("the Student")

   HEARING DATE:

   January 7, 2022, via Zoom

   PANEL MEMBERS:

   Mr. F. Paul Morrison, Chair
   Professor Richard DiFrancesco, Faculty Panel Member
   Ms. Serena Ju, Student Panel Member

   APPEARANCES:

   Mr. Robert Centa, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland
   Rosenberg Rothstein LLP
   Mr. William Webb, Co-Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg Rothstein LLP

   NOT IN ATTENDANCE:

   The Student

   HEARING SECRETARY:

   Ms. Nadia Bruno, Special Projects Officer, Office of Appeals,
   Discipline and Faculty Grievances

   The‚ØStudent‚Øwas charged under s. B.i.1(d) of the‚ØCode of Behaviour
   on Academic Matters, 1995‚Ø(the ‚Code‚) on the basis that she knowingly
   represented as her own an idea or expression of an idea, and/or the
   work of another in an assignment. In the alternative, the Student was
   charged under s. B.i.3(b) of the Code on the basis that she knowingly
   engaged in a form of cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud
   or misrepresentation in order to‚Øobtain academic credit or other
   academic advantage‚Øin connection with an assignment.

   The hearing proceeded on the basis of an Agreed Statement of Fact
   (‚ASF‚). The ASF outlined that the Professor who taught the course for
   which the assignment in question was submitted discovered that there
   were significant similarities between the Student‚s assignment and the
   assignment that another student in the course. The Professor expected
   some overlap between assignments, however, given the number and the
   degree of similarities between the assignments, it was highly unlikely
   that the similarities were coincidental. The Professor met with the
   Student at which time she admitted that a third party wrote the
   assignment. The ASF further outlined that the Student admitted to the
   Dean‚s Designate that she paid a third party agency, EZ4, to complete
   her assignment. Furthermore, she admitted that a tutor from EZ4
   completed the assignment during a videoconference via screen share, and
   that she copied the tutor‚s answer. The Panel noted that the ASF
   outlined that the Student admitted to purchasing the assignment from
   EZ4 and did not complete any meaningful academic work on the
   assignment. In consideration of the ASF, the supporting documents, and
   the Student‚s admissions, the Panel accepted the guilty plea with
   respect to the first charge and entered a conviction thereon. The
   University withdrew the second charge.

   The Panel received a Joint Submission on Penalty (‚JSP‚). The Panel
   noted that the authorities establish that a joint submission may be
   rejected by a panel only in circumstances where to give effect to it
   would be contrary to the public interest or would bring the
   administration of justice into disrepute. In a University setting, this
   means that the joint submission must be measured against the understood
   and entrenched set of values and behaviours, which members of the
   University community are expected to uphold. Only if a joint submission
   is fundamentally offensive to these values may it be rejected. The
   Panel considered the factors and principles relevant to sanction and in
   doing so, the Panel found that the JSP was reasonable and appropriate.
   The Panel imposed the following sanctions: a final grade of zero in the
   course, suspension for just over 55 months; a six-year notation on the
   transcript, and a report to the Provost for publication.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/30475
