Case #960

   DATE: April 3, 2018
   PARTIES: University of Toronto v. M.N. (âthe Studentâ)
   Hearing Date(s):Â  Â March 5, 2018
   Panel Members:
   Ms. Sana Halwani, Barrister and Solicitor, Chair
   Professor Faye Mishna, Faculty Panel Member
   Mr. Andrey Lapin, Student Panel Member
   Appearances:
   Ms. Tina Lie, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Barristers
   Professor Luc De Nil, Vice-Dean Students, School of Graduate Studies
   Ms. Donna Liu, Multidisciplinary Engineering Design Activities and
   Operation Assistant, Department of Mechanical & Industrial Engineering
   In Attendance:
   Krista Osbourne, Administrative Clerk & Hearing Secretary Appeals,
   Discipline and Faculty Grievances
   Mr. Graham Henry, Articling Student (Observer), Lenczner Slaght
   Mr. Sean Lourim, IT Support, Office of the Governing Council
   Not in Attendance
   The Student
   Trial Division - s. B.i.3(a) â forged or falsifying documents â
   falsified transcript used in an internship application âÂ  hearing not
   attended âÂ  reasonable notice provided â graduate student -
   recommendation of expulsion, five-year suspension pending expulsion,
   permanent notation on transcript, report to the Provost with the
   Studentâs name withheld.
   The Student was charged with falsifying or forging an academic record
   contrary to s. B.i.3(a) of the Code , or in the alternative academic
   dishonesty not otherwise described contrary to s.B.i.3(b) of the Code.
   The charge related to a forged academic transcript that the Student
   submitted in an application for an internship. The forgery was caught
   by a University administrator who was confirming the Studentâs
   eligibility to participate in the internship program. Upon the Panelâs
   finding of guilt on the charge of forging an academic record contrary
   to s.B.i.3(a) of the Code , the University withdrew the alternative
   charge of academic dishonesty not otherwise described contrary to
   s.B.i.3(b) of the Code.
   The Student was not in attendance at the hearing. The Panel found that
   reasonable notice had been provided to the Student on the basis of
   affidavits that provided that the Notice of Hearing had been sent to
   the Student through email and by courier to the home address in the
   Universityâs system, as well as by a process server who had received
   verbal confirmation of the Studentâs identity upon serving the Notice
   of Hearing to him personally.
   On the basis of Appendix C of the Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters
   which states that, absent exceptional circumstances, a penalty of
   expulsion is appropriate where the student has forged or falsified an
   academic record, the University requested the penalty that: (1) the
   Panel recommend that the Student be expelled; (2) a suspension of up to
   five years pending the decision on expulsion; (3) a notation be placed
   on the Studentâs transcript corresponding to the suspension and, once
   granted, a permanent notation as to the expulsion; and (4) the decision
   be published with the Studentâs name withheld.
   In determining the appropriateness of the proposed penalty, the Panel
   referred to the case University of Toronto v. R. W ., (Case No. 502,
   April 18, 2008) which spoke to the seriousness of the offence of
   forgery and the harm done to the reputation of the University. The
   Panel noted that it was the Studentâs first offence, however, the
   alterations to the transcript were extensive and performed
   intentionally. Further, that the Student had failed to engage in any
   way with the discipline process could indicate a lack of remorse. The
   Panel ordered: (a) a recommendation to the President of the University
   that the Student be expelled; (b) a suspension of a period of up to
   five years effective immediately pending expulsion; (c) a notation on
   the Studentâs transcript corresponding to the suspension and, if
   granted, a permanent notation on the Studentâs transcript; and (d) that
   the matter be reported to the Provost for publication.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12982
