Case 1243

FILE:

   Case # 1243 (2022-2023)

DATE:

   December 20, 2022

PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v. F.Z. (âthe Studentâ)

HEARING DATE(S):

   September 27, 2022, via Zoom

PANEL MEMBERS:

   Shaun Laubman, Chair

   Professor Georges Farhat, Faculty Panel Member

   Samantha Chang, Student Panel Member

APPEARANCES:

   Tina Lie, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg
   Rothstein LLP

HEARING SECRETARY:

   Krista Kennedy, Administrative Clerk and Hearing Secretary, Office of
   Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances

   The Student was charged with one offenceÂ of knowingly having another
   person personate them at a midterm examination, contrary to section
   B.i.1(c) of the Code. In the alternative, the Student was also charged
   for knowingly obtaining unauthorized assistance in connection with the
   midterm examination, contrary to section B.i.1(b) of the Code. In the
   further alternative, they were charged for knowingly representing as
   their own an idea or expression of an idea or work of another in their
   midterm examination, contrary to section B.i.1(d) of the Code. In the
   further alternative, they were charged with one count of knowingly
   engaging in a form of cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct,
   fraud or misrepresentation not otherwise described in the Code in order
   to obtain academic credit or other academic advantage of any kind in
   connection with the midterm examination, contrary to section B.i.3(b)
   of the Code.

   The Panel relied on the partiesâ Agreed Statement of Facts (âASFâ),
   which contained the Studentâs guilty plea regarding all the charges.
   Based on the ASF, students were required to submit a signature sheet
   and provide proof of identification to complete the online midterm
   examination. At the end of the examination, two students appeared to
   have uploaded each otherâs IDs. The Student uploaded the solution with
   the photo ID and signature of another student (âOther Studentâ), and
   the Other Student uploaded the solution with photo ID and signature of
   the Student. Following an investigation, the Student met with the
   Deanâs Designate and admitted to hiring someone on WeChat to write the
   examination for them. The Student had paid approximately $200 to $300
   to the personator to write their examination. The Student admitted that
   they had permitted the personator to log in to the Studentâs Quercus
   account using the Studentâs login credentials and to complete the
   midterm examination in their name. However, the personator mistakenly
   uploaded the midterm exam for the Other Student. Based on the
   admissions in the ASF, the Panel found the Student guilty of one count
   under section B.i.1(c) of the Code. The University withdrew the
   remaining charges.

   In determining sanction, the Panel considered the cases involving
   impersonation, including the case involving the Other Student who had
   paid the same personator to complete their midterm examination. In that
   case, the penalty was a zero in the course, a five-year suspension and
   notation on the Other Studentâs transcript. The Panel stated that
   personation is a very serious offence and deserving of strong
   sanctions, and it indicated that the additional element of an economic
   aspect (i.e., paying the personator) increased the seriousness of the
   offence.Â According to the Panel, these factors militated in favour of
   a lengthy suspension. The Studentâs early admission of guilt and
   cooperation during the sanction process pointed in favour of a lengthy
   suspension versus expulsion. The interest in maintaining consistency
   with the case involving the Other Student ( University v. Toronto and
   P.L. (Case No. 1211, September 23, 2021), which involved nearly
   identical circumstances, also weighed in favour of accepting the
   partiesâ Joint Submission on Penalty (âJSPâ). The parties submitted
   that it was appropriate to have the suspension start retroactively
   because there was an early admission of guilt in the case and the
   Student had not taken any further cases in the intervening period.
   Relying on past cases, the Panel indicated it has the jurisdiction to
   impose retroactive start dates for penalties in appropriate cases. The
   Panel accepted the JSP and imposed the agreed-upon penalty on the
   Student.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/30829
