THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
The University Tribunal
Trial Division

IN THE MATTER of charges of academic dishonesty against made on August 7,
2008 and November 21, 2008;
AND IN THE MATTER of the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on
Academic Matters, 1995;
AND IN THE MATTER of TheUniversityofTorontoAct, 1971, S.O. 1971, c. 56
as amended S.O. 1978, c. 88

BETWEEN:

UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO (the "University")
- and A

Hearing Date: December 9, 2009

Members of the Panel:
Ms. Laura Trachuk, Barrister and Solicitor, Chair
Professor Graham Trope, Department of Ophthalmology and Vision Sciences,
Faculty of Medicine, Faculty Member
Mr. Adil D'Sousa, Student Member
Appearances:
Mr. William Trudell, Barrister and Solicitor, Counsel for Mr. A I I I A Ms. Linda Rothstein, Discipline Counsel for the University of Toronto, Paliare
Roland Barristers
Ms. Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel for the University of Toronto,
Paliare Roland Barristers

In Attendance:
Mr. A - A - the Student
Ms. Natalie Ramtahal, Coordinator, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances,
Office of the Governing Council

DECISION

[1] A hearing of the Trial Division of the University Tribunal was convened on
December 9, 2009 to consider sanctions against A - A - under the
University of Toronto's Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters (the "Code").Two
prior decisions have been issued with respect to this matter. A preliminary
decision which dealt with a challenge to the panel's jurisdiction was issued on
January 14, 2009. A second decision finding Mr. A - guilty of several
offences under the Code was issued on October 9, 2009. This decision provides
supplementary reasons for the sanctions imposed on Mr. A - at the hearing
on December 9, 2009.
Charges

[2] At a hearing held on September 10, 2009, Mr. A. . . . pied guilty to the
following charges:
(i) On or about April 23, 2008, you knowingly forged or in any other way
altered or falsified any academic record or uttered, circulated or made use
of any such forged, altered or falsified record, whether the record be in
print or electronic form, namely the final exam submitted by N A - in MGTC03H - Principles of Finance, contrary to section 8.1.3.(a)
of the Code.
(ii) On or about November 29, 2007, you knowingly forged or in any other
way altered or falsified any academic record or uttered, circulated or made
use of any such forged, altered or falsified record, whether the record be in
print or electronic form, namely the marks for the mid-term exam
submitted by N - A - in MGTB03H - Management Accounting,
contrary to section B.1.3.(a) of the Code.
(iii) On or about December 10, 2007, you knowingly forged or in any other
way altered or falsified any academic record or uttered, circulated or made
use of any such forged, altered or falsified record, whether the record be in
print or electronic form, namely the marks for the final exam submitted by
in MGTB03H - Management Accounting, contrary to
section 8.1.3.(a) of the Code.

N-A-

[3] In the decision dated October 9, 2009, the Tribunal accepted Mr. Alllll's
plea and found him guilty of the above charges.

Sanctions

[4] A hearing was convened on December 9, 2009 to consider the sanctions
which should be imposed upon Mr. A - for the above offences. The
University was seeking expulsion and Mr. A - was asking for a lesser
penalty. At the conclusion of that hearing the Tribunal made the following
comments and imposed the following sanctions:

We have considered the submissions of the University and Mr. A - .
The offences committed by Mr. A - are, as he acknowledges,
extremely serious. He held a position of trust that he abused on three
occasions. It is absolutely fundamental that students at this University
have confidence in the impartiality of those assigned to assess them. Mr.
A - ' s actions profoundly undermine that necessity. We therefore did
consider the penalty of expulsion. However, we also believe that Mr.
A - has the potential for rehabilitation. We are concerned that we did
not hear his testimony on this issue. Nevertheless, we believe that the
record we do have before us today in addition to the testimony and
materials from last day, allow us to conclude that Mr. A - can be
rehabilitated and should not be precluded forever from graduating from the
University of Toronto. Nevertheless, a strong message needs to be sent to
the community that such conduct will lead to very serious sanctions. We
therefore consider it appropriate that Mr. A - be suspended from the
University until April 2013. That will, in effect, mean that Mr. A-will
have been prevented from graduating from the University for five years.
We consider that to be a penalty which reflects the seriousness of the
offence and the necessity for deterrence balanced with the principle of
rehabilitation. We therefore order as follows:.
1. AIIII A - will be suspended from the University from October 9,
2009 until April 30, 2013.
2. The suspension will be recorded on his academic record for that period
of time.
3. This decision will be reported to the Provost for publication with the
name of the student withheld.
[5] The panel advised the parties that further written reasons for the decision
would follow.
[6] In an early decision of the Appeals Tribunal, Mr. John Sopinka described the
approach to be used in considering sanctions for Code offences. He said "The
classical components of enlightened punishment are reformation, deterrence and

protection of the public." Mr. Sopinka also proposed the following useful list of
factors to be considered in applying those components:
a) the character of the person charged;
b) the likelihood of a repetition of the offence
c)the nature of the offence committed;
d) any extenuating circumstances surrounding the commission of the offence;
e) the detriment to the University occasioned by the offence
f) the need to deter others from committing a similar offence
[7] That approach has been followed in numerous subsequent decisions and
was applied by the panel in this case. The panel was concerned that it did not
hear from Mr. AIIIIII himself during the sanctions part of the proceeding.
·
[8] However, we were provided with a number of documents attesting to Mr.
A - ' s remorse and good character. It was apparent that he had been
straightforward with the individuals who wrote the letters about his actions and
had even given them the ASF to read. He has been doing volunteer work and
had been forthright about these offences when he was applying for the position.
Mr. A - ' s academic record is admirable and he has no prior Code offences.
[9] The panel also took into account the very serious nature of the offences. Mr.
A - accepted teaching assistant positions in courses in which his brother was
enrolled. He abused the privileged position of trust he held as a teaching
assistant to improve his brother's marks on three occasions. Furthermore, he did
not own up to the offences when he was first confronted. However, he did
subsequently acknowledge the offences, agree to the ASF and plead guilty to the
charges. That demonstrated that he did reach an understanding of the
seriousness of his actions and his cooperation saved everyone the time and
expense of a trial.
[1 O] The panel was very cognizant of the detriment to the University occasioned
by Mr. A - ' s offences as well as the need to deter other students, particularly
teaching assistants, from abusing positions of trust. The teaching faculty must be
able to rely upon their teaching assistants implicitly. Furthermore, it is grossly
unfair to the other students for a teaching assistant to use his position to give
credit to a student who has not earned it. The University's reputation is
synonymous with the integrity of the credits earned by its students. Any time
credit is given where it is not due that reputation is threatened. Mr. A - ' s
actions attacked the promise the University makes to its students that they will be
evaluated impartially and to the world that its students have truly earned the
marks and credits on their transcripts.
[11] After considering all of the above factors, the panel determined that a very
significant sanction should be imposed on Mr. A _ _ It seriously considered the

l;zJ 002

Olt29/2010 20:38 FAX

option of recommending expulsion. However, the panel ultimately decided that
preventing Mr. A - from graduating for five years would achieve the goals of
refonnation, deterrence and protection of the public. The greatest penalty the
Tribunal can impose short of expulsion is suspension for five years. In this case,
Mr A - had finished his course won< and was ready to graduate when his
offences were discovered in April 2008. As he was charged with the offencss he
has not been able to graduate since then. He has been prevented from
proceeding with his dream of becoming an accountant, a career which may
remain forever out of his reach now. Therefore, by imposing a suspension until
April 2013, the panel effectively suspended Mr. A - f o r five years. That is a
very significant sanction which will convey the message that such breaches of
trust will not be tolerated.
(12] The panel decided not to recommend expulsion because Mr. A - did not
act for his own benefit. This distinguished Mr. A - ' s actions from those of Mr.
S.L. in the recent decision of The University of Toronto and SL (January 21,
201 0) in which a teaching assistant provided answers to students for money on
several occasions. Mr. A - ' s situation is also distinguishable from the
University of Toronto and M.C. (July 8, 2008), in which a student with access to
the University's computer system abused her position of trust to improve her own
transcript in such a manner that it could never be discovered. Mr. A committed the violations of the Code to assist his brother. There is no question
that Mr. A...,s offences were extremely serious. It is understandable that the
University was seeking expulsion in the circumstances. However, the panel
decided that the suspension would provide the nec9ssary deterrence and that
there was little likelihood of the offence being repeated. Unlike Mr. S.L.,'-the panel
considered It unlikely that Mr. A-would abuse a position of trust In the
future. Finally, and most significantly in this case, the panel accepted that Mr.
A - could be rehabilitated. It decided that he deserved to have another
chance. That decision was also infonned by the fact that he did not act for his
own benefit.
(13] For all of the above reasons the panel imposed the sanctions set out in
paragraph [4] above.

Dated at Toronto, January 29, 2010

~ltriii~

Ms. Laura Trachuk for the panel
Mr. Graham Trope
Mr_ Adi! D'Sousa

5

