THE UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO

IN THE MATTER OF charges of academic dishonesty made on April 26, 201 O;
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic
Matters, 1995;
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University a/Toronto Act, 1971, S.O. 1971, c. 56 as amended
S.0. 1978, C. 88

....-BETWEEN~·- - THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
- and-

H

B

Members of the Panel:
•
•
•

Ms Lisa Brownstone, BaiTister and Solicitor, Chair
Professor Lesley Lavack, Faculty of Pharmacy, Faculty Panel Member
Mr. Mir Sadek Ali, Student Panel Member

Appearances:
•
•
•

Mr. Robert Centa, Assistant Discipline Cow1Sel, Paliare Roland Barristers
Mr. Daniel Goldbloom, Legal Case Worker, Downtown Legal Services
Ms H
B
, the Student

In Attendance:
•
•

Ms Lucy Gaspini, Academic Affairs Officer, University of Toronto, Mississauga
Ms Natalie Ramtahal, Coordinator, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances

-1-

Preliminary

[I]

The Trial Division of the University Tribunal was convened on June 11, 20 IO to consider
charges under the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters, 1995
(the "Code") laid against the student by letter dated April 26, 20 IO from Professor Edith
Hillan, Vice-Provost, Faculty & Academic Life.

Hearing on the Facts

[2]

[3]

[4]

The two charges facing the student were the following:
1.

On or about December 8, 2009, you knowingly used or possessed an unauthorized
aid during and in connection with the final examination in CCT 319 HSF
("Course'~),-contrary tosection-B.I. I (b) ofthe Code.
--- _ _
- __ _

ii.

In the alternative to charge #1, on or about December 8, 2009, you knowingly
engaged in a form of cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or
misrepresentation not otherwise described in the Code in order to obtain academic
credit, or other academic advantage of any kind, with respect to the final
examination in the Course, contrary to section B.l.3(b) of the Code.

Pmiiculars of the charges were as follows:
i.

At all material times, you were registered as a student at the University of Toronto.

ii.

In the Fall term of 2009, you enrolled in the Course, Economics and the Digital
Firm, which was taught by Lee Bailey, in the Department of Economics, University
of Toronto Mississauga.

iii.

The final examination in the Course was held on December 8, 2009 (the
"Examination"). The Examination was worth 30% of the final grade in the Course.

1v.

The Examination was closed-book, but you were permitted to use a nonprogrammable, non-graphing calculator. You were not permitted to bring any other
aids into the Exmnination.

v.

You brought two calculators into the Examination. One calculator had formulae
written in pencil on the inside cover of the calculator. The formulae were relevant to
questions on the final examination. You were not permitted to possess those
formulae during the Examination.

vi.

You brought the formulae into the Examination in order to obtain an academic
advantage.

Discipline Counsel for the University, Mr. Centa, introduced an Agreed Statement of
Facts, which was entered as Exhibit I. A Joint Book of Documents was entered as
Exhibit 2.

-2-

The agreed upon facts of the substantive incident that gave rise to this hearing were as
follows:
(1)

Ms. B
first registered as a student at the University of Toronto at Mississauga
in Fall 2006. At all material times, she remained a student at the University. In
2009, Ms. B
was enrolled in the course of study leading to a specialist degree
in Enterprise Management and a minor in Women's Studies.

(2)

In Fall 2009, Ms. B
enrolled in CCT 319H - Economics and the Digital Firm,
which was taught by Lee Bailey ("Course"). Ms. B
admits that she received a
copy of the syllabus for the Course. The Syllabus stated, in part, as follows:
(1)

Non-programmable, non-graphing calculators are allowed for the term
tests and exams. No other aids are pennitted-. -- -- ---- -- -

(2)

The Governing Council of the University of Toronto has approved a
Code of Academic Behaviour [sicJ and a Code of Student Conduct.
Together, these documents define the standard for conduct that is
expected from members of the university community. Both Codes are
summarized in your Academic Calendar. Please be advised that
misconduct will not be tolerated.

---------~~--~

(3)

The academic requirements for the Course included two term tests (each worth
15%) and a final examination worth 30% of the final grade in the Course.

(4)

Students were permitted to use basic calculators for each term test and no other aids
were permitted.

(5)

The final examination in the Course was held on December 8, 2009. Students were
permitted to use basic calculators for the final examination and no other aids were
permitted.

(6)

The final examination warned students that they were not pe1mitted to possess notes
or unauthorized calendars:
The University of Toronto Mississauga and you, as a student, share a
commitment to academic integrity. You are reminded that you may be
charged with an academic offence for possessing any unauthorized
aids during the writing of an exam, including but not limited to any
electronic devices with storage, such as cell phones, pagers, personal
digital assistants (PDAs), iPods, and MP3 players. Unauthorized
calculators and notes are also not pe1mitted. Do not have any of these
items in your possession in the area of your desk. Please turn the
electronics off and put all unauthorized aids with your belongings at

-3-

the front of the room before the examination begins. If any of these
items are kept with you during the writing of your exam, you may be
charged with an academic offence. A typical penalty may cause you to
fail the course.
(7)

At the beginning of the final examination, the Chief Presiding Officer ("CPO")
announced that students should put away any unauthorized aids.

(8)

Ms. B
states that she brought two calculators to the final examination with
her. She states that she did so in case one of the calculators stopped working during
the final examination.

(9)

Approximately 15 minutes into the final examination, the CPO examined a
calculator on Ms.- B
's desk, 'I'he-CP--0--opened-the-calculator lid-and- -- - discovered handwritten notes and formulae on the inside of the lid of the calculator.
The notes contained on the inside of the calculator were relevant to questions 3 and
4 of the final examination. The calculator lid was entered into evidence at these
proceedings as Exhibit 3.

(10) On March 12, 2010, Ms. B
, accompanied by a representative from
Downtown Legal Services, attended a meeting with Catherine Seguin, Dean's
Designate for Academic Offences at the University of Toronto Mississauga. During
this meeting Ms. B
admitted that she was in possession of an unauthorized
aid during the final examination.
Admission
[5]

Ms B
admitted that she knew or ought to have known that she possessed an
unauthorized aid during the final examination in the Course, contrary to section B.I.l(b)
of the Code., and that she knew or ought to have known that she engaged in a fmm of
cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or misrepresentation not otherwise
described in the Code in order to obtain academic credit or other academic advantage of
any kind in connection with the Assignment, contrary to section B.l.3(b) of the Code.

Decision of the Tribunal

[6]

On the basis of the Agreed Statement of Facts, the Tribunal accepted the plea and found a
contravention of the Code as set out in the first charge. At this time, the Provost
withdrew the second charge.

Penalty Phase
[7]

The parties submitted an Agreed Statement of Facts & Joint Submission on Penalty,
which was entered as Exhibit 4. The following sanctions were jointly proposed:
(a)

MsB

shall receive a final grade of zero in the course CCT 319;

-4-

(b)

Ms B
shall be suspended from the University from September I, 2010,
until August 31, 2013;

(c)

the sanction shall be recorded on Ms B
's academic record and transcript
from the date of the Order from June II, 2010, until June 10, 2014.

(8]

The parties also proposed that the Panel order that this case shall be reported to the
Provost for publication of a notice of the decision of the Tribunal and the sanction or
sanction imposed in the University newspapers, with the name of the student withheld.

[9]

Discipline Counsel reviewed the additional facts agreed to in support of the Joint
Submission on Penalty, portions of which are set out below.

(1)

On March 27, 2008, Ms. B
admitted that she committed the academic
offence- oY--plagiarism in an essay -submitted for credit in VCC201H5S Introduction to Visual Culture ("VCC 201 "), which was taught by Prof. Amish
Mon-ell. The act of plagiarism involved improper citation in the body of an essay
submitted for academic credit.

(2)

On April 9, 2008, Anthony Wensley, Director of the Communication, Culture, and
Information Technology program ("CCJT") sanctioned Ms. B
under the
Code. He reduced her mark on the essay she submitted from 65% to 50%.

(3)

On March 28, 2008, Ms. B
submitted a second essay in VCC 201. Prof.
Mon-ell identified plagiarism in this second essay. He identified that Ms. B
had bon-owed text from a large variety of sources, had included citations from
within her plagiarized sources in her bibliography, and had provided references that
did not correspond with the real source of the text.

(4)

On September 16, 2008, Ms. B
admitted to committing the academic offence
of plagiarism. On September 22, 2008, Assistant Dean Lynn Snowden imposed the
following penalty on Ms. B
: a final grade of zero in the VCC 201 and a 12month annotation recording the offence on her academic record and transcript.

[ 1OJ

The Panel notes that this last letter concluded by stating: "I trust that you have had time
to reflect on the seriousness of this incident and will not commit another academic
offence again. Please be advised that any subsequent allegations of offence are usually
referred directly to the Tribunal for investigation."

(11]

Information about the students' personal situation was also provided, as follows:
(I)

At the time of the final exam in CCT319H, Ms. B
was taking six classes and
was working 10-12 hours per week as a Part-time Sales Associate at Connect-us
Inc. TELUS Authorized Dealers. A reference letter from her manager, George
Arandas, is attached at Tab 3.

(2)

Ms. B
did not make use of the notes on the back of her calculator cover
during the exam, nor did she attempt to make use of them .

. 5.

(3)

Since the date of the exam, Ms. B
has been suffering from stress and
abdominal pain. She has undergone medical testing (including blood work and
ultrasound) as part of her doctor's medical investigations. She has been taking
Pantoprazole for her condition.

(4)

Following the resolution of Ms. B
's second plagiarism offence, her grades
have improved. In particular, her studies relating to the Digital Enterprise
Management specialist program put her in the top I 0% of her class.

(5)

Throughout this process, Ms. B
has sought a speedy resolution to these
charges. She requested, and received, an early hearing date. Ms. B
admitted
she had possession of an unauthorized aid at the earliest opportunity.

--~(6)

In addition, the student read a statement to the Tribunal, in which she accepted
responslbiHty-and remorse for her- acuons,- ancf also described the effects of ner
conduct and this sanction upon her. That statement was marked as Exhibit 5.

[12]

The Tribunal was reminded by counsel that, while not obliged to accept a joint
submission on penalty, the joint submission should not be rejected unless to accept it
would be contrary to the public interest or bring the administration of justice into
disrepute. The Panel accepts and acknowledges that this is a high threshold for declining
to accept ajoint submission.

[13]

The panel considered the mitigating and aggravating factors in this case. An important
aggravating factor was that this was a third offence involving academic dishonesty. In
addition, this student was warned very clearly that aids were not pe1mitted, should not be
in the student's possession, and that use of aids could result in being charged with an
academic offence. The university and its students share a responsibility for academic
integrity. As stated in the preamble to the Code, "The concern of the Code of Behaviour
on Academic Matters is with the responsibilities of all parties to the integrity of the
teaching and learning relationship. Honesty and fairness must inform this relationship,
whose basis remains one of mutual respect for the aims of education and for those ethical
principles which must characterize the pursuit and transmission of knowledge in the
University." The Panel wishes to emphasize the importance of safeguarding integrity and
honesty in the university environment. To that end, this conduct must be treated with a
serious sanction. In mitigation, the Panel notes that the student entered a guilty plea and
co-operated with the process, and demonstrated both an acceptance of responsibility for
her conduct, and genuine remorse. Having considered all of these factors, the Panel
agrees that the sanction that was jointly submitted to it was within an appropriate range of
sanction in the circumstances.

-6 -

Sanction
[14]

The Panel therefore accepted the Joint Submission on Penalty, and made the following
order at the hearing on June 11, 20 I 0:
(a)

Ms B

(b)

Ms B
shall be suspended from the University from September I, 2010, until
August 31, 2013;

(c)

the sanction shall be recorded on her academic record and transcript from the date
of the Order from June 11, 2010, until June 10, 2014; and

shall receive a final grade of zero in the course CCT 319;

(d)

That this case shall be reported to the Provost for publication of a notice of the
decision of the Tribunal and the sanction or sanction imposed in the University
____ new.spapers, with thename of the student withheld._____ __
_ _ _ __

Dated this G1,~ay of June, 2010

-7-

