Case #599

   DATE: June 29, 2010
   PARTIES: University of Toronto v. H.B.
   Hearing Date(s): June 11, 2010
   Panel Members:
   Lisa Brownstone, Chair
   Professor Lesley Lavack, Faculty Member
   Mir Sadek Ali, Student Member
   Appearances:
   Robert Centa, Assistant Discipline Counsel for the University
   Daniel Goldbloom, DLS for the Student
   H.B., the Student
   In Attendance:
   Lucy Gaspini, Academic Affairs Officer
   Trial Division â s. B.I.1(b); s. B.I.3(b) of Codeâ unauthorized exam
   aid â handwritten formulae â hearing attended âAgreed Statement of
   Facts â guilty plea â Joint Submission on Penalty â Joint Submission on
   Penalty accepted â prior academic offences â third academic offence â
   clear warning â co-operated with process â genuine remorse â accepted
   responsibility âÂ Â  grade assignment of zero for course; three-year
   suspension; four-year notation on transcript; and report to Provost
   Student charged with two offences under s. B.I.1(b) and s. B.I.3(b) of
   the Code. Charges relate to the allegations that the Student knowingly
   possessed an unauthorized aid during a final exam. The Student was
   charged to have possessed a calculator with formulae written in pencil
   on the inside cover during an exam. The formulae were relevant to
   questions on the exam and the Student was not permitted to possess
   those formulae during the exam. The Panel was provided with an Agreed
   Statement of Facts signed by the Student and counsel for the
   University. In the Agreed Statement of Facts, the Student admitted to
   committing the academic offences under s. B.I.1(b) and s. B.I.3(b) of
   the Code. After the Panel accepted the Studentâs guilty plea, the
   University withdrew the charge under s. B.I.3(b). Counsel for the
   University noted two previous incidents of academic misconduct. First,
   two years prior, the Student had committed the academic offence of
   plagiarism involving the improper citation in an essay. Second, also
   two years prior, the Student had committed plagiarism in the same
   course as the first incident of plagiarism. The Panel heard information
   about the Studentâs personal situation, including the fact she was
   taking six classes and working 10-12 hours per week part-time during
   the time of the incident, that, since the date of the exam, she had
   been suffering from stress and medical issues, that following the
   resolution of her second plagiarism offence, the Studentâs grades had
   improved, and that throughout the disciplinary process the Student had
   sought a speedy resolution to the charges. The Student read a statement
   to the Panel in which she accepted responsibility and expressed remorse
   for her actions, further describing the effects of her conduct and of
   the sanctions upon her. The Panel considered the mitigating and
   aggravating factors in the case. An important aggravating factor was
   the fact that the Student had committed two prior offences involving
   academic dishonesty. The Panel found the Student was warned very
   clearly that aids in the exam were not permitted. Mitigating factors
   heard included the entering of a guilty plea by the Student, and the
   Studentâs cooperation, acceptance of responsibility, and genuine
   remorse. Considering all of these factors, the Panel found the Joint
   Submission on Penalty was appropriate. The Panel imposed a grade
   assignment of zero for the course, a three-year suspension, a four-year
   notation on the Studentâs transcript and that a report to the Provost
   be issued.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12771
