Case #831

   DATE: August 23, 2016
   PARTIES: University of Toronto v M.L.
   Hearing Date(s): April 21, 2016
   Panel Members:
   Andrew Pinto, Chair
   Maria Rozakis-Adcock, Faculty Member
   Shan Arora, Student Member
   Appearances:
   Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland, Barristers
   Daniel Walker, Studentâs Legal Representative, Bobila Walker Law LLP
   Lucy Gaspini, Manager, Academic Integrity and Affairs, Office of the
   Dean, UTM
   In Attendance:
   Tracey Gameiro, Associate Director, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty
   Grievances
   Ms. M.L., the Student
   Trial Division â s. B.i.1(b), s. B.ii.1(a) , and s. B.ii.2 of the Code
   â unauthorized aid, party to the offence â Student provided 10 students
   with the answer to a quiz in a course she had taken the previous year â
   guilty plea accepted â finding on Agreed Statement of Facts â Joint
   Submission on Penalty accepted â 2-year suspension; 3-year notation on
   the Studentâs academic record and transcript; case reported to Provost
   for publication
   Student charged with one offence contrary to s. B.i.1(b) , s. B.ii.1(a)
   , and s. B.ii.2 and a second offence contrary to s. B.i.3(b) of the
   Code . The charges related to allegations that the Student knowingly
   provided unauthorized assistance to approximately ten students by
   providing them with the answers to a quiz in a course she had taken the
   previous year, for compensation. Student pleaded guilty to the first
   charge of aiding or assisting other to commit the offences under s.
   B.i.1(b), s. B.ii.1(a) , and s. B.ii.2 . The University accepted the
   Agreed Statement of Facts and accepted the Studentâs guilty plea. The
   University then withdrew the second charge. The Panel accepted the
   Joint Submission on Penalty and imposed a 2-year suspension; a 3-year
   notation on the Studentâs academic record and transcript; and that the
   case be reported to the Provost for publication.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12914
