THE UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
IN THE MATTER OF charges of academic dishonesty filed on October 26, 2015;
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on
Academic Matters, 1995;
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Act, 1971, S.O. 1971, c. 56
as am. S.O. 1978, c. 88.
BETWEEN:
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
- AND M

L

-■

REASONS FOR DECISION
Hearing Date: April 21, 2016
Members of the Panel:
Mr. Andrew Pinto, Lawyer, Chair
Professor Maria Rozakis-Adcock, Faculty Panel Member
Mr. Shan Arora, Student Panel Member
Appearances:
Ms. Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Barristers
Mr. Daniel Walker, Student’s Legal Representative, Bobila Walker Law LLP
Ms. Lucy Gaspini, Manager, Academic Integrity and Affairs, Office of the Dean,
University of Toronto, Mississauga
In Attendance:
Ms. Tracey Gameiro, Associate Director, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty
Grievances, University of Toronto
Ms. M
L , the Student

-■

Preliminary

[1]

The Trial Division of the University Tribunal was convened on April 21 ,
2016 to consider charges under the University of Toronto Code of
Behaviour on Academic Matters, 1995 (the "Code") laid against the
Student by letter dated October 26, 2015 from Professor Sioban Nelson,
Vice-Provost, Faculty and Academic Life.

Hearing on the Facts

[2]

The charges against the Student were as follows:
1.
In or about October, 2014, you knowingly used or possessed an
unauthorized aid or aids or obtained unauthorized assistance in
connection with Quiz #6 in STA302H5F (the "Quiz"), contrary to sections
B.1.1 (b), B.I1.1 (a) and B.I1.2 of the Code.
2.
In or about October, 2014, you knowingly engaged in a form of
cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or misrepresentation
not otherwise described in the Code to obtain academic credit or other
academic advantage of any kind, in connection with the Quiz, contrary to
section B.l.3(b) of the Code.
Particulars

The particulars of the offences charged are as follows:

[3]

(a)

At all material times you were a student registered at the University
of Toronto Mississauga.

(b)

In Fall 2014 you knowingly provided unauthorized assistance to
approximately ten students enrolled in STA302H5F: Regression
Analysis by providing them with answers to Quiz #6.

(c)

Students in STA302H5F were required to submit independent work
for grading and not to permit others to copy their work.

(d)

In Fall 2013 you had been enrolled in STA302H5F and were
familiar with the requirement to do independent work and not to
permit copying of your work by others.

(e)

You received monetary compensation for the unauthorized
assistance you provided to students in STA302H5F in Fall 2014.

The Student and the University entered into an Agreed Statement of Facts
("ASF"), attached to these Reasons as Appendix "A".

2

[4]

Discipline Counsel provided an overview of the ASF. In reviewing the
ASF, and based on clarifications requested by the Tribunal, the parties
proposed minor amendments to the ASF as follows :
(a) In paragraph 15(b) of the ASF, "015" should be replaced by "016";
and
(b) Paragraph 22(a) of the ASF should be revised to read:
She didn't just provide the students with a copy of her old
assignment from the 2013 Course, but did the work for Assignment
#6 for them in the fall of 2014 and provided that work to them
because she wanted to help them; and

[5]

In summary, the Student took and successfully completed a Regression
Analysis course in Fall 2013 from Professor Brunner. The Professor
taught the same course in Fall 2014. The Course syllabus was essentially
the same.
The syllabus contained detailed paragraphs about the
requirement that students do their own work, and not permit anyone to
copy from them. A Tutorial Assistant (TA) for the 2014 Regression
Analysis course noticed that 33 students had submitted virtually identical
computer code, and 10 students identical code in the computer printout
section of one of their assignments. The University determined that 9 of
the 10 students had received assistance from a tutor concerning the
assignment in question. The tutor was the Student.

[6]

The Student was invited via email to attend a meeting with Professor
Brunner to discuss the allegation that she had provided unauthorized
assistance to students. The Student responded via email that she did not
believe the allegation had anything to do with her, and would not attend a
meeting without reasonable proof. She did not ultimately attend a meeting
with Professor Brunner.

[7]

The ASF confirmed that the Student charged students $35-40 per session
to $300 for the duration of the Regression Analysis course.

[8]

The Student attended a meeting with the Dean's designate. After being
provided with the standard caution, the Student acknowledged, inter alia,
that she provided unauthorized assistance to the students by providing
them with a copy of her old assignment from the 2013 course. The
Student wished to plead guilty to an academic offence.

3

[9]

Discipline counsel clarified that while the Student did not personally
commit the offence listed in section B.i.1.(b) of the Code, namely "to use
or possess an unauthorized aid or aids or obtain unauthorized assistance
in any academic examination or term test or in connection with any other
form of academic work", by virtue of section B.ii.1.(a)(ii), the Student
becomes a party to that offence if she "does or omits to do anything for the
purpose of aiding or assisting another member to commit the offence."

[1 O]

Discipline counsel clarified that the University was not taking issue with
the tutoring services offered by the Student per se, nor was the University
emphasizing the commercial aspect of the Student's conduct.

[11]

The Student's counsel suggested that there was some vagueness
regarding "unauthorized assistance" in the Code but did not take issue
with Discipline counsel's submissions or contradict what the parties had
agreed to in the ASF.

Decision of the Tribunal on Charges

[12]

Following deliberation, based on the facts set out in the ASF and a review
of the documents contained in a Joint Book of Documents ("JBD")
presented by the parties, the Tribunal accepted the Student's guilty plea.
The University agreed to withdraw the second charge if a finding of guilt
was returned on the first charge. Consequently, the Student stood
convicted on charge 1.

Penalty

[13)

The matter then continued with a hearing into the appropriate sanction.

[14]

The parties provided the Tribunal with a Joint Submission on Penalty
"JSP" which proposed, inter alia, that the Student be suspended from the
University for a period of two years. A copy of the JSP is attached to
these Reasons as Appendix "B".

[15]

The parties presented no further evidence at the penalty phase of the
hearing .

[16)

Discipline Counsel presented a Brief of Authorities containing relevant
cases.

[17]

This was the Student's first offence. There was no evidence presented
regarding mitigating or aggravating factors that would distinguish this case
from other first offence cases where the Tribunal has typically ordered a
two-year suspension.

4

[18]

Discipline Counsel submitted that the JSP was well within the range of the
Tribunal's established jurisprudence. The Student's counsel agreed and
suggested that the Student had pleaded guilty at the Dean's designate
meeting, had attended the hearing and cooperated throughout in the
discipline process.

[19)

l he Tribunal concluded that the JSP was reasonable and that there was
no basis upon which to reject the proposed sanction . While the Tribunal
disagreed with the Student's counsel's assertion that the Student had
been forthcoming throughout, since she initially denied that the allegation
had anything to do with her and did not attend the requested meeting with
her Professor, the Tribunal agreed that, overall, the proposed sanction
was appropriate in all the circumstances.

[20]

In light of the facts of this case as stated in the ASF, the admission of guilt
by the Student, and the parties' submissions, the Tribunal imposes the
following sanction:

1.
THAT the Student is guilty of one count of provIsIon of an
unauthorized aid/ assistance contrary to sections B.l.1(b), Bll.1(a) and
1?.ii.2 of the Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters.
2.
THAT the Student be suspended from the University for a period of
two years, commencing on April 21, 2016 and ending on April 20, 2018.
3.
THAT the sanction be recorded on the Student's academic record
and transcript, to the effect that she was sanctioned for academic
misconduct, for a period of three years from April 21, 2016 until April 20,
2019, or until her graduation from the University, whichever is earlier; and

4.
THAT this case shall be reported to the Provost for publication of a
notice of the decision of the Tribunal and the sanction or sanctions
imposed , with the name of the student withheld .
All of which is ordered on April 21 , 2016,
y-J...

Dated at 1 oronto, thisl3 day of August, 2016.

Andrew Pinto, Co-Chair

5

APPENDIX A
THE UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO

IN THE MATTER OF charges of academic dishonesty filed on October 26, 2015,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters, 1995,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Act, 1971, S.O. 1971, c. 56 as am. S.O. 1978, c. 88

BETWEEN:
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
- and -

MIIIILIIIII
Agreed Statement of Facts

1.

This hearing arises out of charges of academic misconduct ("Charges") filed by

the Provost of the University of Toronto (the "Provost") under the Code of Behaviour on
Academic Matters ("Code"). The Provost and ~ LIi ("Ms. La) have prepared this
Agreed Statement of Facts as well as a joint book of documents ("JBD"). The Provost
and Ms.

LIi agree that:

(a)

each document included in the JBD may be admitted into evidence at the
Tribunal for all purposes, including for the truth of the document's
contents, without further need to prove the document; and

(b)

if a document indicates that it was sent or received by someone, that is
prima facie proof that the document was sent and received as indicated.

2

2.

Ms.

LIi admits that she received a copy of the Charges filed by the Provost. The

Charges are included in the
3.

at Tab 1.

Ms. LIi admits that she has received reasonable notice of the hearing. The

notice of hearing in this matter is included in the JBD at Tab 2.
4.

Ms. ~ waives the reading of the charges filed against her and pleads guilty to all

charges. The Provost agrees that if the Tribunal convicts on charge #1 the Provost will
withdraw charge #2.
5.

Ms.

LJl's academic record as contained in ROSI as of April 13, 2016, is included

in the JBD at Tab 3. Ms. LIi first enrolled at the University in Fall 2010, and since that
time has accumulated a total of 21.50 credits. Ms. LIii has made a graduation request
which is on hold pending the outcome of the Tribunal hearing into the Charges.
A.

STA302H5F

6.

In Fall 2013, Ms. Lllllwas enrolled in and successfully completed STA302H5F -

"Regression Analysis"("2013 Course") at the University of Toronto Mississauga ("UTM").
The 2013 Course was taught by Professor Jerry Brunner. Ms. LIi received a grade of
77 in the 2013 Course. The 2013 Course syllabus is included in the JBD at Tab 4.
7.

Professor Brunner taught STA302H5F - Regression Analysis again in the Fall

2014 term ("2014 Course" and together with the 2013 Course the "Course"). The 2014
Course syllabus was essentially the same as for the 2013 Course, updated to reflect
changes in dates. The 2014 Course syllabus is included in the JBD at Tab 5.
8.

The Course syllabus in each of the 2013 Course and the 2014 Course explained

that quizzes would require prior completion of corresponding assignments, and

3

contained the following detailed paragraphs about the requirement that students do their
own work, and not permit anyone to copy from them:
Grading: 70% of the mark will be based on [11] equally weighted weekly quizzes [ ... ]
There will be an assignment for each quiz. The knowledge you need to do each quiz is
a subset of the knowledge you need to do the corresponding assignment. Many of the
assignments will include a computer part. You will bring printouts to the quiz and answer
questions based on the printouts. Possibly, one of the quiz questions will be to hand in a
printout. The non-computer parts of the assignments are just to prepare you for the
quizzes; they will never be handed in.

[... ]
Academic Honesty: It is an academic offence to present someone else's work as your
own, or to allow your work to be copied for this purpose. To repeat: the person who
allows her/his work to be copied is equally guilty, and subject to disciplinary action by the
university.
It is fine to discuss the assignments and to learn from each other, but there are clear
limits on what is acceptable. It is okay to discuss the meaning of the question. It is okay
to discuss general principles related to the question. It is okay, and encouraged, to
discuss examples from lecture or textbook that are similar to the question. It is okay to
reveal your approach to solving a problem (not the details), but only to somebody who
has tried the problem and is really stuck. [ ... ]
But above all, don't copy, and don't let anyone else copy from you. You are
expected to do the work yourself, and then perhaps compare answers after you have
done so. [ ... ]
For the computer parts of the homework: Never look at anyone else's printouts or show
anyone your printout before the quiz when they might be handed in. Above all, do not
allow anyone in the class to see your program file before a computer assignment is due,
and do not look at anyone else's. [ ... ]
For some quizzes, you will be asked to bring your printouts to class; maybe you will
hand them in, and maybe you will use them to answer some questions. Never, ever,
bring a copy of somebody else's printout, or allow anyone to have a copy of yours.
Again, your "friends" may ask you. You are expected to refuse.
You might be surprised to know how easy it is to detect copying on computer
assignments. Here are some guidelines: [... ]
@I

@I

If two students have computer work that is excessively similar to each other, but
not similar to what was presented in lecture or office hours, that is evidence of
cheating ...
If you allow anyone to have an electronic copy of your computer work, for any
reason, you are not only guilty of an academic offence, you have lost your mind.

4
@t

Direct copying of computer code from the internet (other than from our class
website) is prohibited. You are expected to do the work yourself. [ ... ]

It is acceptable to get help with your assignments from someone outside the class, but
the help must be limited to general discussion and examples that are not the same as
the assignment. As soon as you get an outside person to actually start working on one of
your assignments, you have committed an academic offence. (Unless the person
refuses to tell you the answer and just laughs at you because it was so easy.)

9.

In addition to the detailed syllabus, Professor Brunner also communicated to

students in the Course during class time in 2013 and 2014 that they were required to
submit independent work for grading and not to permit others to copy their work.
10.

As described in the Course syllabus, students in the Course were required to

complete 11 assignments, most including a computer part, which were to be brought to
and used in completing the 11 weekly quizzes. Quizzes were each worth 7% of the
Course mark (after dropping the lowest marked quiz). The assignments in the Course
were very similar in 2013 and 2014.
11.

On October 24, 2014, students enrolled in the 2014 Course submitted Quiz #6.

Prior to submitting Quiz #6, the students completed corresponding Assignment #6,
which was distributed to the students about a week prior to the date of Quiz #6. A copy
of Assignment #6 in the 2014 Course is included in the JBD at Tab 6. A copy of Quiz
#6 in the 2014 Course is included in the JBD at Tab 7.

12.

Assignment #6 had two elements: a series of math problems, and a computer

problem. The computer problem on Assignment #6 in Fall 2014 (Questions 15 and 16)
was identical to the computer problem on Assignment #7 in Fall 2013 (Questions 1 and
2).

5

13.

Students in the 2014 Course were required to bring to Quiz #6 a printout of their

answer to the computer problems on Assignment #6 ("Printout"). This Printout assisted
students to complete questions on Quiz #6. At the conclusion of the quiz, students were
also required to submit the Printout.
14.

Charles Tsang, the TA for the 2014 Course, marked Quiz #6, and notified

Professor Brunner that 33 students had submitted virtually identical code in their
computer Printouts. Of these, 10 students (the "Tutored Students") had submitted the
identical Printout, including identical text, code, font, and colour (the "Identical Printout").
A copy of the Identical Printout (highlighted to show the features described in paragraph
15 below) is included in the JBD at Tab 8.
15.

Professor Brunner reviewed the Printouts from the Tutored Students and

concluded that the Tutored Students did, in fact, submit identical Printouts. The fact that
each Identical Printout is identical is highly unusual because there are many different
ways to correctly complete the computer problems in Assignment #6. There is a very
low likelihood that more than one student would select identical commands resulting in
an identical Printout. Each Identical Printout contained the following noteworthy
features:
(a)

Each student used the term "census" in lower-case letters to identify the
data file CensusTract.data, which appears in the first line of code under
Q 15

(">census=read. table").

Students

could

select

any

word

or

combination of letters and characters, which are case-sensitive, to identify
the data file, but all of the Tutored Students used the word "census" with
identical capitalization.

6

(b)

Each Tutored Student used the term "mod2", in lower-case characters, to
identify the linear model object, which appears in the third line of code
under

ajf. Again, students cou ld select any word or combination of

letters and characters, which are case-sensitive, to identify the linear
· model object.

(c)

The input and spacing (including page breaks) is identical on each
Identical Printout.

(d)

Each Identical Printout contains red text (or red text printed in grey scale),
which is not computer-generated and must have been added by the
author of the Identical Printout when transferring the computer data into a
Microsoft Word document. Each Tutored Student submitted a Printout with
red text in identical locations, including the following text:

(e)

(i)

the regression coefficient 66.469 under Q15;

(ii)

the R-squared statistic 0.9546 under Q15; and,

(iii)

the colon in front of the R-squared statistic 0.9546 under Q15.

Q15 at the top of the first page was balded and highlighted, while Q16 on
the next page was neither balded nor highlighted. This formatting is not
computer-generated and therefore must have been added by the author of
the Identical Printout when transferring the computer data into a Microsoft
Word document.

7

16.

Professor Brunner scheduled individual interviews with each of the Tutored

Students to discuss their Identical Printouts. During these interviews Professor Brunner
was advised that nine of the ten Tutored Students had received assistance from a tutor
throughout the 2014 Course, and specifically that the tutor had provided them with
assistance on Assignment #6. The tenth student claimed that he had received the
Identical Printout from another student in the Course.
17.

Professor Brunner obtained a copy of an email sent to nineteen email addresses

by

Ms.

La,

using

her

boyfriend's

computer

and

the

mail.com which attached a copy of the Identical Printout.

email

address

The document

properties associated with the Identical Printout indicate it was created on October 18,
2014. A copy of that email, dated October 19, 2014, and its attachment, together with a
screenshot of the properties screen for that attachment, is included in the JBD at Tab 9.
18.

Upon investigation, Professor Brunner determined that Ms.

LI was the tutor from

whom the Tutored Students had obtained the Identical Printout.
19.

Professor Brunner attempted to schedule a meeting with Ms. Lllto discuss the

allegation that she had provided unauthorized assistance to students in his 2014
Course. Ms. LIi responded that she did not believe the allegation had anything to do
with her, and would not attend a meeting without reasonable proof. She ultimately did
not attend a meeting with Professor Brunner. A copy of an email exchange between
Professor Brunner and Ms. LI from December 3, 2014 to December 9, 2014 is included
in the JBD at Tab 10.
20.

Ms.

LIi provided tutoring services to students enrolled in the 2014 Course,

including at least nine of the ten tutored Students.

Ms. La charged a fee to these

8

students for her tutoring services of from $35-$40 per session to $300 for the duration of
the Course. A handwritten note from one of the Tutored Students confirming that she
had paid approximately $300 for Ms.

LIi's tutoring service for the duration of the 2014

Course is included in the JBD at Tab 11.
Meeting with the Dean's Designate

21.

Ms.

LIii attended a meeting with the dean's designate, Professor Michael

Georges, on March 10, 2015.

After being provided with the standard introductory

comments, including the dean's warning pursuant to section C.l.(a)6 of the Code, Ms.

Ll!lacknowledged that:
(a)

she tutored approximately five students taking the 2014 Course;

(b)

she gave these students her old course materials, including all of the
online posts, quizzes and assignments from the 2013 Course, and she
answered questions that they had about the Course;

(c)

she also hosted an online discussion group that connected Chinese
students "from all over the place talking about Canadian life";

(d)

some of the students that participated in the online discussion group were
also students in the 2014 Course, and these students asked if anyone had
notes or assignments from the Course that they could share;

(e)

she shared notes and assignments with students from the discussion
group, including an answer that she prepared to the computer problem on
Assignment #6;

9
(f)

she sent the answer to the computer problem on Assignment #6 to a list of
students using -

(g)

s email account; and

she understood that students in the Course were required to do the
assignments independently, and she was aware that the Course syllabus
made this clear in each of 2013 and 2014.

22.

Ms. tll also told Professor Georges that:

~·uo--r
(a)

she didn't provide the students with a copy of her old assignment from the
2013 Course, but r~

r did the work for Assignment #6 for them in the fall

of 2014 and provided that work to them because she wanted to help them;
and
(b)

because she had taken the Course before, she knew that copying was
not permitted, and told the students not to copy the answer she had given
them.

23.

At the meeting Ms. LIii indicated that she wished to plead guilty to an academ ic

offence and signed a document confirming her guilty plea. That document is included in
the JBD at Tab 12.
24.

Ms. La adm its that the dean's meeting took place in a manner consistent with

the requirements of the Code.
25.

Ms. LIi admits that she knowingly provided unauthorized assistance and an

unauthorized aid to students in the 2104 Course who used that unauthorized assistance

10
and the unauthorized aid in connection with Assignment and Quiz #6 in the 2014
Course, contrary to sections B.1.1 (b), B.I1.1 (a) and B.I1.2 of the Code .
26.

Ms. ta acknowledges that in knowing ly providing the unauthorized assistance

and aid to students in the 2014 Course who committed the offence of using or
possessing an unauthorized aid or obtaining unauthorized assistance in connection with
Assignment and Quiz #6, she is a party to that offence.

C.

Acknowledgments

27 .

Ms. t.a acknowledges that:
(a)

the Provost advised her of her right to obtain legal counsel and that she
obtained that advice; and

(b)

she is signing this ASF freely and voluntarily.

Signed on April

..2:.L-, 2016

Signed on Apri l .a.L_, 2016
Lily Harme
Assistant Discipline Counsel
University of Toronto

Doc 1783157 v2

the ... ,

1.tQY,'.Q,Y,-f-, ~ ••gfu-~ ~ v.)j°'., ...... .

this ;) I

cl:w ci

Apr, I

,20 •.{':-!..

~~

APPENDIX B
THE UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO

IN THE MATTER OF charges of academic dishonesty filed on October 26, 2015,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters, 1995,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Act, 1971, S.O. 1971, c. 56 as am. S.O. 1978, c. 88

BETWEEN:
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
- and -

JOINT SUBMISSION ON PENAL TY

1.

For the purposes of the sanction · phase of this hearing under the Code of

Behaviour on Academic Matters ("Code"), the University of Toronto (the "University")
and ~LIi ("Ms. ta'') have prepared this Joint Submission on Penalty.
2.

The Provost and Ms. Lal submit that the appropriate penalty in all the

circum?tances of the case is that the University Tribunal impose the following sanctions
(a)

Ms.

LIii be suspended from the University for a period of two

years, commencing on April 21, 2016 and ending on April 20, 2018; and

(b)

the sanction be recorded on Ms.

Li's academic record and transcript, to

the effect that she was sanctioned for academic misconducyor a period of
three years from the date of this Order until April 20, 2019, or until her
graduation from the University, whichever is earlier.

2.

The parties agree that this case shall be reported to the Provost for publication of

a notice of the decision of the Tribunal and the sanction or sanctions imposed, with the
name of the student withheld.
3.

Ms. ~ acknowledges that she has signed this JSP freely and voluntarily,

knowing of the potential consequences she faces.

Ms. LIi acknowledges that the

University of Toronto has advised her to obtain independent legal advice before signing
this JSP and that she has either done so or waived the right to do so.

Signed on April 21, 2016

Signed on April 21, 2016
Lily Harmer
Assistant Discipline Counsel
University of Toronto

Doc 1788801 v1

this c) I

day of

