Case #504

   DATE: October 22, 2008
   PARTIES: University of Toronto v. M.A.
   Hearing Date(s): July 16, 2007
   Panel Members:
   Ms. Jane Pepino, Chair
   Professor Marc Lewis, Faculty
   Ms. Melany Bleue
   Appearances:
   Mr. Steve Frankel, Student Legal Representative, DLS
   Mr. Mike Hamilton, Assistant Legal Representative, Downtown Legal
   Services
   M.A., the Student
   Mr. Robert Centa, Assistant Discipline Counsel for the University
   Ms. Lucy Gaspini, Dean;s Designate, UTM
   Trial Division ‚ s. B.i.1(a), s. B.i.1(d) and s. B.i.1(b) of Code ‚
   forged documents and plagiarism ‚Medical Note and course work ‚ Agreed
   Statement of Facts ‚ guilty plea ‚ Joint Submission on Penalty ‚
   mitigating factors that Student pleaded guilty and cooperated with
   discipline process and offences occurred at approximately the same time
   ‚ Joint Submission on Penalty accepted ‚ grade assignment of zero for
   two courses; three-year suspension; three-year notation on transcript;
   and report to Provost
   The Student was charged under s. B.i.1(a), s. B.i.1(d), and s. B.i.1(b)
   and alternatively, two charges under ss. B.i.3(b) of the Code. The
   charges related to allegations that the Student forged or altered a
   medical note submitted in connection with a missed test in one course
   and that he plagiarized or received unauthorized assistance in
   connection with a paper submitted in another course. The matter
   proceeded based upon an Agreed Statement of Facts. The Student pleaded
   guilty to the charges under s. B.i.1(a) and s. B.i.1(d). On the basis
   of the Agreed Statement of Facts and the submissions of both parties,
   the Panel accepted the plea. The parties submitted a Joint Submission
   on Penalty. The University submitted that two mitigating factors
   explained the leniency of the proposed penalty in respect of the
   plagiarism offence: the Student admitted guilt early in the process and
   cooperated fully with the University; and the two offences occurred at
   approximately the same time with no intervention between them. The
   Panel found the joint submission to be appropriate. The Panel imposed a
   grade of zero in the two courses; a three-year suspension; a three-year
   notation on the Student‚s academic record and transcript; and that a
   report be issued to the Provost.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/13060
