Case 1286

   DATE:

   April 15, 2024

   PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v. M.C. ("the Student")

   HEARING DATE:

   February 7, 2024, via Zoom

   PANEL MEMBERS:

   Ira Parghi, Chair
   Professor Michael Saini, Faculty Panel Member
   Brinda Batra, Student Panel Member

   APPEARANCES:
   William Webb, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg
   Rothstein LLP
   Chris Steinburg, Counsel for the Student, Steinburg Law

   IN ATTENDANCE:

   The Student (for part of the hearing)

   HEARING SECRETARY:

   Nadia Bruno, Special Projects Officer, Office of Appeals, Discipline
   and Faculty Grievances

   The Student was charged with two counts of¬ knowingly using or
   possessing an unauthorized aid or obtaining authorized assistance in
   connection with a term test and final exam in a course (the
   ‚Assessments‚) under s. B.i.1(b) of the Code. In addition, and in the
   alterative, the Student was charged with two counts under sections
   B.i.1(b) and B.ii.1(a) for knowingly aiding and assisting other
   students in the course to use or possess an unauthorized aid in
   connection with the Assessments. In addition, and in the alternative,
   to all of the foregoing charges, the Student was charged with two
   counts under s. B.i.3(b) of the Code for knowingly engaging in a form
   of cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or
   misrepresentation not otherwise described in the Code.

   The Student was present for part of the hearing via Zoom, but was
   disconnected due to poor connectivity. The Student‚s counsel, upon
   conferring with the Student, obtained instructions to proceed in the
   Student‚s absence. Counsel for the University also advised that they
   too were agreeable to proceeding in the absence of the Student. The
   Panel was satisfied that the hearing could proceed in the absence of
   the Student and continued in the absence of the Student.

   As part of the course, the Student was required to write a term test
   and final exam, worth 30% and 35% of their final grade respectively.
   Students were expected to complete the Assessments independently and
   were not permitted to communicate with anyone while completing their
   submissions.

   The Panel considered a Joint Book of Documents (‚JBD‚), which included
   an Agreed Statement of Facts (‚ASF‚), submitted by the University and
   the Student. The ASF detailed that the professor in the course noticed
   several unusual similarities between the Student‚s answers and other
   students‚ answers, and prepared a report setting out the similarities
   in detail. The Professor was unsuccessful in scheduling a meeting to
   discuss his concerns with the Student and proceeded to examine
   similarities between the Student‚s submissions and other students‚
   submissions on prior term tests. The Professor subsequently identified
   several similarities between the Student‚s answers and those of two
   other students on one of the term tests. The Student did not attend
   meetings with faculty or the Dean‚s designate, and the matter was
   forwarded to the Provost. Several students in the class subsequently
   admitted that they had collaborated with other students using a link to
   a Google Doc shared by the Student. In the ASF, the Student ultimately
   admitted and acknowledged that he had invited other students to join a
   Google Doc in which other students could share answers to the Exam. The
   Student further admitted to all of the charges against him.

   Upon reviewing the ASF, the Panel was satisfied on a balance of
   probabilities that the Student was guilty of two counts of knowingly
   obtaining unauthorized assistance, contrary to section B.i.1(b) of the
   Code; two counts of knowingly aiding and assisting other students,
   contrary to ss. B.i.1(b) and B.ii.1(a) of the Code; and one count of
   knowingly engaging in a form of cheating, academic dishonesty or
   misconduct, fraud or misrepresentation not otherwise described in the
   Code in order to obtain academic credit or other academic advantage of
   any kind, contrary to s. B.I.3(b) of the Code. In view of the Panel‚s
   findings, the University withdrew one count under s. B.i.3(b) of the
   Code for knowingly engaging in a form of cheating, academic dishonesty
   or misconduct, fraud or misrepresentation in connection with the term
   test.

   In determining the appropriate sanction, the Panel considered a Joint
   Submission on Penalty (‚JSP‚) submitted by the Student and the
   University. The Panel noted that when a JSP is filed, the Tribunal is
   not bound to follow it, but it also noted that the case law is clear
   that a JSP should be disregarded only where giving effect to the
   sanction would be contrary to the public interest or would bring the
   administration of justice into disrepute. The Panel considered the
   principles and factors relevant to sanction as articulated in
   University of Toronto and Mr. C. (Case No. 1976/77-3, November 5,
   1976). With respect to the nature of the offences and the detriment to
   the University, the Panel noted that the offences were serious and
   undermined the process of academic evaluation at the University. The
   Panel further noted that the Student‚s encouragement to other students
   to not say anything to the Dean‚s office regarding the document sharing
   scheme suggested that the Student‚s conduct was pre-meditated,
   deliberate, and extensive.¬  With respect to the need for deterrence,
   the Panel noted that there was a strong need for both specific
   deterrence (in view of the Student‚s prior and similar offence) and
   general deterrence to discourage other students from providing or
   receiving unauthorized assistance during assessments, and from
   pressuring others to not admit academic misconduct to University
   administrators. Finally, with respect to the character of the Student,
   the Panel considered that the Student had demonstrated some insight and
   remorse for their actions, and further acknowledged that the Student
   was suffering from attention deficit hyperactivity disorder, anxiety
   and depression at the time of the offence. In view of the Mr. C
   factors, and previous similar decisions of the Tribunal, the Panel was
   satisfied that the JSP was appropriate.

   The Panel imposed the following sanction: a final grade of zero in the
   course; a three-year suspension; a four-year notation on the Student‚s
   academic record and transcript; and a report to the Provost for
   publication.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/31623
