Case No.: 1286
THE UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
IN THE MATTER OF charges of academic dishonesty filed on November 9, 2021,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic
Matters, 1995,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Act, 1971, S.O. 1971, c. 56 as
amended S.O. 1978, c. 88
B E T W E E N:
UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
- and M

C

REASONS FOR DECISION
Hearing Date: February 7, 2024, via Zoom
Members of the Panel:
Ira Parghi, Chair
Professor Michael Saini, Faculty Panel Member
Brinda Batra, Student Panel Member
Appearances:
William Webb, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg Rothstein LLP
Chris Stienburg, Counsel for the Student, Stienburg Law
Hearing Secretary:
Nadia Bruno, Special Projects Officer, Office of Appeals, Discipline & Faculty
Grievances
In Attendance:
M
C
(for part of hearing)

1

I.

Introduction

1.
The Trial Division of the University Tribunal was convened via videoconference on
February 7, 2024, to consider charges brought against M.C. (the “Student”) by the
University of Toronto (the “University”) pursuant to the University of Toronto Code of
Behaviour on Academic Matters, 1995 (the “Code”) on November 9, 2021. The charges
were as follows:
1. On or about March 18, 2021, you knowingly used or possessed an unauthorized aid or
aids or obtained unauthorized assistance in Test 2 in ECE285H1: Probability and Statistics
(the “Course”), contrary to section B.I.1(b) of the Code;
2. In addition and in the alternative to charge 1, on or about March 18, 2021, you knowingly
aided and assisted other students in the Course to use or possess an unauthorized aid or
aids or obtain unauthorized assistance in Test 2, contrary to sections B.I.1.(b) and B.II.1(a)
of the Code;
3. In addition and in the alternative to charges 1 and 2, you knowingly engaged in a form
of cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or misrepresentation not otherwise
described in the Code in order to obtain academic credit or other academic advantage of
any kind, contrary to section B.I.3(b) of the Code, in connection with Test 2 in the Course;
4. On or about April 27, 2021, you knowingly used or possessed an unauthorized aid or
aids or obtained unauthorized assistance in the final exam in the Course, contrary to
section B.I.1(b) of the Code;
5. In addition and in the alternative to charge 4, on or about April 27, 2021, you knowingly
aided and assisted other students in the Course to use or possess an unauthorized aid or
aids or obtain unauthorized assistance in the final exam, contrary to sections B.I.1.(b) and
B.II.1(a) of the Code; and
6. In addition and in the alternative to charges 4 and 5, you knowingly engaged in a form
of cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or misrepresentation not otherwise
described in the Code in order to obtain academic credit or other academic advantage of
any kind, contrary to section B.I.3(b) of the Code, in connection with the final exam in the
Course.

2.
The particulars for the charges (with the names of other students changed to
initials) were as follows:
1. At all material times, you were a student at the University of Toronto in the
Faculty of Applied Science and Engineering.

2

2. In Winter 2021, you were enrolled in the Course.
3. Students in the Course were required to write Test 2 on March 18, 2021, which
was worth 30% of the final mark in the Course (“Test 2”), and a final exam on April
27, 2021, worth 35% (“Exam”). You submitted your Test 2 and your Exam to
complete these requirements.
4. You were not permitted to communicate with anyone during Test 2 and the
Exam, and to submit only work that was your own.
5. You confirmed in your answer to question 1 of each of Test 2 and the Exam that
the work you submitted was solely your own.
6. You did not write your Test 2 or your Exam independently, and the work you
submitted was not solely your own.
7. You organized and participated in an online group chat during Test 2 and the
Exam in which you shared answers to those exams with other members of the
group, and used those shared answers in Test 2 and the Exam.
8. Your answers for many of the questions in Test 2 were extraordinarily similar to
the answers given to those questions by a number of other students in the Course,
including M.E-E. and C.U-O.
9. Your answers for many of the questions in the Exam were extraordinarily similar
to the answers given to those questions by a number of other students in the
Course, including M.E-E., C.U-O., and X.S., among others.
10. You knowingly obtained unauthorized assistance from and/or provided
unauthorized assistance to others for answers to the questions on Test 2 and the
Exam.
11. You knowingly obtained and/or provided unauthorized assistance in connection
with Test 2 and the Exam in the Course.
3.
The Student attended part of the hearing via Zoom. Part-way through the hearing,
the Student lost connectivity to the hearing. The hearing was briefly adjourned so that his
Counsel could speak with him and obtain his instructions. When the hearing reconvened,
the Student’s Counsel advised that he had spoken with the Student and that the Student
wished for the hearing to continue in his absence. The Student’s Counsel advised that he

3

was agreeable to proceeding in the Student’s absence. Counsel for the University advised
that he, too, was agreeable to doing so. On this basis, the Tribunal was satisfied that the
hearing could continue in the absence of the Student. The hearing accordingly continued
in the absence of the Student.
II.

Liability

4.
The University and the Student filed a Joint Book of Documents re Finding of
Offence, which was entered into evidence at the hearing. The Joint Book of Documents
re Finding of Offence included an Agreed Statement of Facts that was signed by the
Student on January 19, 2024 (the “ASF”).
5.
In the ASF, the University and the Student agreed that each of the documents
attached to the ASF could be admitted into evidence before the Tribunal for all purposes,
including for the truth of the document’s contents, without further need to prove the
document, and that, if a document indicates that it was sent or received by someone, that
is prima facie proof that the document was sent and received as indicated.
6.
The ASF indicates that the Student first registered as a student in the BASc in
Engineering Science program in the Faculty of Applied Science & Engineering at the
University of Toronto in Fall 2019. The relevant facts in this matter, as set forth in the ASF,
are reproduced here (with references to underlying documentation removed, and with the
names of other students changed to initials):
A. The Course
6. In Winter 2021, Mark Ebden taught ECE286H1: Probability and Statistics (the
“Course”). Students in the Course were required to write an assignment (worth 15%), two
mid-terms - Test 1 (worth 20%) and Test 2 (worth 30%), and a final exam worth 35% (the
“Exam”).
7. The syllabus contained a section on academic integrity that stated students were
responsible for knowing the content of the University of Toronto's Code of Behaviour on
Academic Matters, and to contact [Professor Ebden] if they had any questions.
8. In January 2021, Professor Ebden posted instructions to Quercus about the term tests
and exam. Students were instructed that printed material, the internet, calculators, and
computing platforms were allowed provided that there was no interaction with other people
directly or indirectly.
9. The Student, V.B., T.C., R.H., M.E-E., X.S., M.T., C.U-O., A.V., and J.X. were all students
in the Course (the “Students”).

4

10. Test 2 was administered online on March 18, 2021, from 9:00 a.m. to 11:00 a.m. Test
2 was open book, but the instructions reminded students that there was to be no
interaction with other people either directly or indirectly. Question 1 on Test 2 asked
students to affirm adherence to the Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters, and that
between 9:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. that day, they would not share technical content of Test
2 with others.
11. On March 18, 2021, the Student, M.E-E., and C.U-O. each submitted their Test 2 with
the required academic integrity confirmation.
12. The Exam was administered online on April 27, 2021, from 7:00 p.m. to 9:30 p.m. EST.
The Exam was an open book, but the instructions again stated that there was to be no
interaction with other people, either directly or indirectly.
13. Professor Ebden distributed five different versions of the Exam to students. Version A
was distributed to a student who required accommodations, and Version B was distributed
to 4 students who wrote a deferred exam. Version C was the default exam, and versions
D and E contained subtle differences to produce distinctive answers. For version D of the
exam, questions 5 and 6 were reversed (e.g., question 5 on version D was question 6 on
version E and vice versa), as were questions 9 and 10. These exams were distributed as
follows: Version C was distributed to students with surnames A to K; Version D was
distributed to students with surnames M to Z; and Version E was distributed to students
with surnames L.
14. The Exams were distributed to the Students as follows:
(a) Version C: the Student, V.B., T.C., M.E-E., and R.H.
(b) Version D: X.S., M.T., C.U-O., A.V., and J.X.
15. The first question on each version of the Exam asked students to affirm adherence to
the Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters, and that between 7:00 p.m. on the night of
the exam and 11:30 a.m. the next morning, they would not share technical content of the
exam with others.
16. On April 27, 2021, the Students submitted their Exams with the required academic
integrity confirmation.
B. The investigation
1. The Exam investigation

5

17. As Professor Ebden reviewed students’ Exams, he found many unusual similarities
between the Student’s answers and other Students’ answers. Professor Ebden prepared
a report that sets out the similarities in detail.
18. Professor Ebden identified numerous similarities between the Student’s answers and
other students’ answers. The similarities include several idiosyncratic features, such as
making the same mistakes, arriving at the same answer without showing enough work,
arriving at the same incorrect final answer, using the same non-standard notation, and
providing an answer to a question that did not appear on his version of the Exam.
19. In June 2021, Professor Ebden emailed the Student to schedule a meeting to discuss
his concerns that the Student obtained unauthorized assistance on the Exam. The Student
did not respond.
2. The Test 2 investigation
20. After discovering that several students had unusually similar answers on the Exam,
Professor Ebden examined several students’ answers to other tests. Professor Ebden
identified unusual similarities in the answers given by the Student, M.E-E., and C.U-O. in
relation to Test 2. Professor Ebden prepared several academic integrity reports that set
out these similarities on Test 2 in detail.
21. Professor Ebden identified numerous similarities between the Student’s and M.EE.’s
answers, and several similarities between the Student’s and C.U-O.’s answers. These
similarities included idiosyncratic features, such as making the same mistakes in the same
ways, using the same non-standard notation, and arriving at the same answer without
showing enough work.
…
23. In July 2021, Professor Ebden emailed the Student to schedule a meeting to discuss
his concerns that the Student obtained unauthorized assistance on Test 2. The Student
did not respond.
C. The Dean’s Office
24. In June 2021, the Dean’s office at the Faculty of Engineering and Applied Science
received allegations that several students collaborated on the Exam and Test 2. The late
Hans Kunov, Professor Emeritus and Dean’s Designate of academic integrity, and Pamela
Kennedy, Accreditation and Academic Integrity Coordinator, oversaw these allegations.
1. Attempts to schedule a dean’s meeting with the Student

6

25. From June to October 2021, the faculty made numerous attempts to schedule a
meeting with the Student to discuss the Exam and Test 2. In particular:
(a) Professor Kunov and Ms. Kennedy gave the Student an opportunity to retain
counsel and sent him resources about Downtown Legal Services;
(b) Ms. Kennedy sent the Student mental health resources when the Student
stated that he was experiencing mental health issues;
(c) Professor Kunov, Professor Ebden, and Ms. Kennedy agreed to meet with the
Student on weekends or evenings to accommodate his schedule;
(d) Professor Kunov offered to reimburse the Student to access a payphone when
the Student stated that he did not have an active phone line and could not afford a
pay phone; and
(e) On two separate occasions, Professor Kunov, Professor Ebden, and Ms.
Kennedy waited approximately 45 minutes for the Student to join a call that he had
agreed to attend, but the Student did not show up.
26. The Student did not attend a dean’s meeting, and the matter was forwarded to the
Provost.
27. The Student obtained three credits in the Fall 2021 semester.
2. Dean’s meetings about the Exam
28. From June to September 2021, Professor Kunov, Professor Ebden, and Ms. Kennedy
met with each of the students except the Student. Ms. Kennedy advised the students at
the start of each meeting that minutes would be taken and could be used as evidence if
the matter proceeded. Ms. Kennedy took detailed notes of each meeting and has
confirmed that they were accurate.
29. On May 31, 2021, J.X. admitted that he collaborated with other students during the
Exam in a letter to Professor Kunov.
30. On June 23, 2021, in a dean’s meeting, J.X. confirmed that he collaborated with other
students during the Exam.
31. On June 23, 2021, in a dean’s meeting, T.C. admitted that he collaborated with other
students during the Exam.
32. On June 23, 2021, in a dean’s meeting, C.U-O. admitted that he obtained unauthorized
assistance from M.E-E.

7

33. On June 23, 2021, in a dean’s meeting, X.S. admitted that she collaborated with other
students during the Exam. After the meeting, X.S. sent Professor Kunov a written
admission in which she stated:
(a) The Student sent her a link to a Google Doc to collaborate on the Exam;
(b) During the Exam, there were approximately 15 users in the Google Doc, but
everyone was anonymous except the Student; and
(c) Several users uploaded answers to Exam questions on Google Docs, and she
uploaded her answer to Question 5.
34. On July 9, 2021, in a dean’s meeting, M.E-E. stated he did not provide or obtain
unauthorized assistance on the Exam, and that he did not know the Student.
35. On July 15, 2021, in a dean’s meeting, A.B. admitted that he collaborated with other
students during the Exam. He stated:
(a) The Student sent him a link to a Google Doc to collaborate on the Exam;
(b) During the Exam, there were approximately 10 to 15 users in the Google Doc,
but everyone was anonymous except for the Student;
(c) Several users uploaded answers to Exam questions on the Google Doc, and
he uploaded part of his answer to Question 13; and
(d) He had previously worked with M.E-E. on an assignment and recognized his
handwriting in one of the answers that had been uploaded to the Google Doc.
Professor Ebden showed him a copy of M.E-E.’s answer to Question 9 on the
Exam, and he confirmed that he saw that answer in the Google Doc.
36. On July 15, 2021, in a dean’s meeting, R.H. admitted that he collaborated with other
students during the Exam. He stated: he had access to a Google Doc to collaborate on
the Exam; he did not want to comment on whether he knew the Student; and he
collaborated with V.B. during the Exam.
37. On July 23, 2021, in a dean’s meeting, M.E-E. again stated he did not knowingly
provide or obtain unauthorized assistance on the Exam.
38. On August 11, 2021, in a dean’s meeting, A.V. admitted that he collaborated with other
students during the Exam, including M.T.

8

39. On August 24, 2021, in a dean’s meeting, M.T. admitted that he collaborated with other
students during the Exam. He stated that the Student sent him a link to a Google Doc to
collaborate on the Exam; he collaborated with the Student and A.V. on the Exam; and, in
July and August 2021, the Student repeatedly suggested to him that he should not say
anything about the allegations.
3. Dean’s meetings about Test 2
40. On August 26, 2022, in a dean’s meeting, C.U-O. said that he would not admit to an
academic offence in relation to Test 2 if the evidence was not clear. C.U-O. then denied
that he had committed an academic offence in relation to Test 2.
41. On September 22, 2022, in a dean’s meeting, M.E-E. denied that he had received
unauthorized assistance on Test 2.
D. Procedural history
1. Charges and Disclosure
42. On November 9, 2021, the Office of the Vice-Provost, Faculty and Academic Life
served the charges in this matter on the Student by email.
43. On March 21, 2022, Downtown Legal Services inform Assistant Discipline Counsel
that the Student had retained them in connection with this matter.
44. On April 14, 2022, Mr. Webb emailed Downtown Legal Services and the Student a
disclosure letter and a disclosure brief.
45. The Student was enrolled in courses in Winter 2022. The Student has not enrolled in
courses since the Winter 2022 semester.
46. On June 22, 2022, Downtown Legal Services informed Mr. Webb that there was a
breakdown in the solicitor-client relationship, and it no longer represented the Student for
his academic integrity matters.
47. On June 23, 2022, Mr. Webb emailed the Student: “We understand that Downtown
Legal Services is no longer representing you in this matter. Please let us know whether
you have retained other counsel, whether you would like us to provide you with referrals
to other lawyers who practice in this area, or whether you intend to represent yourself.”
The Student did not respond.
2. The Initial Hearing Date

9

48. On July 5, 2022, Mr. Webb emailed the student about scheduling a hearing date. Mr.
Webb advised that if he did not hear back by July 11, 2022, he would request a hearing
date be scheduled. The Student did not respond.
49. On July 12, 2022, Mr. Webb emailed the student to inform him that he was going to
proceed with scheduling the hearing for August 19, 2022. Later that day, Mr. Webb emailed
the Office of Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances (the “ADFG Office”) to request a
hearing be scheduled. The student was copied on this email.
50. On July 12, 2022, the ADFG Office issued a Notice of Electronic Hearing. The ADFG
Office sent the notice to the Student.
3. The Initial Hearing Date Is Adjourned
51. On August 15, 2022, the Assistant Discipline Counsel sent the Student an affidavit of
C.U-O. In his affidavit, C.U-O. gives evidence that he collaborated with the Student on
Test 2 and the Exam.
52. Later that day, the Assistant Discipline Counsel requested an adjournment to provide
the Student with additional time to review the new evidence and to retain counsel. The
Student consented to the adjournment request, and the Chair granted the adjournment.
4. The Second Hearing Date
53. The Provost gave the Student additional time to retain counsel.
54. The Student retained counsel in March 2023.
55. The Student’s counsel and Assistant Discipline Counsel had several without-prejudice
exchanges between March 2023 and October 2023.
56. The Student requested that the Provost agree to postpone the hearing until 2024 on
the basis that he was unable to attend a hearing in Fall 2023 due to health issues. The
Provost agreed to postpone the hearing until 2024, and the parties subsequently agreed
to schedule a hearing for February 7, 2024.

7. In the ASF, the Student admitted and acknowledged the following:
1. He knowingly obtained unauthorized assistance from several other students in
connection with the Exam and Test 2;
2. He knowingly provided unauthorized assistance to several other students in
connection with the Exam and Test 2;

10

3. He invited several other students to join a Google Doc in which they could share
answers to the Exam; and
4. In July and August 2021, he repeatedly told other students not to say anything
about the Exam allegations to the Dean’s office.
8. The Student also admitted the following:
1. He knowingly used or possessed an unauthorized aid or aids or obtained
unauthorized assistance in connection with the Exam and Test 2, contrary to
section B.I.1(b) of the Code;
2. He knowingly aided and assisted other students in the Course to use or possess
an unauthorized aid or aids or obtain unauthorized assistance in the Exam and
Test 2, contrary to sections B.I.1.(b) and B.II.1(a) of the Code; and
3. He knowingly engaged in a form of cheating, academic dishonesty or
misconduct, fraud or misrepresentation not otherwise described in the Code in
order to obtain academic credit or other academic advantage of any kind, in
connection with the Exam and Test 2, contrary to section B.I.3(b) of the Code.
9. The Student acknowledged that he was signing the ASF freely and voluntarily, knowing
of the potential consequences he faced, and did so with the advice of counsel or having
waived the right to obtain counsel.
10. The onus on the University was to establish on a balance of probabilities, through
clear and convincing evidence, that the Student had committed one or more of the
academic offences enumerated above.
11. Upon review of the ASF, including the Student’s admissions contained in the ASF and
the documents attached to the ASF, and upon hearing the submissions of counsel, the
Tribunal was satisfied on the balance of probabilities that the Student was guilty of
charges 1, 2, and 4 through 6, as enumerated above. That is, the Tribunal was satisfied
that the Student was guilty of the following academic offences:
1. Two counts of knowingly obtaining unauthorized assistance, contrary to section
B.I.1(b) of the Code;
2. Two counts of knowingly aiding and assisting other students, contrary to
sections B.I.1.(b) and B.II.1(a) of the Code; and
11

3. One count of knowingly engaging in a form of cheating, academic dishonesty or
misconduct, fraud or misrepresentation not otherwise described in the Code in
order to obtain academic credit or other academic advantage of any kind, contrary
to section B.I.3(b) of the Code.
12. In light of the Tribunal’s findings, charges 1, 2, and 4 through 6, charge 3, of knowingly
engaging in a form of cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or
misrepresentation not otherwise described in the Code in order to obtain academic credit
or other academic advantage of any kind, contrary to section B.I.3(b) of the Code, in
connection with Test 2 in the Course, was withdrawn by the University.
IV.

Penalty

13. The University and the Student filed a Joint Book of Documents re: Sanction, which
was entered into evidence at the hearing. The Joint Book of Documents re: Sanction
included an Agreed Statement of Facts on Penalty and Joint Submission on Penalty that
was signed by the Student on January 19, 2024.
14. The Agreed Statement of Facts on Penalty set forth additional facts relevant to
penalty, which are reproduced here (with references to underlying documentation
removed and with the names of other students changed to initials):
1. Prior Academic Offence
4. In Fall 2020, the Student enrolled in ECE253H1: Digital and Computer Systems
(“ECE253”), taught by Jason Anderson. During that semester, the Student submitted his
midterm, which was worth 20% of his final grade.
5. In December 2020, Professor Anderson alleged that the Student provided unauthorized
assistance to and obtained unauthorized assistance from two other students in the course,
M.E-E. and C. U-O. The late Hans Kunov, Professor Emeritus and Dean’s Designate of
Academic Integrity, and Pamela Kennedy, Accreditation and Academic Integrity
Coordinator, oversaw these allegations.
6. On December 17, 2020, Professor Kunov, Professor Anderson, and Ms. Kennedy met
with the Student to discuss the allegations that the Student provided and obtained
unauthorized assistance in connection with the ECE253 midterm. The Student admitted
that he and other students in ECE253 had shared copies of the midterm and collaborated
during the midterm. The Student then pled guilty to plagiarism.
7. The Student admits that he provided unauthorized assistance to and obtained
unauthorized assistance from M.E-E. and C.U-O. in the ECE253 midterm.

12

8. The case was resolved at the divisional level. The Student was sanctioned with a final
grade of zero on the midterm in ECE253.
9. Later that day, the faculty sent the Student a letter confirming the sanction that was
imposed. The letter also warned the Student that the penalty for future offences would be
much more severe:
Academic offences are extremely serious and constitute unacceptable behaviour
in the University. They are a breach of ethical standards of the engineering
profession that you aspire to enter. This letter is to serve as a strong warning to
you that any future academic work must be conducted in full accordance with the
rules and regulations of the University.
Be advised that, in the event of a 2nd offence, the penalties would be much
more severe.
[Emphasis in original]
10. The Student admits that he received and reviewed a copy of this letter in late 2020.
2. Charged Academic Offences
11. On March 18, 2021, the Student obtained and provided unauthorized assistance on
Test 2 in ECE286H1: Probability and Statistics.
12. On April 27, 2021, the Student obtained and provided unauthorized assistance on the
final exam in ECE286H1: Probability and Statistics.
13. In July and August 2021, the Student repeatedly told other students to not say anything
about the ECE286H1 Final Exam allegations to the Dean’s office.
3. Student Evidence
14. The Student believes that he experienced mental health issues in 2020 and 2021 that
were related to the pandemic. The Student states that he felt anxious and depressed at
this time, and he believes that this affected his academics.
15. On December 12, 2022, the Student was prescribed an antidepressant.
16. On January 5, 2023, the Student was diagnosed with attention deficit hyperactivity
disorder (“ADHD”). The Student believes that he had ADHD in 2020 and 2021, and he
believes that this affected his academics.
17. The Student is continuing to seek treatment for his mental health and ADHD.

13

18. The Student apologizes for committing the academic offences, and acknowledges that
the facts at paragraphs 14 through 17 of the JSP do not excuse his behaviour.

15. The Joint Submission on Penalty (“JSP”) stated as follows:
The Provost and the Student submit that, in all the circumstances of the case, the
University Tribunal should impose the following sanctions on the Student:
(a) A final grade of zero in ECE286H1: Probability and Statistics;
(b) A suspension from the University for a period of 3 years commencing on September 1,
2023; and
(c) A notation of the offence on the Student’s academic record and transcript for a period
of 4 years from the date of the University Tribunal’s order.

16. The JSP also indicated that the parties agree that this case shall be reported to the
Provost for publication of a notice of the decision of the Tribunal and the sanction
imposed, with the name of the Student withheld.
17. In the Agreed Statement of Facts on Penalty and JSP, the Student acknowledged that
the Provost had advised him of his right to obtain legal counsel and that the Student had
obtained that advice or waived his right to obtain that advice.
18. The Student also acknowledged that he was signing the JSP freely and voluntarily,
knowing of the potential consequences he faced and knowing that the University Tribunal
was not bound by the JSP and had the discretion to impose and/or recommend a different
sanction, including one that is more severe than what the JSP recommends.
19. When a JSP is filed, as here, the Tribunal is not bound to follow it when determining
the sanction in the case before it. However, the case law is clear that a JSP should be
disregarded by the Tribunal only where giving effect to the sanction would be contrary to
the public interest or would bring the administration of justice into disrepute (see, e.g.,
University of Toronto and Y.W. (Case No. 1155, July 26, 2021), University of Toronto and
P.H.Q. (Case No. 982, May 8, 2019), and S.F. and The University of Toronto (Case No.
690, October 20, 2014)).
20. In the circumstances of this case, for the reasons outlined below, the Tribunal had no
concern that proceeding in accordance with the JSP would be contrary to the public
interest or bring the administration of justice into disrepute.

14

21. The Tribunal considered the principles and factors relevant to sanction as articulated
in University of Toronto and Mr. C. (Case No. 1976/77-3, November 5, 1976). The Tribunal
determined that these factors supported the imposition of the JSP. In this regard, the
Tribunal observed the following:
a. The nature of the offence: The Student’s offences are clearly serious in nature.
He knowingly obtained unauthorized assistance from, and provided unauthorized
assistance to, several other students on two separate occasions. He invited other
students to join a Google Doc in which they could share answers to the Exam. He
repeatedly told other students to not say anything about the Exam allegations to
the Dean’s office. The Student’s provision and receipt of unauthorized assistance
was pre-mediated, deliberate, and extensive.
b. The detriment to the University occasioned by the offence: The harm caused to
the University by these offences is extremely significant. This type of conduct
undermines the process of academic evaluation at the University. It damages the
University’s reputation. It erodes trust between the University and its students,
between prospective employers and the University and its students, and between
other academic institutions and the University and its students.
c. The need to deter others from committing a similar offence: There is a strong
need to deter others from providing or receiving unauthorized assistance during
exams, and from pressuring others to not say anything about alleged academic
misconduct during meetings with University administrators, for many of the
reasons noted above. This type of offence poses a grave threat to the integrity of
the University, is profoundly unfair to other students, and jeopardizes the
University’s reputation. It also undermines the ability of the University to investigate
and handle these matters at the departmental level and with the cooperation of
students.
d. The likelihood of a repetition of the offence: There is a clear likelihood of
repetition of these offences. Indeed, the Student had a prior offence in fall 2020,
involving a midterm examination in which he received unauthorized assistance
from and provided unauthorized assistance to two other students, both of whom
were involved in the matters at issue in this hearing. That case resulted in the
Student receiving a final grade of zero on the midterm and receiving a formal
warning. Just months later, the Student committed the offences at issue in this
matter, in March 2021 and then again in April 2021.

15

e. The character of the Student, extenuating circumstances: At the same time, the
Tribunal acknowledges that the Student showed insight into and remorse for his
actions. The Student was experiencing attention deficit hyperactivity disorder, and
pandemic-related anxiety and depression, at the time of the offences. He is now
seeking medical treatment for those health concerns. The fact that he has sought
and continues to receive medical treatment demonstrates that he acknowledges
the seriousness of his situation and is attempting to address it. The Student has
also acknowledged that these health issues do not excuse his behaviour.
Additionally, while the Student was not initially responsive to efforts by the
University to communicate with him about the offences, he did eventually
participate in the process and attended the hearing (until he lost connectivity and
asked that the hearing continue without him, as discussed above). He has also
apologized for committing the academic offences. These are extenuating
circumstances and are considerations that reflect positively on the character of the
Student.
22. The Tribunal was satisfied that these various factors were appropriately reflected in
the Joint Submission on Penalty.
23. In support of the sanction recommendation contained in the JSP, the Tribunal was
directed by counsel for the University to prior decisions of the Tribunal in which students
who had received and/or provided unauthorized aid were suspended for similar time
periods to the one proposed in the JSP here. Many of these cases involved students who
had committed prior academic offences and who participated in the disciplinary process
through an Agreed Statement of Facts and JSP, like the Student here. In several of those
cases, the students received 3-year suspensions, like the one contained in the Joint
Submission on Penalty here (University of Toronto and A.G. (Case No. 935, August 21,
2018); University of Toronto and S-H.K. (Case No. 732, March 11, 2014); and University
of Toronto and S.S. (Case No. 1219, December 9, 2021)). In others, the students received
slightly longer suspensions of 3 years and 8 months (University of Toronto and M.T. (Case
No. 1391, December 16, 2022)) or 4 years (University of Toronto and J.G. (Case No. 753,
April 10, 2014); University of Toronto and K.P. (Case No. 660, June 8, 2011); and
University of Toronto and M.B. (Case No. 978, May 27, 2019)). In the cases in which the
suspension was for 3 years, there was generally evidence of mitigating factors, such as
health issues on the part of the student. In the cases in which the suspension was 4 years,
there was generally no such evidence.
24. The Tribunal determined that the JSP proposed here fell within the well-defined range
of penalties established by the jurisprudence for cases like this one.

16

25. The Tribunal also determined that, in all of the circumstances, the appropriate penalty
was the one submitted by the parties in the JSP.
V.

Order

26. At the conclusion of the hearing, the Tribunal made the following order:
THAT the Student is guilty of the following academic offences:
(a)

two counts of knowingly obtaining unauthorized assistance, contrary to
section B.I.1(b) of the Code;

(b)

two counts of knowingly aiding and assisting other students, contrary to
sections B.I.1.(b) and B.II.1(a) of the Code; and

(c)

one count of knowingly engaging in a form of cheating, academic
dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or misrepresentation not otherwise
described in the Code in order to obtain academic credit or other academic
advantage of any kind, contrary to section B.I.3(b) of the Code.

THAT the following sanctions shall be imposed on the Student:
(d)

a final grade of zero in ECE286H1: Probability and Statistics;

(e)

a suspension from the University for a period of 3 years commencing on
September 1, 2023; and

(f)

a notation of the offence on the Student’s academic record and transcript
for a period of 4 years from the date of the University Tribunal’s order.

THAT this case shall be reported to the Provost for publication of a notice of the
decision of the University Tribunal and the sanctions imposed, with the name of
the student withheld.

Dated at Toronto, this 15th day of April, 2024

Original signed by:
___________________________________
Ira Parghi, Chair
On behalf of the Panel
17

