Case No.: 91 7
THE UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO

IN THE MATTER OF charges of academic dishonesty filed on January 17. 2017;
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on
Academic Matters, 1995;
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Act, 1971 , S.O. 1971 , c. 56
as amended S.O. 1978, c. 88.

BETWEEN:
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
-AND-

REASONS FOR DECISION

Hearing Date: March 17, 2017
Members of the Panel:
Mr. Andrew Pinto, Barrister and Solicitor, Chair
Professor Kathi Wilson, Faculty Panel Member
Ms. Natasha Ramkissoon, Student Panel Member
Appearances:
Mr. Robert Centa, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Barristers
Ms. Emily Home, Student-at-Law, Paliare Roland Barristers
In Attendance:
Professor Donald Dewees, Dean's Designate for Academic lntegnty
Dr. Kristi Gourlay, Manager and Academic Integrity Officer, Office of Student
Academic Integrity
Sana Kawar, Manager, University of Toronto Transcript Centre
Ms. Krista Osbourne, Administrative Clerk & Hearing Secretary, Office of
Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances

Mr. Sean Lourim. Technology Assistant, Office of the Governing Council
Not in Attendance:
Mr. ~
. the Student
Preliminary

[1]

The Trial Division of the University Tribunal was convened on March 17.
2017 to consider charges under the University of Toronto ("the University")
Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters. 1995 (the "Code") laid against
the Student by letter dated January 17. 2017 from the Vice-Provost,
Faculty & Academic Life of the University of Toronto.

[2)

The Student did not attend the hearing; nor did a representative attend on
the Student's behalf.

Hearing on the Facts

(3)

The charges against the Student were as follows :
1.
You knowingly forged or in any other way altered or falsified an
academic record, and/or uttered, circulated or made use of such forged ,
altered or falsified record, namely, a document which purported to be your
Transcript of Consolidated Academic Record from the University of
Toronto dated June 3, 2015, contrary to section B.l.3(a) of the Code.
2.
In the alternative, You knowingly engaged in a form of cheating,
academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or misrepresentation not
otherwise described in order to obtain academic credit or other academic
advantage of any kind, contrary to Section B.l.3(b) of the Code.
Particulars of charges

(a)

As part of your application for a scholarship with the Saudi
Arabian Cultural Bureau, you provided a document that
purported to be your Transcript of Consolidated Academic
Record from the University of Toronto dated June 3, 2015.

(b)

You forged this document and falsely represented your
marks, grades, sessional grade point averages, cumulative
grade point averages, and academic history and status.

(c)

You knew that this document was forged , altered, and/or
falsified when you circulated it.

2

(d)

You had an obligation to provide accurate and truthful
information and not to misrepresent your academic record.
You had an obligation not to provide forged or falsified
documents in support of your application.

[4]

The first issue that the Panel dealt with was whether the Student had been
provided adequate notice of the hearing and whether the hearing could
proceed in his absence.

[5]

Discipline Counsel noted that the University's Book of Documents
included an Affidavit of Service from Susan Murphy who indicated that, on
January 17, 2017, she served the Student with the charges via e-mail,
which e-mail was the e-mail address the Student had provided to the
University in ROSI.

[6]

Krista Osbourne, the Administrative Clerk and Hearing Secretary for the
Office of Appeals. Discipline and Faculty Grievances, also provided an
Affidavit of Service indicating that, on February 22, 2017, she served the
Student with the Notice of Hearing via e-mail. On February 23, 2017, she
served the Student with the Notice of Hearing by sending a copy by
Purolator to the last known address that the Student had provided to the
University in ROSI.

[7]

Mike Wiseman, the University's Acting Director, Information Security,
Information Technology Services, provided an e-mail Indicating that the
last time the Student's e-mail address was accessed was March 12, 2017,
which implied that the e-mail address was actively being used on a date
after the charges and Notice of Hearing had been sent to that e-mail
address.

[8]

The Tribunal observed that section 9 of the Tribunal's Rules of Practice
and Procedure permit, inter a/ia, service of charges and notices of hearing
via e-mail to the student's e-mail address contained in ROSI.

[9]

The Tribunal was satisfied that the Student had been provided reasonable
notice of the charges and the hearing, and that the hearing could proceed
in the Student's absence.

[1 O]

Discipline Counsel provided a brief overview of the charges. The Student
was alleged to have provided a fraudulent document to the Saudi Arabian
Cultural Bureau (SACB) purporting to be his transcript of academic record
from the University.

[11]

The University called one witness, Ms. Sana Kawar, the Manager of the
University's Transcript Centre. She has been employed by the University
3

for 38 years. The Transcript Centre issues transcripts upon request to
locations all over the world and has regular dealings with the SACB.
[12]

The witness reviewed correspondence between the Transcript Centre and
the SACS, and the Student and the SACS. The witness explained that
due to financial holds being placed on the Student's record. an official
transcript could not be provided to the SACS until the holds were cleared.
However, the Transcript Centre could and did provide an academic record
to the SACS which contained the same information as a transcript, but did
not constitute an official transcript.

[13]

The witness testified that, upon her review of the document submitted by
the Student to the SACB purporting to be an official transcript, she knew
right away that the document was fraudulent. Among other discrepancies.
the signature on the Student's document did not correspond to that of the
University official who regularly signs transcripts. The words on the
document "Faculty of Arts and Science Statement of Results" do not
appear on an authentic transcript; and, most importantly, the courses and
grades listed on the Student's document bore no resemblance to the
Student's actual academic record. Also, the document indicated that the
Student had been on academic probation when that was not even
possible given his academic status. All in all, the Student's document was
a wholesale misrepresentation of the Student's actual academic record at
the University.

(14]

Discipline Counsel submitted that the Student had falsified and
misrepresented his academic record to the SACS. This was not an act
that could have been done via inadvertence.
Decision of the Tribunal on Charges

(15]

Following deliberation, based on the witness' uncontradicted evidence and
a review of the documents, the Tribunal concluded that the Student was
guilty on charge 1. The University withdrew charge 2 which was brought in
the alternative. Consequently. the Student stood convicted on charge 1.

Penalty

[16]

The matter then continued with a hearing into the appropriate sanction.

[17]

The University requested, given the gravity of the offence that, inter alia,
the Tribunal recommend to the University's President that the Student be
expelled.

4

(181

Discipline Counsel noted that. although the Student had no prior discipline
history, transcript forgery is treated extremely seriously by the Tribunal.
The University is part of a network of global institutions that rely on each
other for the integrity of their transcript documentation. The Student's
misconduct was flagrant and deliberate and may not have been detected
but for the events in question and the diligence of the University's
Transcript Centre. There was also no mitigating evidence offered by the
Student who did not attend the hearing, though properly notified.

[19)

Discipline Counsel presented the panel with a document summarizing
similar cases as contained in the University's Book of Authorities. In the
majority of cases, even where there was no prior offence, the Tribunal
recommended the student for expulsion for transcript forgery.

[20}

Here, the Tribunal determined that the Student had created an entirely
fictitious document made to look like an official University transcript and
sent it to the SACS. The fraudulent document was a complete distortion
of the Student's actual academic achievement and status. The Student.
though provided a fair opportunity to attend the hearing did not do so and
there was no mitigating evidence. The University's request on sanction
was consistent with the Tribunal's jurisprudence.

[21]

In light of the facts of this case, the submissions of Discipline Counsel.
and a review of the available authorities. the Tribunal orders as follows:

1.

The hearing may proceed in the Student's absence;

2.

The Student is guilty of 1 count of knowingly forging, altering, or falsifying,

an academic record, or uttering, circulating, or making use of such an academic
record, contrary to section B.l.3(a) of the Code of Behaviour on Academic
Matters;

3.

The Student shall immediately be suspended from the University for a

period of up to five years;
4.

The Tribunal recommends to the President of the University that he

recommend to the Governing Council that the Student be expelled from the
University; and
5.

This case shall be reported to the Provost for publication of a notice of the

decision of the Tribunal and the sanctions imposed , with the name of the student
withheld.

5

Dated at Toronto. this {'3-U. day of June, 2017.

Andrew Pinto, Co-Chair

6

