Case #917

   DATE: June 13, 2017
   PARTIES: University of Toronto v. A.B. ("the Student")

   Hearing Date(s): March 17, 2017

   Panel Members:
   Mr. Andrew Pinto, Barrister and Solicitor, Chair
   Professor Kathi Wilson, Faculty Panel Member
   Ms. Natasha Ramkissoon, Student Panel Member

   Appearances:
   Mr. Robert Centa, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland
   Barristers
   Ms. Emily Home, Student-at-Law, Paliare Roland Barristers

   In Attendance:
   Professor Donald Dewees, Dean's Designate for Academic Integrity
   Dr. Kristi Gourlay, Manager and Academic Integrity Officer, Office of
   Student Academic Integrity
   Sana Kawar, Manager, University of Toronto Transcript Centre
   Ms. Krista Osbourne, Administrative Clerk & Hearing Secretary. Office
   of Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances
   Mr. Sean Lourim, Technology Assistant. Office of the Governing Council

   Not in Attendance:
   The Student

   Trial Division - s. B.i.3(a) of Code - forged academic record - student
   submitted forged transcript in scholarship application - student did
   not attend hearing - University provided proper notice of hearing -
   finding of guilt - expulsion, five year suspension, publication of the
   decision with the name of the Student withheld

   The Student was charged with forging an academic record under s.
   B.i.3(a) of the Code, and alternatively, academic dishonesty under s.
   B.i.3(b) of the Code. The charges related to a scholarship application
   that included a forged transcript.

   The Student did not attend the hearing. The University presented
   evidence that the notice of hearing and charges had been sent to the
   Student's university e-mail account, and that the account had been
   accessed after these documents had been sent. The Tribunal was
   satisfied that the Student had been provided with reasonable notice of
   the hearing, and ordered that the hearing proceed in the Student's
   absence.

   The Tribunal found the Student guilty of the forgery charge, and the
   University withdrew the second charge. In determining the penalty, the
   Tribunal noted that transcript forgery is treated extremely seriously
   due to the importance of the integrity of the University's official
   records; that forgery is difficult to detect; that the Student's
   conduct was flagrant and deliberate; that many cases impose expulsion
   for such forgeries; and that the Student did not participate in the
   hearing to present any mitigating factors. The Tribunal suspended the
   Student for up to five years, recommended that they be expelled, and
   ordered that the decision be reported to the Provost for publication
   with the name of the Student withheld.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12944
