THE UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO

IN THE MATTER OF charges of academic dishonesty made on December 8, 2014;
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic
Matters, 1995;
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University a/Toronto Act, 1971, S.O. 1971, c. 56 as amended
S.O. 1978, C. 88
BETWEEN:
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
- and-

Dates of Hearing: March 9, 2015, and August 11, 2015
Members of the Panel:
Ms. Lisa Brownstone, Barrister and Solicitor, Chair
Dr. Chris Koenig-Woodyard, Faculty Panel Member
Mr. Adam Wheeler, Student Panel Member
Appearances:
March 9 & August 11, 2015: Ms. Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland
Barristers

August 11, 2015:

Ms. Tegan O'Brien, Legal Caseworker for the Student, Downtown
Legal Services
Ms. Naomi Mares, Assisting, Legal Caseworker for the Student,
Downtown Legal Services

In Attendance:
March 9 & August 11, 2015: Ms.
Mr.
, Father of the Student
Ms. Lucy Gaspini, Manager, Academic Integrity & Affairs, UTM

March 9, 2015:

Ms. Natalie Ramtahal, Coordinator, Appeals, Discipline and
Faculty Grievances

- 1-

August 11, 2015:

Ms. Sharice Annis, Observer, Student Social Worker, Downtown
Legal Services

August II, 2015:

Mr. Christopher Lang, Director, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty
Grievances

Preliminary
[1]

The Trial Division of the University Tribunal was convened on March 9, 2015, to
consider charges under the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic
Matters, 1995 (the "Code"), laid against the student by letter dated December 8, 2014,
from Professor Sioban Nelson, then Interim Vice-Provost, Faculty & Academic Life.

Hearing on the Facts
[2]

The charges facing the student were the following:
(1)

IVIII GIIIIII

On or about February 28, 2014, Ms.
knowingly represented the ideas,
or the expression of the ideas, of another as your own work in Assignment 2 that
you submitted in BIO 153H5 - Diversity of Organism (the "Biology Course"),
contrary to section B.I.l(d) of the Code.

(2) In the alternative to paragraph 1, on or about February 28, 2014, you knowingly

obtained unauthorized assistance in connection with Assignment 2 that you
submitted in the Biology Course, contrary to section B.I.l(b) of the Code.
(3)

On or about March 27, 2014, you knowingly falsified a document or evidence
required by the University of Toronto, or uttered, circulated, or made use of any
such falsified document, namely, a Data Sheet which formed part of Experiment 5
that you submitted in CHM120H5 - Chemical Principles 2 ("Chemistry Course"),
contrary to section B.I.l(a) of the Code.

(4)

On or about March 27, 2014, you knowingly submitted academic work containing a
purported statement of fact which had been concocted in a Data Sheet which formed
part of Experiment 5 that you submitted in the Chemistry Course, contrary to
section B.I.1(:f) of the Code.

(5) In the alternative, you knowingly engaged in a form of cheating, academic
dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or misrepresentation in order to obtain academic
credit or other academic advantage of any kind, contrary to section B.I.3(b) of the
Code, in respect of:
(a)
the submission of Assignment 2 in the Biology Course on or about February
28, 2014;
(b)
the submission of the Data Sheet which formed part of Experiment 5 in the
Chemistry Course on or about March 27, 2014.

-2-

[3]

Particulars of the charges were as follows:
(1)

At all material times you were a student enrolled at the University of Toronto
Mississauga.

(2)

In the 2014 Winter term you were enrolled in the Biology Course, which was
taught by Christoph Richter.

(3)

On or about February 28, 2014, you submitted Assignment 2 which was worth
3% of your final grade in the Biology Course.

(4)

You submitted Assignment 2 to obtain academic credit.

(5)

You submitted Assignment 2 knowing that it contained verbatim or nearly
verbatim text from an assignment submitted by another student in the Biology
Course named Ishara Wijekoon;

(6)

You submitted Assignment 2 knowing that it contained ideas or expressions of
ideas which were not your own, but which were the ideas or expressions of ideas
of Ms. Wijekoon, without giving proper attribution Ms. Wijekoon.

(7)

You knowingly obtained unauthorized assistance in connection with Assignment
2 from Ms. Wijekoon.

(8)

You submitted the Assignment 2 with the intention that, when evaluating
Assigmnent 2, the University of Toronto would rely on Assignment 2 as
containing your own ideas that you had expressed in your own words.

(9)

In Winter 2014 you were also enrolled in the Chemistry Course, which was taught
by Thottackad Radhakrishnan.

(10)

On March 27, 2014, you submitted an experiment in the Chemistry Course titled
Experiment 5: Oxidation of Ethanol by Chromium (VI) which was worth 5% of
your final grade in the Chemistry Course. You submitted as part of Experiment 5
two pages entitled Data Sheet dated 27/03/2014.

(11)

You knowingly forged the signature of Stephen Ho, the Tutorial Assistant in your
Lab Section, on the Data Sheet.

(12)

You knowingly concocted, altered or misrepresented the data contained on the
Data Sheet.

(13)

You knowingly submitted the forged signature and false data in an attempt to
obtain academic credit or other academic advantage.

-3-

[4]

At the outset, Ms. Harmer on behalf of the Provost indicated that the University's
intention was to proceed with charges 1, 3, and 4, and not with the "alternative" charges
in paragraphs 2 and 5, unless it became evident that there was a need to do so.

[5]

The Student admitted that she had committed the offences as set out in paragraphs 1, 3,
and 4.

The Evidence

[6]

Discipline Counsel for the University, Ms. Harmer, introduced a Joint Book of
Documents which contains the charging documents and other relevant information,
(Exhibit 1) and an Agreed Statement of Facts (Exhibit 2). The agreed-upon facts are
substantially reproduced below:
Guilty plea

MIi

(1)

Ms.
G111111 admits that she received a copy of the charges filed by the
Provost, which are included in the JBD at Tab 1.

(2)

Ms.

(3)

The Provost hereby withdraws charges #2 and #5.

(4)

Ms.
GIIIIII further admits that she received the Notice of Hearing for
March 9, 2015, which is found in the JBD at Tab 2.

MIi GIIIIII hereby pleads guilty to charges #1, #3 and #4.
MIi

Background

(5)

MIi

Ms.
GIIIIII has been a registered student at the University of Toronto
Mississauga since Fall 2013. As of February 26, 2015 she had earned 7.0 credits,
with a cumulative grade point average of 1. 73. A copy of her ROSI transcript as
of February 26, 2015 is found in the JBD at Tab 3.

The Biology Course

MIi

(6)

In Winter 2014, Ms.
GIIIIII enrolled in BIO153H5 - Diversity of Organism
(the "Biology Course"), which was taught by Professor Christoph Richter. A copy
of the course syllabus for the Course is found in the JBD at Tab 4.

(7)

Students in the Biology Course were required to submit four assignments, each
worth 3% of the Biology Course mark. Assignments were required to be
submitted through Turnitin.com ("Turnitin") on Blackboard.

(8)

Assignment 2 was due on or about February 25, 2014. It was worth 3% of
Ms.
George's final grade in the Biology Course. A copy of the information

MIi

-4-

MIi ctlllll describing the requirements of Assignment 2 is

provided to Ms.
found in the JBD at Tab 5.

MIi ctlllll

(9)

On February 28, 2014, Ms.
submitted a copy of her Assignment 2
through Turnitin on Blackboard. A copy of Ms.
George's Assignment 2 is
found in the JBD at Tab 6.

(10)

A Turnitin report for Assignment 2 revealed a 53% similarity index with an
assignment submitted by another student with the initials I.W. in the Biology
Course. A copy of the Turnitin report for Assignment 2 is included in the JBD at
Tab 7. A copy of the essay that was submitted by I.W. in the Biology Course is
included in the JBD at Tab 8. A copy of the Turnitin report for I.W.'s assignment
2 is included in the JBD at Tab 9.

(11)

Ms.
met with Professor Richter on March 7, 2014 to discuss the
results of the Turnitin.com analysis and Professor Richter's concerns that
Ms.
had obtained unauthorized aid and plagiarized Assignment 2.

( 12)

MIi

MIi ct11111
MIi ct11111
Ms. MIi ctlllll admits that she obtained unauthorized assistance and
committed plagiarism in respect of Assignment 2. Ms. IV11 ct11111 admits that

she submitted Assignment 2:
(a)
to obtain academic credit;
(b)
knowing that it contained verbatim or nearly verbatim passages from the
essay that was submitted by I.W. in the Biology Course, but without
attribution to that source;
(c)
knowing that it contained ideas or expressions of ideas which were not her
own; and
(d)
with the intention that the University rely on it as containing her own ideas
in considering the appropriate academic credit to be assigned to her work.
Chemistry Course

ctlllll

(13)

In Winter 2014 Ms. IVII
was also enrolled in CHM120H5 - Chemical
Principles 2 ("Chemistry Course"), which was taught by Professor Thottackad
Radhakrishnan. A copy of the course syllabus for the Chemistry Course is found
in the JBD at Tab 10.

(14)

Students in the Chemistry Course were required to submit five lab reports based
on experiments performed in the lab. Each of these lab reports was worth 5% of
the Chemistry Course mark.

(15)

On or about March 27, 2014, Ms.
participated in Experiment 5:
Oxidation of Ethanol by Chromium (VI) which was carried out in the lab.

MIi ctlllll

-5-

ctlllll

Ms. 1\1111
was required to complete a Data Sheet while conducting
Experiment 5, and to have it signed by the teaching assistant in charge of the lab.
( 16)

(17)

ctlllll
ct11111

Ms. 1\1111
left her Data Sheet for Experiment 5 ("Original Data Sheet") in
the lab and did not take it with her when she had completed Experiment 5.
Ms. 1\1111
made no effort to reclaim her Original Data Sheet at any time.
A copy of that abandoned Original Data Sheet is found in the JBD at Tab 11.

ctlllll

On April 3, 2014, Ms. Iv,ai
submitted her lab report for Experiment 5
("Lab Report"). Attached to that Lab Report was a Data Sheet dated 27/03/2014
bearing Ms. 1\1111 George's name and in her handwriting ("Second Data Sheet").
This Second Data Sheet also contained what appeared to be a signature from the
Teaching Assistant, Stephen Ho, who had been in charge of the lab on March 27,
2014 when Ms. 1\1111
conducted Experiment 5. A copy of the lab report,
together with its attached Second Data Sheet, is found in the JBD at Tab 12.

ct11111

MIi ct11111

( 18)

The Second Data Sheet was not the Original Data Sheet which Ms.
had filled out during the conduct of Experiment 5.

(19)

The signature that appeared to be that of Mr. Ho on the Second Data Sheet was
not his signature.

(20)

The data on the Second Data Sheet is not the same as the data originally recorded
by Ms.
on the Original Data Sheet.

(21)

MIi ctlllll
Ms. 1\1111 ct11111 fabricated the data included on the Second Data Sheet, and

forged Mr. Ho's signature on the Second Data Sheet.

ctlllll

(22)

Ms. JVal
admits that she knowingly falsified the Second Data Sheet and
forged Mr. Ho's signature, and that she did so to obtain academic credit.

(23)

Ms. 1\1111
further admits that she knowingly concocted the data on the
Second Data Sheet, and that she did so to obtain academic credit.

ct11111

Dean's Meeting

(24)

ctlllll

Ms. IVJII
attended a meeting with dean's designate Michael Georges on
August 6, 2014. At that meeting Ms. IVJII
admitted to having taken
I.W. 's assignment 2, added words to it, and handed it in as her own. She
confirmed that she understood that to do so was to commit plagiarism. Ms.
also admitted to having forged Stephen Ho's signature on the Second
Data Sheet which she submitted for academic credit in the Chemistry Course.

ctlllll

IVJII

ctlllll

-6-

[7]

After Ms Harmer took the Panel through the Agreed Statement of Facts, which the
Student agreed were true and accurate, the Student indicated that she wished to provide
further information to the Panel. The information she wished to provide had not
previously been made known to University Counsel. The Panel indicated that, should the
Student wish to provide additional facts that were not included in the Agreed Statement
of Facts but that were, in the Student's view, relevant to the liability stage of the hearing,
those facts would have to be adduced under oath with an opportunity for crossexamination. Indeed, given the late stage at which the Student raised this desire, which
came as a surprise to University Counsel, it was unclear whether the facts that the Student
wished to adduce would affect the proceeding in a larger way.

[8]

The Panel asked University Counsel and the Student to confer and advise the Panel
whether they could agree on a manner of proceeding. The parties ultimately requested
that the matter be adjourned so that the Student could seek representation or advice, if she
sees fit, through Downtown Legal Services. The Panel agreed to adjourn the matter on
that basis.

[9]

On August 11, 2015, the Panel and the parties reconvened, with the student now being
represented by Downtown Legal Services. At the outset, the student confirmed that she
was indeed admitting to charges 1, 3, and 4 on the basis of the facts and documents
previously agreed to.

[ 1O]

The Panel considered the charges, the facts and the documents and concluded that the
allegations had been made out. The Panel therefore made the findings against the student
as set out in charges 1, 3, 4, at which point the University withdrew the allegations of
charges 2 and 5.

[11]

At the penalty portion of the hearing, the Panel was provided with a Joint Submission on
Penalty. The parties had agreed that an appropriate sanction in the case was for the
student to receive a grade of zero in the two courses in which the misconduct occurred,
and a four-year suspension from the University, with a notation on the student's transcript
for five years. In addition, the case would be reported for publication with the student's
name withheld. The Panel was provided with a Brief of Authorities in support of the Joint
Submission on Penalty, and heard submissions from both parties.

[12]

In support of the joint submission on penalty, the parties filed a further Agreed Statement
of Facts, which is reproduced substantially here:
(1)

I\9

In December 2013, Ms.
~ admitted to submitting work for academic credit
that was taken directly from published sources without attribution. In particular, she
submitted for grading a Scientific Literacy Essay in BIO 152H that was materially
plagiarized. The essay was worth 10% of her grade in BIO152H.

-7-

(2)

The matter was resolved at the depatimental level. The Chair of the department imposed
a sanction of a grade of zero for the assignment.

(3)

The Chair warned Ms.
GIIIIII in a letter that second offences are a very serious
matter and carry significantly greater sanctions. Ms.
GIIIIII confirmed by her
signature that she had read and agreed to the academic offence charge and sanction.
Ms.
GIIIIII is a recent immigrant. Her family moved from India to Canada in April
2013.

(4)

(5)

IvJII

IvJII

IvJII

Pati of the family's motivation for coming to Canada was so the children could pursue
education. Ms. ~ George's father was a doctor in India. As the eldest sibling
Ms.
G111111 experiences a lot of pressure to succeed academically. Her immediate
and extended family all expect she will become a doctor.

IvJII

(6)

MIi

If she were to testify Ms.
GIIIIII would say that the educational culture she
experienced was different in India, including citation methods and the ability to interact
with teaching assistants and professors. It did not occur to Ms.
GIIIIII that she
could ask the TA about her lost data sheet.

IvJII

[13]

The Panel considered the aggravating circumstances that the three offences occurred in
two courses within a very short timeframe, that is, between February 28, 2014 and March
27, 2014. In addition, the offences occurred very shortly after the student had been
confronted with and acknowledged engaging in plagiarism in respect of a scientific
literacy essay in another course. The Panel also considered that the student was warned
after the December, 2013 incident that second offences are very serious and carry
significantly greater sanctions. In addition, the Panel was presented with and considered
mitigating circumstances, including the student's recent immigration status and the
pressure~ in her household, as well as the different educational culture the student
experienced in Canada than she had been used to in India.

Decision of the Tribunal

[14]

The Panel concluded that the Joint Submission on Penalty was within the appropriate
range of sanction for the facts of this case, taking into account the previous plagiarism
misconduct. Plagiarism is a serious offence, affecting the University's integrity and
resulting in great unfairness to the remainder of the student population. It must be treated
seriously in order to fulfill all of the sentencing objectives, particularly specific and
general deterrence. Although the Panel was divided in its views as to where within the
appropriate range the sanction sat, the Panel was unanimous that the penalty was within
the appropriate range and therefore the Panel made the order requested. That is, the Panel
ordered that:
(a)

a final grade of zero in the course BIO153H5 in 2014 Winter;

(b)

a final grade of zero in the course CHM120H5 in 2014 Winter;

(c)

a four-year suspension from the University commencing the date of this Order;

-8-

MIi

(d)

a notation of the sanction on Ms.
George ' s record and transcript until the
date she graduates from the University or for a period of five years from the date
of this Order, whichever is first; and

(e)

this case be reported to the Provost, with Ms.
George's name withheld, for
publication of a notice of the decision of the Tribunal and the sanction imposed.

MIi

Dated this

-9-

