Case 789

DATE:

   October 9, 2015

PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v J.M.G.

Hearing Date(s):

   March 9, 2015 and August 11, 2015

Panel Members:

   Lisa Brownstone, Chair
   Chris Koenig-Woodyard, Faculty Member
   Adam Wheeler, Student Member

Appearances:

   Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel
   Tegan O‚Brien, Counsel for the Student, Downtown Legal Services
   Naomi Mares, Assistant Counsel for the Student, Downtown Legal Services

In Attendance:

   Ms. J.M.G., the Student
   Mr. G.V., the Student‚s father
   Lucy Gaspini, Manager, Academic Integrity and Affairs, University of
   Toronto Mississauga
   Natalie Ramtahal, Coordinator, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty
   Grievances
   Sharice Annis, Observer, Downtown Legal Services
   Christopher Lang, Director, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances
   Student charged under s. B.i.1(d) and, in the alternative, s. B.i.1(b)
   of the Code , and under s. B.i.1(a) , s. B.i.1(f) and, in the
   alternative, s. B.i.3(b) of the Code . The charges related to
   allegations that the Student engaged in academic misconduct in two
   courses. The first set of charges was in relation to allegations that
   the Student knowingly represented the ideas of another as her own work
   in an assignment. The second set of charges was in relation to
   allegations that the Student knowingly falsified a document that formed
   the data for an assignment in a separate course. The Student was
   present at the hearing. At the first hearing, the Student indicated
   that she wished to provide further information to the Panel that was
   not present in the Agreed Statement of Facts. The Panel agreed to
   adjourn the matter so that the Student could seek representation or
   advice.
   Student pleaded guilty with respect to the charge of plagiarism. The
   Panel accepted the Agreed Statement of Facts and found the Student
   guilty of the offence. The Student admitted to obtaining unauthorized
   assistance and committing plagiarism by submitting an assignment
   knowing it contained verbatim or nearly verbatim passages from an essay
   that was submitted by another student in the Course, and knowing that
   the assignment contained ideas or expressions of ideas which were not
   her own. The University then withdrew the alternative charge of
   unauthorized aid.
   Student pleaded guilty with respect to the charges of forged documents
   and concoction. The Panel accepted the Agreed Statement of Facts and
   found the Student guilty of the offences. The Student admitted to
   forging the signature of her Teaching Assistant and to submitting a
   data sheet with fabricated data. The University then withdrew the
   alternative charge of academic dishonesty not otherwise described.
   The Panel took into account as an aggravating factor that the Student
   had been charged with another plagiarism offence and warned of the
   serious consequences that would occur in the event of a repetition,
   especially given the very short timeframe between the offences. The
   Panel also took into account mitigating circumstances, including the
   Student‚s recent immigration status and the pressures in her household.
   The Panel accepted the Joint Submission on Penalty, noting that it was
   within the appropriate range of sanction taking into account the
   previous plagiarism misconduct. The Panel imposed a grade assignment of
   zero in both courses; a 4-year suspension; the earlier of either a
   5-year notation on the Student‚s academic record and transcript, or a
   notation until her graduation; and that the case be reported to the
   Provost for publication.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12885
