UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
TRIAL DIVISION

IN THE MATTER OF charges of academic misconduct made on November 14,
2011;
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on
Academic Matters, 1995;
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Act, 1971 , S .O. 1971 , c. 56
as amended S.O. 1978, c. 88.

BETWEEN:
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
-AND-

REASONS FOR DECISION

Hearing Date: May 15, 2012

Members of the Panel:
Mr. Andrew Pinto, Barrister and Solicitor, Chair
Dr. Richard B. Day, Department of Political Science, Faculty Panel Member
Ms. Vy Nguyen, Student Panel Member
Appearances:
Mr. Robert Centa, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Barristers
In Attendance:
Dr. Kristi Gourlay, Manager, Office of Student Academic Integrity, Faculty of Arts
and Sciences
Ms. Natalie Ramtahal, Coordinator, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances

Preliminary
[1]

The Trial Division of the University Tribunal was convened on May 15,
2012 to consider charges under the University of Toronto Code of
Behaviour on Academic Matters, 1995 (the "Code") laid against the
Student by letter dated November 14, 2011 from Professor Edith Hillan,
Vice-Provost, Faculty and Academic Life.

[2]

The Student did not attend the hearing; nor did a representative acting on
the Student's behalf. The Tribunal waited several minutes after the official
start time of the hearing in case the Student and/or his representative
arrived late, but no one appeared. The Tribunal questioned Discipline
Counsel concerning the University's efforts to bring the charges and the
hearing to the Student's attention. The University had included an
Affidavit of Service in its Book of Documents which confirmed that the
Student had been personally served on April 27, 2012 with the Notice of
Hearing which appended the charges, as well as relevant supplementary
documentation. The Tribunal was satisfied that the Student had been
properly notified and determined that it would be appropriate for the
hearing to proceed in the Student's absence.

Hearing on the Facts
[3]

The charges against the Student were as follows:
1.
In or about June 2010, you knowingly falsified a document or
evidence required by the University of Toronto, or uttered,
circulated or made use of any such falsified document, namely, a
petition form seeking to defer for a second time a University of
Toronto course examination in the course RSM220H1 F, contrary to
section B.1.1 (a) of the Code.
2.
In June 2010, you knowingly uttered, circulated or made use
of a forged, altered or falsified document or evidence required by
the University of Toronto, namely, a University of Toronto Student
Medical Certificate, dated June 23, 2010, which you submitted to
the Faculty of Arts and Science Committee on Standing
("Committee") in support of your request for academic
accommodations or relief, contrary to section B.1.1 (a) of the Code.
3.
In June 2010, you knowingly falsified a document or
evidence required by the University of Toronto, or uttered,
circulated or made use of any such falsified document or evidence,
or uttered, circulated or made use of any such falsified document
namely, a hand-written letter which you submitted to the Committee
2

in support of your request for academic accommodations or relief,
contrary to section B.1.1 (a) of the Code.
4.
In July 2010, you knowingly uttered, circulated or made use
of a forged, altered or falsified document or evidence required by
the University of Toronto, namely, a University of Toronto Student
Medical Certificate, dated July 21, 2010, which you submitted to the
University in support of your request for academic accommodations
or relief in RSM221 H1 S, contrary to section B.1.1 (a) of the Code.
5.
In August 2010, you knowingly falsified a document or
evidence required by the University of Toronto, or uttered,
circulated or made use of any such falsified document, namely, a
petition form seeking to defer a University of Toronto course
examination in the course RSM221 H1 S and to defer for a second
time a University of Toronto course examination in the course
ECO220Y1Y, contrary to section B.1.1 (a) of the Code.
6.
In August 2010, you knowingly uttered, circulated or made
use of a forged, altered or falsified document or evidence required
by the University of Toronto, namely, a University of Toronto
Student Medical Certificate, dated August 20, 2010, which you
submitted to the Committee in support of your request for academic
accommodations or relief, contrary to section B.1.1 (a) of the Code.
7.
In August 2010, you knowingly falsified a document or
evidence required by the University of Toronto, or uttered,
circulated or made use of any such falsified document or evidence,
or uttered, circulated or made use of any such falsified document
namely, a letter which you submitted to the Committee in support of
your request for academic accommodations or relief, contrary to
section B.l.1(a) of the Code.
8.
On August 18, 2010, you knowingly forged, altered or
falsified a document or evidence required by the University of
Toronto, or uttered, circulated or made use of a forged, altered or
falsified document or evidence, namely, a letter submitted in
support of your petition seeking to be permitted to enrol in a full
course-load in Fall 2010, contrary to section B.1.1 (a) of the Code.
9.
On August 26, 2010, you knowingly falsified a document or
evidence sent to the University of Toronto, or uttered, circulated or
made use of any such falsified document, namely, an email that
you sent to Mily Van at University College in which you claimed that

3

the August 20, 2010 medical note was written by your doctor,
contrary to section B.1.1 (a) of the Code.
10.
In September 2010, you knowingly uttered, circulated or
made use of a forged, altered or falsified document or evidence
required by the University of Toronto, namely, a University of
Toronto Student Medical Certificate, dated September 7, 2010,
which you submitted to the Committee in further support of your
request to defer examinations in RSM221 H1 S and ECO220Y1Y,
contrary to section B.1.1 (a) of the Code.
11.
In October 2010, you knowingly uttered, circulated or made
use of any such forged, altered or falsified document or evidence
required by the University of Toronto, namely, a University of
Toronto Student Medical Certificate, dated October 22, 2010, which
you submitted to the University in support of your request for
academic accommodations or relief in RSM324H1 S, contrary to
section B.l.1(a) of the Code.
12.
In January 2011, you knowingly falsified a document or
evidence required by the University of Toronto, or uttered,
circulated or made use of any such falsified document, namely, a
petition form seeking a deferral, a second deferral, and a third
deferral of University of Toronto course examinations in the courses
RSM324H1S, RSM221 H1S, and ECO220Y1Y respectively,
contrary to section B.1.1 (a) of the Code.
13.
In or around January 2011, you knowingly uttered, circulated
or made use of any such forged, altered or falsified document or
evidence required by the University of Toronto, namely, a
University of Toronto Student Medical Certificate, dated December
13, 2010, which you submitted to the Committee in support of your
request for academic accommodations or relief, contrary to section
B.1.1 (a) of the Code.
14.
On January 20, 2011, you knowingly forged, altered or
falsified a document or evidence required by the University of
Toronto, or uttered, circulated or made use of any such forged,
altered or falsified document or evidence, namely, a letter
submitted in support of your petition seeking a deferral of one
University of Toronto course examination and second deferrals of
two University of Toronto course examinations in the courses
RSM324H1 S, RSM221 H1 S, and ECO220Y1Y, contrary to section
B.1.1 (a) of the Code.

4

15.
On January 26, 2011, you knowingly falsified a document or
evidence sent to the University of Toronto, or uttered, circulated or
made use of any such falsified document, namely, an email that
you sent to Michael Nicholson at University College in which you
claimed that two of your medical notes were written by your family
doctor and the other three were written at a walk-in clinic, contrary
to section B.l.1(a) of the Code.
16.
In February 2011, you knowingly uttered, circulated or made
use of a forged, altered or falsified document or evidence required
by the University of Toronto, namely, a University of Toronto
Student Medical Certificate, dated February 14, 2011, which you
submitted to the University in support of your request for academic
accommodations or relief in RSM330H1S, contrary to section
B.1.1 (a) of the Code.
17.
In February 2011, you knowingly uttered, circulated or made
use of a forged, altered or falsified document or evidence required
by the University of Toronto, namely, a University of Toronto
Student Medical Certificate, dated February 14, 2011, which you
submitted to the University in support of your request for academic
accommodations or relief in RSM225H1 S, contrary to section
B.1.1 (a) of the Code.
18.
In February 2011, you knowingly uttered, circulated or made
use of a forged, altered or falsified document or evidence required
by the University of Toronto, namely, a University of Toronto
Student Medical Certificate, dated February 28, 2011, which you
submitted to the University in support of your request for academic
accommodations or relief in RSM333H1S, contrary to section
B.l.1(a) of the Code.
19.
On April 28, 2011, you knowingly falsified a document or
evidence required by the University of Toronto, or uttered,
circulated or made use of any such falsified document, namely, a
petition form seeking to defer three University of Toronto course
examinations in the courses RSM225H 1S, RSM330H 1S, and
RSM333H 1S, contrary to section B.I.1 (a) of the Code.
20.
In April 2011, you knowingly uttered, circulated or made use
of a forged, altered or falsified document or evidence required by
the University of Toronto, namely, a University of Toronto Student
Medical Certificate, dated April 13, 2011, which you submitted to
the Committee in support of your request for academic
accommodations or relief, contrary to section B.1.1 (a) of the Code.

5

21.
In April 2011, you knowingly forged, altered or falsified a
document or evidence required by the University of Toronto, or
uttered, circulated or made use of any such forged, altered or
falsified document or evidence, namely, a letter submitted in
support of your request for academic accommodations or relief,
contrary to section B.I.1 (a) of the Code.
22.
In the alternative to each of the charges above, you
knowingly engaged in a form of cheating, academic dishonesty or
misconduct, fraud or misrepresentation not otherwise described in
the Code in order to obtain academic credit or other academic
advantage of any kind by submitting falsified or forged documents
to the University of Toronto in support of various forms of academic
accommodation or relief, contrary to section B.l.3(b) of the Code.

[4]

The University indicated that it was withdrawing charges 1, 2, 3 and 8 but
proceeding with the other charges.

[5]

Discipline counsel provided an opening statement. The University alleged
that the Student had committed academic misconduct by providing false
medical documentation, academic petitions and personal statements that
included 5 forged medical notes in support of the Student's missed work in
Commerce. The medical notes had been purchased from an on-line
commercial provider in order to support the Student's request for medical
accommodation. The allegations involved 8 separate incidents spanning
3 different terms. Ultimately, the Student admitted to providing false
documentation but not in respect of one of the three academic petitions he
had submitted. Discipline counsel suggested, however, that all three
academic petitions were false.

[6]

Two witnesses provided evidence on behalf of the University: Dr. Mike
Nicholson, Associate Registrar, University College; and Dr. Kristi Gourlay,
Manager, Office of Student Academic Integrity, Faculty of Arts and
Sciences.

[7]

Dr. Nicholson's office provides intake and analysis services in respect of
academic petitions. These petitions may be in respect of requests to defer
examinations, extend time for term work or other requests. The petition
form requires the student to carefully review the form and explicitly
acknowledge that the student has provided accurate and complete
information with supporting documentation for the request. If there are
concerns about the veracity of a student's academic petition, the office
may follow up with the student or the provider of the documentation.

6

[8]

Dr. Nicholson's office became concerned when it appeared that an office
stamp on a medical note that the Student had submitted was not
authentic. A follow-up call to the medical clinic confirmed that there was
an inconsistency between the Student's note and the information on file at
the clinic. Dr. Nicholson eventually forwarded the documentation to the
Student Academic Integrity Office.

[9]

Dr. Kristi Gourlay conducted further analysis of the Student's medical
notes and academic petitions. She contacted the medical clinic and
determined that a medical note with a physician's signature was not in fact
signed by the physician in question and was therefore a forgery. Dr.
Gourlay set up a meeting with the Student and the Dean's designate Prof.
John Britton. Dr. Britton read the standard caution to the Student that
anything he said at the meeting was admissible before the Tribunal.
Eventually the Student admitted that he had purchased the medical notes
from a commercial enterprise and that they were forged. The Student also
admitted that two of the three academic petitions were false and that he
had submitted false documentation in order to defer writing exams. The
Student acknowledged that he had committed academic misconduct.

[1 O]

In his submissions concerning liability, Discipline counsel reminded the
panel that the submission of academic petitions and medical notes is done
on a self-reporting basis. The University does not have the means to
authenticate every document. Yet, these notes relate to the important
obligation of the University to accommodate students including under the
Ontario Human Rights Code. The University has a duty of fairness to all
students that the academic petition system is based on honesty and
integrity.

[11]

Discipline counsel submitted that the Student's academic petition forms,
personal statements and medical notes were all false. There was
overwhelming evidence of academic misconduct even with respect to the
third academic petition that the Student claimed was authentic. This was
not a singular error in judgment since the false documentation spanned
July 2010 to April 2011. Indeed, the Student did not dispute that he had
committed academic misconduct.

Decision of the Tribunal on Charges

[12]

Following deliberation, based on the evidence presented by the two
witnesses, the available documentation and submissions of Discipline
Counsel, the Tribunal concluded at the Student was guilty and the Student
stood convicted on charges 4 through 7 and 9 through 21.

7

Penalty

[13]

The matter then continued with a hearing into the appropriate sanction.
The University sought the most serious penalty, a recommendation for
expulsion of the Student.

[14]

The panel reviewed a number of Tribunal decisions presented by the
University. In the University and Q. W. decision (Case 633; May 14,
2012), the Tribunal imposed a five year suspension of the student in
circumstances where the student had submitted numerous forged
academic petitions. That Tribunal noted that absent a joint submission on
penalty, which the panel believed deserved deference, the panel would
have given serious consideration to a more severe penalty. Similarly, in
the University and Y. L. (Case 639; February 27, 2012), a joint submission
on penalty resulted in the student receiving a five year suspension rather
than being recommended for expulsion for submitting multiple false
academic petitions.

[15]

Finally, in the University and X. D. (Case 636; January 24, 2012), the
Tribunal recommended the student for expulsion in circumstances where
she was found guilty of seven counts of misconduct (the student admitted
four instances of forged certificates), and where the student did not
participate in the hearing. Based on the above precedents, and based on
the gravity of the present Student's misconduct, Discipline Counsel
submitted that the appropriate sanction was recommendation for
expulsion.

[16]

The panel received confirmation that the Student had no prior academic
offence.

[17]

The Tribunal deliberated and concluded that a recommendation for
expulsion was the appropriate sanction for the Student in the present
circumstances.

[18]

The Student engaged in multiple instances of misconduct submitting
numerous falsified medical notes, personal statements and academic
petitions. The Student obtained the forged medical notes by purchasing
them through an internet facility.
This commercial aspect of the
misconduct represented an aggravating factor because the student helped
maintain a fraudulent industry that ensnares other students. While
admitting to misconduct on several occasions the Student still attempted
to mislead the University by suggesting, contrary to reason, that his third
academic petition was authentic.

[19]

The Student's failure to participate in the hearing process necessitated the
University going through the formal process of proving the commission of
8

the offence before the Tribunal. The Student's non participation resulted
in the Tribunal's inability to gauge whether there were any mitigating
factors in favour of the Student.
[20)

The panel determined, consistent with the Tribunal's previous decisions,
that submission of falsified medical documentation represents a very
serious and fundamental breach of the academic Code. The medical
verification and accommodation process is integral to the University's
obligations under the Human Rights Code and to petitioning students and
other students as well. The Student's conduct represented an attack on
the integrity of that process and must be met with a very serious sanction
in terms of general deterrence.

[21]

In light of the facts of this case, the Tribunal imposes the following
sanction:
1.

Mr. ~ receive a final grade of zero (0) in each of the
following six (6) courses:
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)

RSM221H
RSM225H
RSM324H
RSM330H
RSM333H
ECO220Y

2.

Mr. ~ be suspended immediately from the University for
a period of up to 5 years, from the date of th is Order;

3.

The Tribunal recommends to the President of the University
that he recommend to the Governing Council that Mr. ~
be expelled from the University; and,

4.

That this case shall be reported to the Provost for publication
of a notice of the decision of the Tribunal and the sanctions
imposed, with the name of the student withheld.

DATED at Toronto, February 2. o t/4., 2013.

Andrew Pinto, Co-Chair

9

