Case #646

   DATE: February 20, 2013
   PARTIES: University of Toronto v. K.Y.
   Hearing Date(s): May 15, 2012
   Panel Members:
   Andrew Pinto, Chair
   Richard B.Day, Faculty Member
   Vy Nguyen, Student Member
   Appearances:
   Robert Centa, Assistant Discipline Counsel for the University
   In Attendance:
   Kristi Gourlay, Manager, Office of Academic Integrity
   Natalie Ramtahal,Â Coordinator, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty
   Grievances
   Trial Division â s. B.i.1(a) of the Code â forged documents â altered
   medical certificate â forged documents submitted in support of
   petitions for accommodation â Student did not attend hearing â Student
   had been personally served with Notice of Hearing â finding of guilt â
   commercial aspect was an aggravating factor â conduct undermined
   integrity of accommodation process âgrade assignment of zero in six
   courses; five-year suspension; recommendation that the Student be
   expelled; report to Provost for publication.
   Student charged with twenty-one offences under s. B.i.1(a) and in the
   alternative, twenty-one offences under s. B.i.3(b) of the Code . The
   charges related to allegations that the Student provided false medical
   documentation, academic petitions, and personal statements that
   included five forged medical notes in support of various petitions for
   accommodation. The Student purchased medical notes from an online
   commercial provider. The allegations involved eight separate incidents
   spanning three different terms. The Student admitted to the Deanâs
   designate that he had purchased the medical notes and they were
   therefore forgeries. The Student also admitted that two of the three
   academic petitions he submitted were false and that he had provided
   false documentation in order to defer writing exams. The Student did
   not attend the hearing, but the Panel was satisfied notice requirements
   were met and therefore proceeded. The University dropped four of the
   original charges. The Panel convicted the Student of the remaining
   offences. The Panel noted that the commercial aspect of the misconduct
   represented an aggravating factor because the Student thereby helped
   maintain a fraudulent industry that ensnares other students. The Panel
   held that the Studentâs conduct represented an attack on the integrity
   of the accommodation process which is integral to the Universityâs
   obligations under the Ontario Human Rights Code . The Panel imposed a
   final grade of zero in six courses, a five-year suspension, a
   recommendation that the Student be expelled, and that the case be
   reported to the Provost for publication in the University newspapers.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12795
