Case #702

   DATE: April 15, 2013
   PARTIES: University of Toronto v. S.P.
   Hearing Date(s): March 20, 2013
   Panel Members:
   Ms. Sarah Kraicer, Chair
   Prof. Ernest Lam, Faculty Member
   Mr. Adam Found, Student Member
   Appearances:
   Mr. Robert Centa, Assistant Discipline Counsel for the University
   In Attendance:
   Dr. Kristi Gourlay, Manager, Office of Student Academic Integrity
   Ms. Natalie Ramtahal, Coordinator, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty
   Grievances

   Trial Division â s. B.i.1(a) of Code â forged documents â forged
   personal statements and medical certificates on five different
   occasions over three years â hearing not attended â Agreed Statement of
   Facts â guilty plea â finding of guilt â Joint Submission on Penalty â
   forgery of medical documentation was even more serious than other types
   of forgery â multiplicity of similar conduct suggested likelihood of
   repetition â Student fully cooperated and had no prior academic
   offences â proposed penalty was consistent with precedents â Panel
   accepted Joint Submission â absent Joint Submission, Panel would have
   considered extending the period of notation â grade assignment of zero
   for course; five-year suspension; seven-year notation on transcript or
   until graduation; report to Provost

   Student charged under s. B.i.1(a) of the Code. The charges related to
   allegations that the Student forged personal statements and medical
   certificates to obtain academic accommodations on five different
   occasions over the course of three years. The Student admitted that she
   worked at a hospital and used her position to forge medical
   certificates. The Student consented to the hearing proceeding in her
   absence and did not attend the hearing. The Student pleaded guilty to
   the charges, and the Panel found the Student guilty under s. B.i.1(a)
   of the Code. The Parties submitted a Joint Submission on Penalty. On
   the issue of the nature of the offence, the Panel stated that the
   misconduct of forging medical documentation was even more serious than
   forging other types of documentation, as it implicated the integrity of
   third party health professionals and undermined the ability of the
   University to rely on the bona fides of certificates and documentation
   in a petition process that depended on self-reporting by students.
   Thus, it must be met with a very serious sanction to meet the goal of
   general deterrence. Regarding the likelihood of a repetition of the
   offence and the Studentâs character, the Panel stated that the
   multiplicity of occasions of similar conduct over a stretched period of
   time suggests that there was likelihood that she will repeat the
   misconduct. However, she had no prior discipline history and fully
   cooperated with the University although the Panel had no information of
   any mitigating factors as the Student chose not to appear. The Panel
   further stated that the proposed penalty of a five-year suspension was
   consistent with precedents (P.P., Case 642 and Q.W., Case 633).
   Although the Panel recommended expulsion in KCY (Case 646), in that
   case, the Student did not fully cooperate with the University process
   and was found to have continued to attempt to mislead the Panel. The
   Panel concluded that the sanctions proposed were reasonable in the
   circumstances and accepted the Joint Submission. However, absent the
   Joint Submission, the Panel would have considered extending the period
   of notation to the entire period she would be enrolled at the
   University should she resume her studies. The Panel imposed a grade
   assignment of zero in each of the three courses; a five-year
   suspension; a seven-year notation or until graduation, whichever was to
   occur first; and a report be issued to the Provost.

   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12792
