Case No. 1563
THE UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
IN THE MATTER OF charges of academic dishonesty filed on October 26, 2023,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic
Matters, 2019,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Act, 1971, S.O. 1971, c. 56 as am. S.O.
1978, c. 88
B E T W E E N:
UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
- and Y

Z

REASONS FOR DECISION

Hearing Date: April 17, 2024, via Zoom
Members of the Panel:
R. Seumas M. Woods, Chair
Dr. Emily Nacol, Faculty Panel Member
Samantha Chang, Student Panel Member
Appearances:
Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel, for the University
Sonia Patel, Co-Counsel, for the University
Hearing Secretary:
Christopher Lang, Director, Office of Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances
Not in Attendance:
Y
Z

-2The Charges
1.

On October 26, 2023, the University of Toronto (the “University”) laid the following

charges (the “Charges”) against Y

Z

(the “Student”) under the Code of Behaviour on

Academic Matters, 2019 (the “Code”):
1.

On or about December 17, 2021, you knowingly used or possessed an unauthorized aid or
aids or obtained unauthorized assistance in connection with the final exam you submitted
in MAT135H5: Differential Calculus (“MAT135”), contrary to section B.I.1(b) of the
Code.

2.

In the alternative, on or about December 17, 2021, you knowingly represented as your own
an idea or expression of an idea or the work of another in the final exam you submitted in
MAT135, contrary to section B.I.1(d) of the Code.

3.

In the further alternative, on or about December 17, 2021, you knowingly engaged in a
form of cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or misrepresentation not
otherwise described in the Code in order to obtain academic credit or other academic
advantage of any kind in connection with the final exam you submitted in MAT135,
contrary to section B.I.3(b) of the Code.

4.

On or about February 17, 2022, you knowingly had another person personate you during
an online test in ENV100Y5 (“ENV100”), contrary to section B.I.1(c) of the Code.

5.

In the alternative, on or about February 17, 2022, you knowingly obtained unauthorized
assistance during the online test in ENV100, contrary to section B.I.1(b) of the Code.

6.

In the further alternative, on or about February 17, 2022, you knowingly engaged in a form
of cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or misrepresentation not otherwise

-3described in the Code in order to obtain academic credit or other academic advantage of
any kind in connection with the final exam you submitted in ENV100, contrary to section
B.1.3(b) of the Code.

The Hearing
2.

The Tribunal heard the Charges on April 17, 2024 over Zoom. Counsel for the University

was present at the start of the virtual hearing, but the Student was not.
Ability to Proceed in the Student’s Absence
3.

As a result of the Student’s failure to attend the hearing, after waiting 15 minutes to ensure

that the Student had the opportunity to attend the hearing, the Tribunal started by considering
whether or not it could proceed in the Student’s absence. Counsel for the University, Ms. Patel,
submitted that the University Tribunal’s Rules of Practice and Procedure (the “Rules”) entitled
the Tribunal to proceed since the Student had been provided with adequate notice of the hearing.
In support of that position, she provided the Tribunal with affidavits from Natalia Botelho and
Andrew Wagg.
4.

Ms. Botelho is an assistant with Ms. Patel’s law firm. In her affidavit, Ms. Botelho

provided information about the Student’s contact information and the efforts the University made
to contact them based on that information. Ms. Botelho affirmed that:
(a)

during the course of a meeting between the Student and the Dean’s Designate,
Professor Shay Fuchs, Professor Fuchs reminded the Student that they needed to
check their email regularly for important emails, and that if there was something
important, the Student needed to reply and could not ignore the emails;

-4(b)

on October 26, 2023, the Office of the Vice-Provost, Faculty and Academic Life,
emailed the charges in this matter to the Student at the Student’s email address in
the University’s Repository of Student Information (“ROSI”);

(c)

on November 1, 2023, counsel for the University emailed the Student, at the
Student’s email address on ROSI, a disclosure letter and brief, and a copy of the
University’s Policy on Official Correspondence with Students. That same day,
counsel for the University also attempted to call the Student at the phone number
given for them on ROSI but did not get through. When counsel’s assistant
attempted to contact the Student at that number, she received an automated message
stating that the call could not be completed as dialed;

(d)

on January 11, 2024, counsel for the University emailed the Student at the Student’s
address on ROSI, asking about possible hearing dates. The Student responded to
that email, stating that “I’m not at U of T anymore. I transferred. Therefore, I do
not think it is necessary for me to attend this meeting, and I will not reply to all the
following matters.”;

(e)

after counsel for the University asked for a hearing date, on March 8, 2024, the
Office of Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances (the “ADFG Office”)
scheduled the hearing for April 17, 2024 at 5:15 p.m., notifying the Student about
the hearing date by email sent to the Student’s address on ROSI that same day;

(f)

on March 10, 2024, counsel for the University emailed the Student, forwarding the
ADFG Office’s email notifying the Student about the date of the hearing, and
warning them about the Tribunal’s ability to proceed in the Student’s absence;

-5(g)

on April 5, 2024, counsel for the University emailed the Student copies of the
affidavits on which the University intended to rely in respect of the merits of the
Charges. Counsel asked the Student if they intended to cross-examine any of the
affiants;

(h)

on April 9, 2024, Ms. Botelho did a Google search on the Student’s mailing address.
She discovered that it was linked to the Kent School, a private high school.

5.

Mr. Wagg is the Manager, Incident Response at Information Security, Information

Technology Services at the University. His affidavit evidence was that on March 25, 2024 he
checked to determine the last time anyone had accessed the email account for the Student in ROSI.
Mr. Wagg determined that the last time someone had accessed the email account was March 9,
2024.
6.

Under rule 13(c) of the Rules, service of charges, notices of hearing and disclosure,

amongst other things, may be served on a student by emailing a copy of the document to the
students email address contained in ROSI.
7.

While direct evidence that the Student had personally accessed the email account identified

as the Student’s email account in ROSI after the Charges and the initial Notice of Virtual Hearing
were emailed to the Student would have established that the Student had had actual notice of both
the Charges and the date of this hearing, the Rules do not require the University to establish actual
notice. To the contrary, the Rules allow the University to provide students with documents by
emailing them to the student at their email address in ROSI. Students are responsible for
monitoring their account in ROSI. They fail to do so at their own risk.

-68.

In this case, the Student was notified of the Charges by email sent to the Student’s address

on ROSI on October 26, 2023. Counsel for the University emailed the Student about possible
hearing dates on January 11, 2024. The Student responded that same day, stating in his response
that in his view he did not believe it necessary to attend the hearing because he was no longer at
the University. The Student was specifically notified of the date of this hearing by emails sent to
the Student’s email address in ROSI on March 8 and 10, 2024.
9.

Based on the evidence before us, we believe that the Student had actual notice of both the

charges and the hearing based on the fact that he responded to the email counsel for the University
sent to the Student’s ROSI email address on January 11, 2024, after the charges had been emailed
to him, and Mr. Wagg’s evidence that someone accessed the Student’s email account on March 9,
2024, the day after the ADFG Office emailed the Student notice of this hearing. While that in
itself does not establish that the Student themselves accessed the account on that day, we infer that
the person accessing the account was the Student, given the Student’s previous response to
counsel’s January 11, 2024 email.
10.

Applying the Rules to the above evidence, the Student had notice of both the Charges and

the date of this hearing. We could therefore proceed to hear and consider the University’s evidence
in the Student’s absence under rule 17 of the Rules.
Merits of the Charges
11.

In support of its position on the merits of the Charges, the University relied on three

affidavits, the affidavits of Maria Wesslén, Monika Havelka and Shay Fuchs.
Professor Wesslén’s Evidence

-712.

Professor Wesslén’s evidence dealt with the charges related to MAT135. Professor

Wesslén is an Associate Professor, Teaching Stream, in the Department of Mathematical and
Computation Science at the University of Toronto Mississauga (“UTM”). Professor Wesslén was
the course coordinator for MAT135 in Fall 2021. MAT135 was an online course. The Student
was a student in it.
13.

The syllabus for MAT135 included a section entitled “Academic Integrity” which

reminded students that the Code continued to apply in the online learning environment. It set out
examples of potential academic offences, including accessing unauthorized resources during
assessments and posting test, essay, or exam questions to message boards or social media:
With regard to remote learning and online courses, UTM wishes to remind students that
they are expected to adhere to the Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters regardless of
the course delivery method. By offering students the opportunity to learn remotely, UTM
expects that students will maintain the same academic honesty and integrity that they would
in a classroom setting. Potential academic offences in a digital context include, but are not
limited to:
•

Accessing unauthorized resources (search engines, chat rooms, Reddit, etc.)
for assessments.

•

Using technological aids (e.g. software) beyond what is listed as permitted in
an assessment.

•

Posting test, essay, or exam questions to message boards or social media.

•

Creating, accessing, and sharing assessment questions and answers in virtual
“course groups.”

•

Working collaboratively, in-person or online, with others on assessments that
are expected to be completed individually.

All suspected cases of academic dishonesty will be investigated following procedures
outlined in the Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters. If you have questions or concerns
about what constitutes appropriate academic behaviour or appropriate research and citation
methods, you are expected to seek out additional information on academic integrity from
your instructor or from other institutional resources.

14.

Students in MAT135 were evaluated on the basis of, among other things, a final exam

-8worth 34% of the final grade in the Course. The exam took place online. Students were required
to upload their exam answers to Crowdmark in scan, photo, or PDF form. Students were permitted
to use certain specified resources and websites when writing the exam. These authorized aids were
limited to resources that had been posted on Quercus by the instructors or Teaching Assistants, a
scientific or graphic calculator, the Course textbook, personal notes related to official Course
material, and certain other websites (namely Crowdmark, DESMOS, Piazza, and Zoom). Students
were prohibited from using any aids outside of these permitted resources.
15.

The exam coversheet included several reminders about academic integrity and the use of

unauthorized aids. The coversheet reminded students that they “may be charged with an academic
offence for possessing any unauthorized aids during the writing of an exam” and that if “during an
exam, [they made] use of any unauthorized aid [they] may be charged with an academic offence.”
The exam coversheet included a specific reminder that it was “NOT OK to use any online
resources other than: Quercus, Crowdmark, OpenStax, Calculus Volume 1, DESMOS, Piazza
(ONLY for making a private post to instructors), Zoom (ONLY for contacting the instructors)”
(emphasis in original). It also reminded students that they were required to complete the exam
independently. Students were instructed that it was “NOT OK to communicate with anyone other
than the instructors during the test” (emphasis in original).
16.

Students writing the exam were required to complete a digital academic integrity

declaration during the exam window. By signing the declaration, students affirmed that their
conduct during the exam adhered to the Code and that they had not and would not act in such a
way that would constitute cheating, misrepresentation, or unfairness, including but not limited to
using unauthorized aids and assistance, impersonating another person, and committing plagiarism.
The Student signed the declaration on December 17, 2021 at 12:39 p.m. and submitted their final

-9exam on that same date.
17.

After the final exam window had closed, the instructor team for MAT135 became aware

that some of the exam questions had been posted to Chegg.com (“Chegg”).

Chegg is a

subscription-based website that allows students to post questions which are then answered by
“experts”. Chegg was not one of the permitted online resources for the exam.
18.

When Professor Wesslén was reviewing the Student’s final exam answers, she discovered

that his answer to question 6 of the exam was strikingly similar to the Chegg solution for question
6, but with certain words removed. In particular, Professor Wesslén noted that:
(a)

the Student’s answer and the Chegg solution used basically identical line breaks
and structure. While the paragraph beginning “when bird is x km from…” was not
in the Student’s answer, the rest of the answers were near identical. The line breaks
in both answers appeared in the same places;

(b)

the diagrams in both answers faced the same way and used the point labels of A, B,
and C. These letters were not given in the question and there was no need for any
labels at all;

(c)

both answers placed the bird at point B, when it should have been at C;

(d)

both answers used “S” to represent distance, but S was not used in the question.
This is unusual, as usually distance is shown with “D” or “d”;

(e)

both answers did identical “pre-work” before starting question 6(a). Most students
began by writing (a) at the top of the page, but both the Student and the Chegg

- 10 solution instead structured their answers by only beginning to directly answer (a)
halfway down the page’
(f)

the solutions contained identical structure in situations where there were several
correct ways to structure their solutions, including: (i) using x for multiplication;
(ii) bringing up the 42 in the numerator, but not simplifying 7x42 as 296; and (iii)
in the same step, simplifying 72+25 to 74;

(g)

both answers used very similar words in the last few lines. The Chegg solution
included the word “at” which appeared to be scribbled out. The Student’s solution
also included the “at”. Similarly, both used the word “so” to start the next line;
and,

(h)

both answers used the same style of skipping conjunctions in the final sentence,
“therefore distance not changing”, rather than the full sentence, “therefore the
distance is not changing”.

19.

Taken as a whole, Professor Wesslén concluded that there were too many similarities

between the Student’s answer and the Chegg solution to be a coincidence. On January 5, 2022,
she therefore sent the Student an email outlining her concerns with the Student’s exam and inviting
the Student to meet with her. She advised the Student that their “solution to Question 6 appears
very similar to a solution found online.”
20.

The Student responded that the question had appeared in their tutoring class before, and

that the teaching assistant had told the class how to solve the problem. Professor Wesslén advised
the Student that someone from the Academic Integrity Unit would be in contact to set up a meeting

- 11 and to provide information on the next steps.
Professor Havelka’s Evidence
21.

Professor Havelka is an Associate Professor, Teaching Stream, in the Department of

Geography, Geomatics and Environment at UTM. She was one of the instructors for ENV100.
Like MAT135, ENV100 was an online course in which the Student was a student. Its syllabus
included the same sections on academic integrity as the syllabus for MAT135.
22.

ENV100 was divided into three thematic modules. At the end of each module, students

were required to complete a test. Each test was worth 10% of the final grade in the Course.
23.

The second test in ENV100 took place on February 17, 2022. The test was administered

remotely, and students were expected to complete the test independently. Students were provided
with a cover sheet for the test in advance so that they could prepare for the test. The cover sheet
for the test included the following declaration and instructions about academic integrity:
Academic Integrity
The University of Toronto Mississauga and you, as a student, share a commitment to
academic integrity.
“In submitting this test, I confirm that my conduct adheres to the Code of Behaviour on
Academic Matters. I confirm that I will NOT act in any way that would constitute
cheating, misrepresentation, or unfairness, include but not limited to, using
unauthorized aids and assistance; impersonating another person; communicating with
anyone during the test for any reason other than logistical or technical problems; and
committing plagiarism.”
Aids Permitted:
During the test, you may consult:
•

The course required textbook (Environment: The Science Behind the Stories
by Withgott et al., 2017 – digital or print version);

•

Course lectures and lecture notes (posted on our Quercus site); and

- 12 •

Your own written notes on the lectures or readings (digital or print), as long
as they only contain your own work, in your own words.

Aids Not Permitted:
•

Do not access any external websites or apps – only our Quercus site, the
textbook, the posted lecture notes, and your own writing notes.

•

Do not communicate with anyone during the test, either in person or
electronically.

•

Do not copy-and-paste or quote directly from lecture notes, the textbook,
or any other source; this will be an academic offence, even if you include
a citation and quotation marks.

We will be looking for YOUR thoughts, words, and ideas in response to these
questions, not ideas from the textbook or notes. If you are reporting on your own
understanding of the course material, in your own words, you should not need to cite a
source. If you do refer specifically to information, data, or a figure from the textbook, you
should include a proper in-text citation (such as Withgott et al., 2017, p. 34).
USING ANY SOURCES OTHER THAN THE ALLOWED AIDS IS A SERIOUS
ACADEMIC OFFENCE
[Emphasis in original]

24.

The test included three scenario-based questions.

Each scenario contained multiple

questions. The questions were a mix of multiple choice and short answer questions. Students
were only required to answer questions for two out of the three scenarios.
25.

The Student submitted their test on February 17, 2022, at 8 p.m. The marking Teaching

Assistants flagged the Student’s test as a potential case of academic misconduct. Once the test
was flagged, Professor Havelka and her co-instructor reviewed the test in greater detail. They
discovered that the Student had answered most of the questions for Scenario 1 in a different
language. Of the five questions for Scenario 1, only question 1, which was a multiple-choice
question, was answered in English. As ENV100 was offered in English, students were not
permitted to answer questions in any other languages. The Student therefore received no marks
for questions 2 to 5 of Scenario 1.

- 13 26.

The Student also chose to answer questions for Scenario 2, which similarly consisted of

one multiple choice question and four short answer questions. The Student answered all of the
questions for Scenario 2 in English, but in doing so used wording that was unusually sophisticated.
In some instances, this wording went beyond the scope of the Course material or what students in
the Course (or in any first-year environmental science course at the University) would be expected
to know. For example, question 4 of Scenario 2 asked the following question:
The interviewer is particularly interested in forest fires. As a forest scientist, you know that
boreal forest ecosystems are fire-adapted. What does this mean? Mention and briefly
explain at least three aspects of fire adaptation in boreal forests. What does it mean when
we say that forest fires can set up a positive feedback cycle, and is this a good thing? (4
marks)

27.

The Student answered the question as follows:
There are many kinds of soil fungi with powerful functions, including saprophytic fungi
that feed on litter and ectomycorrhizal fungi that associate with white birch and Larix
gmelinii. Moreover, the northern forest ecosystem has a strong ability to restore the flora.
After the fire, with the increase of post fire recovery time, the composition of ectophytic
colonies changes sharply and the diversity is also significantly improved.

28.

Professor Havelka’s evidence was that terms and details such as “ectophytic colonies” and

“Larix gmelinii” (i.e., Gmeli larch) were not taught in ENV100 and were not covered in the Course
textbook or notes. The instructors in that course did not discuss changes in the diversity of
saprophytic or ectomycorrhizal fungi in relation to fire adaptation in boreal forests. The Student’s
answer required sophisticated knowledge of boreal forest ecology beyond the scope of the Course
and did not fundamentally answer the question about fire-adaptation in forests.

Professor

Havelka’s evidence was that she would expect a student with this type of sophisticated knowledge
to know that their answer was not responsive to the question asked.

- 14 29.

Upon reviewing the Student’s test answers, she and her co-instructor searched the language

online to determine whether it had been copied from an online source. While they did not find an
exact match for the wording used in the Student’s test, they identified a news article titled “The
post-fire ‘road to reconstruction’ of the subterranean fungal kingdom in the boreal forest” that
contained similar wording. The news article was published on new.qq.com, which is a Chinese
language news website. The English translation of the article included the following sentence
which was similar to the Student’s answer for question 4 of Scenario 2: “Soil fungi are diverse
and powerful, including saprophytic fungi that feed on litter, and ectomycorrhizal fungi that
associate with birch and Xing’an larch” (emphasis added to show similarities).
30.

On March 2, 2022, Professor Havelka and her co-instructor emailed the Student to inform

the Student that they suspected that the Student had obtained unauthorized assistance to complete
the second test. They invited the Student to meet with them to discuss the allegation in greater
detail or, if the Student did not wish to meet, to respond to the allegation in writing. The Student
did not respond to the emails. Professor Havelka and her co-instructor therefore reported the
matter to the Chair of the Department of Geology, Geomatics and Environment.
Professor Fuchs’ Evidence
31.

Professor Fuchs is an Associate Professor, Teaching Stream, in the Department of

Mathematical and Computational Sciences at UTM. He also serves as the Dean’s Designate for
Academic Integrity. In his evidence, Professor Fuchs detailed the Academic Integrity Unit’s
attempts to set up a meeting with the Student, and what happened at the meeting when it took place
on October 4, 2022.

- 15 32.

After explaining the academic misconduct process, reminding them that they did not have

to say anything at the meeting but that anything the Student did say would be recorded, and
explaining the possible sanctions if the Student was found guilty of an academic offence, and the
Student acknowledging that they understood, Professor Fuchs outlined the allegations.
33.

Addressing the allegations with respect to MAT135, Professor Fuchs said that a question

that had been posted online looked similar to an answer on the Student’s final exam and that it
appeared that the Student may have accessed it. The Student said that they had searched for the
answer online, found it, and written it in their test. When Professor Fuchs asked the Student for
the name of the website, the Student said that he was not sure because it was their friend who had
searched for the answer, not them. The Student explained that the friend was their roommate who
attended a different school. When Professor Fuchs asked whether the website was Chegg, the
Student said yes. Professor Fuchs explained that in addition to copying a solution that was not
their own, communicating with another person during the exam was itself an offence. Professor
Fuchs asked the Student why he had communicated with his roommate during the exam and copied
the answer from Chegg. The Student stated that they wanted to get a higher score on the final test
and that when they could not solve the problem, they asked their friend to search for it.
34.

Professor Fuchs asked the Student about the ENV100 allegations. He explained that the

instructor for the course had observed that the answer to one of the questions used complex
sentences and that this answer was found online. Professor Fuchs told the Student that it seemed
that they may have used phrases from a website as their own. The Student responded that ENV100
was an online course and that they had asked someone else to attend the class for them. They said
they had not attended the class. Professor Fuchs asked the Student to confirm that they had not
written the test themselves and that someone else had completed it for them. The Student

- 16 responded “yes”. Professor Fuchs informed the Student that this was a pretty severe academic
offence and that they could not ask someone to do work and pretend it was the Student. He asked
the Student how they pleaded. The Student said “guilty”.
35.

After returning from a short break during which the Student was put into the waiting room,

the Student explained that there may have been something wrong with their earlier explanation.
They explained that they had only asked their friend to do one question on the ENV100 test, not
the whole test. I noted that the Student had said that someone had taken the whole course for them.
The Student clarified that it was “just the test, not the class.” The Student went on to confirm that
someone else had taken the test on their behalf and submitted it on their behalf.
36.

Professor Fuchs informed the Student that having someone else write their test for them

was considered personation, a very serious offence, and indicated that due to the severity of the
offence, he was unable to resolve the MAT135 and ENV100 cases and would be sending the cases
to the Tribunal level for resolution. Professor Fuchs concluded the meeting by emphasizing the
seriousness of the personation allegation in particular. Professor Fuchs advised the Student that it
was very important that they consult a lawyer or law student and that they were eligible for free
legal counsel through Downtown Legal Services. The Student indicated that they understood.
Assessment and Conclusion
37.

Based on the evidence before the Tribunal the Student is guilty of charge one. We agree

with Professor Wesslén that the similarities between the Student’s answer to question 6 of the final
exam in MAT135 to the answer for that question on Chegg is not a coincidence. They are so
similar because the Student must have used the answer posted on Chegg to complete the exam.
Were we in any doubt that the Student had used the Chegg answer to complete their answer on the

- 17 exam, that doubt would have been removed by the Student’s initial admission to Professor Fuchs
that he had searched for the answer online, found it, and then written it in his answer on the exam.
His subsequent statement that it was a friend who had looked up the answer and provided it does
not alter the fact that the Student used an unauthorized aid or obtained unauthorize assistance in
answering the question.
38.

Based on the evidence before the Tribunal the Student is also guilty of charge four of

having someone personate the Student in writing the final exam in ENV100. We accept Professor
Fuchs’ evidence that the Student admitted that they had committed the offence during the Dean’s
Designate meeting between the Student and Professor Fuchs, that the Student had asked a friend
to complete one question of the ENV100 test. We believe that in answering some of Professor
Fuchs’ questions the Student may have been confused, but the Student’s admission that someone
else had written the test for him did not change at any point during the meeting. The finding that
someone else wrote the test is also consistent with Professor Havelka’s evidence about the
sophisticated language in the answer to the second scenario in the test.
39.

Having concluded that the Student was guilty of the first and fourth charges, the University

withdrew charges two, three, five and six.
Sanction
40.

After the Tribunal accepted the Student’s guilty plea on the first of the charges, the hearing

moved into the sanction phase. The University did not adduce any further evidence during this
stage of the proceedings.

- 18 41.

Counsel for the University asked the Tribunal to make an order recommending to the

President of the University that the President recommend to the Governing Council that the
Student be expelled, that the Student be immediately suspended from the University for a period
of up to five years or until the Governing Council makes its decision on expulsion, whichever
came first, the Student receive final grades of zero in each of MAT135 and ENV100, and that the
case be reported to the Provost for publication of a notice of the decision of the Tribunal and the
sanctions imposed, with the name of the Student withheld.
42.

Counsel for the University submitted that personation in itself was a very serious offence,

for which the typical penalty was a recommendation of expulsion. In support of that submission,
she referred to a number of cases including University of Toronto and A.N, (Case No. 663, May 9,
2013), University of Toronto and M.W. (Case No. 585, September 1, 2010), University of Toronto
and Z.G. and M.J.S. (Cases No. 734 and 735, October 2, 2014) and University of Toronto and
D.W. and H.L. (Cases No. 578 and 583, December 16, 2010). In all those cases the students were
found guilty of having someone personate them, or themselves had personated a student on a test
or examination. In each of those cases the Tribunal concluded that recommending expulsion was
the appropriate penalty.
43.

Counsel for the University noted that there were cases in which the Tribunal had imposed

the lesser sanction of a lengthy suspension, but in each of those cases there was one or more
mitigating factors. Examples of such cases include University of Toronto and H.Z. (Case No.
1475, July 17, 2023), University of Toronto and F.Z (Case No. 1243, December 20, 2022) and
University of Toronto and P.L. (Case No. 1211, September 23, 2021). In each of those cases, the
Student admitted their guilt at an early stage, cooperated with the disciplinary process, and offered

- 19 some explanation and displayed some form of remorse for their actions. The Student did none of
those things here.
44.

The factors this Tribunal must consider in deciding what sanction to impose are well

established. The leading case is University of Toronto v Mr. C. (Case No. 1976/1977-3, November
5, 1976) in which, sitting as a member of the Appellate Division of this Tribunal, former Supreme
Court of Canada Justice Sopinka described them this way:
What then are the principles that this Tribunal should follow in dealing with an appeal from
sentence? First, in my opinion, punishment is not intended to be retribution to get even, as
it were, with the student for what he has done. It must serve a useful function. The classical
components of enlightened punishment are reformation, deterrence, and protection of the
public. In applying these criteria, a tribunal should consider all of the following:

45.

(a)

the character of the person charged;

(b)

the likelihood of a repetition of the offence;

(c)

the nature of the offence committed;

(d)

any extenuating circumstances surrounding the commission of the
offence;

(e)

the detriment to the University occasioned by the offence;

(f)

the need to deter others from committing a similar offence.

Considering each of the above factors, the sanction the University seeks is appropriate.
(a)

Character:

The Student chose not to participate in the disciplinary process

including the hearing before us. As such, the only evidence of character we have
are the acts themselves and the Student’s decision not to participate in the
disciplinary process. Both the acts and the decision not to participate tend to
support a recommendation for expulsion rather than any lesser penalty.

- 20 (b)

Likelihood of Repetition: The fact that the Student had someone personate them
in ENV100, only about a month after Professor Wesslén emailed the Student about
her concerns with the Student’ answers to the test in MAT135, leads us to conclude
that there is a high risk of repetition if we do not impose a significant sanction.

(c)

Nature of the Offence: Using an unauthorized aid to assist oneself in writing a test
or exam is a serious offence. Personation is an even more serious offence, meriting
a serious sanction.

(d)

Extenuating Circumstances:

There is no evidence of any extenuating

circumstances.
(e)

Detriment to the University: Honesty and integrity form part of the University’s
core values. Few actions are more dishonest and display a lack of integrity than
having someone take an examination for oneself. It cannot be tolerated. As such,
this factor weighs in favour of a serious sanction.

(f)

Deterrence:

A serious sanction will send the message to students that

impersonation is not tolerated at the University. As such, as a matter of general
deterrence, the Tribunal ought to impose a serious sanction, consistent with those
imposed by past Tribunals.
46.

Taking all of the above into consideration, we have concluded that the penalty requested

by counsel for the University is the appropriate sanction in this case.
Order

- 21 47.

For the reasons set out above, the Tribunal orders that:
(a)

the hearing may proceed in the absence of the Student;

(b)

the Student is guilty of knowingly using or possessing an unauthorized aid or aids
or obtaining unauthorized assistance in connection with the final exam in
MAT135H5, contrary to section B.I.1(b) of the Code;

(c)

the Student is guilty of knowingly having someone personate them during an online
test in ENV100Y5, contrary to section B.!.1(c) of the Code ;

(d)

the following sanctions shall be imposed on the Student:
(i)

the Tribunal recommends to the President of the University that the
President recommend to the Governing Council that the Student be expelled
from the University;

(ii)

the Student shall be immediately suspended from the University for a period
of up to five years from April 17, 2024, or until the Governing Council
makes its decision on expulsion, whichever comes first, and a
corresponding notation shall be placed on the Student’s academic record
and transcript;

(iii)

the Student shall receive a final grade of zero in MAT135H5; and

(iv)

the Student shall receive a final grade of zero in ENV100Y5;

- 22 (e)

the case be reported to the Provost for publication of a notice of the Tribunal’s
decision and the sanctions imposed, with the Student’s name withheld.

Dated at Toronto at this 16th day of August, 2024.
Original signed by:
_______________________
Seumas Woods, Chair
On behalf of the Panel

