Report 379

DATE:

   July 27, 2015

PARTIES:

   Ms. P.M. (the Student) v. the School of Graduate Studies (SGS)

Hearing Date(s):

   June 29, 2015

Committee Members:

   Ms. Renu Mandhane, Chair
   Professor Salvatore Spadafora
   Mr. Ben Coleman

Secretary:

   Mr. Christopher Lang, Director, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty
   Grievances

Appearances:

For the Student Appellant:

   Ms. P.M., the Appellant (‚the Student‚)
   Ms. Nicole Wilkinson, Ms. Tegan O‚Brien, and Ms. Sherice Annis,
   Downtown Legal Services

For the SGS:

   Professor Luc de Nil and Ms. Kendra Hawke, SGS
   Professor Brent Sleep, Department of Civil Engineering
   Ms. Lily Harmer, Paliare Roland Rosenberg Rothstein LLP, Counsel for
   the SGS

   Request for late withdrawal without academic penalty from one Course.
   The Student faced a number of personal and familial difficulties while
   she was enrolled in the Course. The Student filed a petition with her
   Department‚s Graduate Departmental Academic Appeals Committee when she
   learned that her failures could result in termination from her program.
   The GDAAC denied the petition because the Student‚s distress was not
   documented by a medical certificate. The Student then appealed to the
   Graduate Academic Appeals Board. The GAAB also denied the Student‚s
   petition, noting that the Student‚s circumstances did not change after
   the drop date, and that the Student had not provided any documentation
   of any unanticipated circumstances that affected her performance in the
   Course.

   The Student then appealed to the Academic Appeals Committee. The
   Committee accepted that the Student was distressed by her family
   situation and that her academic performance was likely affected, but
   concluded that the circumstances were insufficient to merit the
   extraordinary remedy of late withdrawal without academic penalty. The
   Committee emphasized that the remedy of late withdrawal without
   academic penalty is an extraordinary remedy, reserved for rare
   situations where unexpected circumstances arise after the drop date,
   where pre-existing circumstances significantly worsen or where
   pre-existing circumstances that were reasonably expected to abate do
   not. The Student did not file sufficient medical or psychological
   evidence to support the finding that her situation became unexpectedly
   more difficult after the drop date. The Committee also noted that even
   if it were to accept the Student‚s characterization of the events as a
   significant deterioration of existing circumstances, it would have
   expected her to reach out to someone within the University to discuss
   her situation well before the exam, or at least immediately afterwards.
   Appeal dismissed.
   [1]View Report

References

   1. file:///media/12623
