Report 368

DATE:

   October 15, 2013

PARTIES:

   Mr. J.B. (the Student) v. the Faculty of Law

Hearing Date(s):

   June 4, 2013

Committee Members:

   Mr. Tad Brown, Chair
   Dr. Sarita Verma
   Mr. Chirag Variawa

Secretary:

   Mr. Christopher Lang, Director, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty
   Grievances

Appearances:

For the Student Appellant:

   Mr. J.B., the Appellant (‚the Student‚)

For the Faculty of Law:

   Professor Ian Lee, Associate Dean, Faculty of Law

   Request to change a grade on the Student‚s transcript from ‚B‚ to
   ‚Credit.‚ In particular, the Student disputed whether the issuance of a
   Statement of Grades ‚ an unofficial transcript which is used
   extensively by prospective employers looking to hire students for
   summer positions ‚ was appropriate when combined with the application
   of the Faculty of Law‚s policy which does not allow an appeal of those
   grades until the end of the academic year. Student originally sought to
   appeal his C+ assignment grade from the first term, but was denied
   because of the Faculty‚s policy that an appeal can only be brought
   against a final grade in a course and not against an individual
   assignment grade. The Student‚s final grade in the Course was a B. The
   Student asked the professor to re-assess his grade in the Course by
   re-assessing his grade on the first assignment. The professor confirmed
   the original grade.

   Student then submitted a petition to the Academic Standing Committee
   seeking a change in his final grade from B to CR, accompanied by a
   notation explaining that the Faculty of Law failed to adhere to its
   administrative duties and that this failure had a negative effect on
   the Student‚s performance, along with a letter of Apology from the
   Faculty. The ASC denied the petition, stating that it was not satisfied
   that the actions complained about actually prejudiced the Student‚s
   performance.

   Student then appealed to the Appeals Committee of the Faculty of Law.
   The Appeals Committee dismissed the appeal, noting that the Faculty‚s
   policies permit the invocation of the appeal process for final grades
   only, and not for partial evaluations, reflecting the Faculty‚s
   position on a number of important considerations. The Appeals Committee
   noted that by objecting to the absence of a ‚timely‚ appeal, the
   Student was not merely appealing a grade, but rather appealing the
   Faculty‚s policy as not providing a timely process. The Appeals
   Committee concluded that there was no unfairness or unreasonableness in
   the manner in which the policy was applied to the Student, and noted
   that to change Faculty policy would be inappropriate and undesirable
   given the narrow scope of this single complaint.

   Student then appealed to the Committee. In dispute was whether the
   application of the Faculty‚s policy to only allow an appeal from a
   final course grade and not directly from an individual assignment grade
   caused the Student prejudice which warranted granting one or more of
   the remedies requested by the Student. The Committee noted that its
   role is to review the application of Faculty policies and to ensure
   that they are applied fairly, reasonably and consistently, and not to
   change Faculty policy. The Committee found that the Faculty of Law‚s
   policy on appeals was applied fairly and reasonably, and also that the
   Faculty‚s policy of not allowing appeals until the final grade has been
   issued is not inconsistent with the policies of the University. The
   Committee concluded that there was no justification for the requested
   remedy of replacing the mark for the Course on the Student‚s transcript
   or for requiring a letter of apology from the Faculty. Appeal
   dismissed.
   [1]View Report

References

   1. file:///media/12606
