THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
THE GOVERNING COUNCIL
Report #368 of the Academic Appeals Committee
October 15, 2013
To the Academic Board
University of Toronto
Your Committee reports that it held a hearing on Tuesday June 4, 2013 at which the
following members were present:
Mr. Tad Brown, Chair
Dr. Sarita Ve1ma
Mr. Chirag Variawa
S ecretary: Mr. Christopher Lang, Director, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty
Grievances

Appearances
For the Student Appellant:

Mr. ~ ~' the Student
For the University of Toronto Faculty of Law:
Professor Ian Lee, Associate Dean, Faculty of Law

The Appeal
The Student is appealing a decision of the Appeal Committee of the Faculty of Law dated
November 22, 2012. The decision of the Appeal Committee of the Faculty of Law
dismissed an appeal by the Student of the decision of Academic Standing Committee of
the Faculty of Law dated June 2012 in which the student petitioned to change a grade on
his transcript for the first year Criminal Law course (LAW124Yl) (the "Course") from a
letter grade to a grade of "Credit" accompanied by an explanatory note indicating that the
Faculty of Law had failed to adhere to its administrative obligations. The student has
also petitioned that the Faculty provide him with a letter of apology that would include a
brief plan on how the Faculty intends to prevent such administrative deficiencies in the
future. The issue originated from the Student's concern with the mark received on the

first assignment in the Criminal Law course and his request that the assignment grade be
omitted from a Statement of Grades on first term tests and assignment which the Faculty
issues to first-year students early in the second tenn.
In the written Statement of Appeal, the Student has reiterated his request that the
following remedies be applied (1) the Faculty of Law issue a letter of apology to him
acknowledging that it failed to adhere to its administrative obligations and (2) the Faculty
change the final grade on the Student's transcript for the Course from a letter grade to a
grade of "Credit". In the hearing the Student also requested as further remedies that the
Faculty of Law pursue one of the following three options: (1) cease publishing the
Statement of Grades to first year law students after the first term, (2) move a semester
system, or (3) provide the option for an appeal of interim marks so that marks under
appeal would be noted on the Statement of Grades.

In the Student's first year small group class, the Course, students were required to write a
series of assignments and one of these is due in the first term. The Student received a C+
on his first assignment. His professor initiated a meeting with the Student to discuss this
assignment. However the Student was still not satisfied with the professor's explanation
of the grade. At the core of the discussion was whether the Student had answered the
assignment as instructed. In the Student's view, there was a problem because there were
no written instructions but only verbal instructions in class as to the assignment.
The Student sought to appeal his assignment grade but learned of the Faculty of Law's
policy that an appeal can only be brought against a final grade in a course and not against
an individual assignment grade. In first year full year courses this means at the end of the
academic year. The Student then requested that the assignment grade be omitted from a
Statement of Grades on first term tests and assignments which the Faculty issues to first
year students early in the second term. This Statement of Grades may be used by the
students for a number of purposes including applications for summer jobs at the end of
first year. The Faculty initially refused this request. However, after a few repeated
requests by the Student, the Faculty reconsidered their position and agreed to provide the
Student with a Statement of Grades omitting the disputed assignment grade. The
Student's final grade in the Course was B.
On June 22, 2012, the Student asked the professor to re-assess his grade in the Course by
re-assessing his grade on the first assignment which is the first required step under the
Faculty's appeal policy. The professor confirmed the original grade and provided written
reasons for his decision. The Student did not pursue a further appeal of his grade.

Previous Decisions
On June 15, 2012, the Student submitted a petition seeking a change in his grade in the
Course from B to CR. The Student further requested a notation on his transcript

explaining that "the Faculty of Law failed in its obligations to provide appropriate
procedures to resolve disputes in the course and that this failure is recognized as having
had a negative effect on [the Student's] performance" and a letter of apology from the
Faculty. The Faculty submitted the petition to the Academic Standing Committee
("ASC"). On June 22, 2012, the ASC denied the petition stating that it was "was not
satisfied that the actions complained about actually prejudiced [the Student's]
performance.
The Student appealed the ASC's denial of his petition to the Appeal Committee of the
Faculty of Law. The Appeals Committee dismissed the appeal. In the written decision,
the Appeals Committee stated that "the Faculty's Policies permits the invocation of the
appeal process for final grades awarded upon course completion but not for component
partial evaluations as they come along and prior to the final grade as approved by the
Faculty. This policy reflects, in our view, the Faculty's position on a number of
important considerations of both principle and pragmatics. So, what happened here, in
this Committee's view, is that the prime objection of the student became just the absence
of such a right to a "timely" appeal. But, as the student correctly pointed out, this is not a
matter of a grade appeal-it is a matter of objecting to the Faculty's policy as not providing
a timely process."
The Appeals Committee concluded that there was no unfairness or unreasonableness in
the manner in which this policy was applied to the Student. It stated that "Taking grades
out of play on the basis that there is a complaint or appeal that has not been processed is
not part of the Faculty's policy. There is no "interim remedy" to be granted on the basis
that an appeal will or may be launched later. A grade is not subject because an appeal
has been launched or may be coming. To demand as a remedy in this case such a change
in policy is not possible given our mandate. Nor would we want to change that policy via
the narrow scope of this single complaint and the narrow and non-participatory nature of
this adjudicative process. To change Faculty policy on this point would be a "big deal".
The right process for these changes lies elsewhere and involves a debate about the many
substantive and pragmatic issues any change would entail- none of which have been, or
should discussed in this appeal."

Decision

The facts of this appeal are not in dispute between the parties. What is disputed by the
Student is whether the application of the Faculty's policy to only allow an appeal from a
final course grade and not directly from an individual assignment grade causes the
Student prejudice which warrants granting of one or more of the remedies requested by
the Student. In particular, the Student questions whether the provision to first-year
students of a Statement of Grades early in the second term which is used extensively by
prospective employers looking to hire students for summer positions is appropriate when
combined with the application of this policy which does not allow an appeal of those
grades until the end of the academic year.

The Terms of Reference for the Academic Appeals Committee sets out in section 2(a)(i)
the jurisdiction of Your Committee as "to hear and consider appeals made by students
against decisions of faculty, college or school councils (or committees thereof in the
application of academic regulations and requirements." [emphasis added] The role of
Your Committee is to review the application of Faculty policies and to ensure that they
applied fairly, reasonably and consistently. Your Committee finds that in this case the
Faculty of Law's policy on appeals was applied fairly and reasonably. Your Committee
also finds that the Faculty of Law's policy of not allowing appeals until the final grade
has been issued is not inconsistent with the policies of the University.
As set out in the decision of the Appeals Committee of the Faculty of Law, the review of
Faculty policy is a complicated matter which requires broad input and analysis of the
various issues and outcomes. It is outside the jurisdiction of this Committee to change
Faculty policy. As set out in section 5 (iii) of the University Policy on Academic
Appeals within Divisions, "The Office of the Provost is responsible for monitoring the
implementation of divisional appeals processes that are in compliance with this Policy.
The Office of the Provost is also responsible for facilitating a periodic review of
divisional processes for consistency to the Policy, for facilitating effective
communication of the Policy and divisional processes, and for conveying information to
the divisions about suggested best practices." If there is to be a review of the Faculty
policy in question, the responsibility falls with the Office of the Provost.
Your Committee was also presented with detailed submissions on the history, purpose
and format of the Statement of Grades which is issued to first year students in the Faculty
of Law early in the second term. The Faculty of Law started issuing Statement of Grades
a number of years ago after a debate and decision by the Faculty Council. Previously the
results of first term tests were issued informally which the Faculty submitted resulted in
cases of misrepresentation by students in years past. As a result, the Faculty began
issuing the formal Statement of Grades which included the crest, seal and signature of the
Faculty. The form of the Statement of Grades contains a number of notations and
disclaimers including the following statements:
"Except for Legal Process, which is a final grade, this is a statement of instructorreported grades for FIRST TERM TESTS. First term tests are practice tests,
administered primarily for pedagogical purposes."
"However, if it is to the student's advantage, they will count towards the student's
final grade. Final grades for these courses will be issued and approved after the
end of the academic year."
While the Statement of Grades does not explicitly state that the final marks may be
appealable, it does state in bold letters that "This is not an official transcript." For
privacy reasons, one hard copy of the Statement of Grades is issued and available to be
picked up by each student. While the Statement of Grades is required for many summer
job positions, it is the student's sole decision as to whether and to whom to distribute the

Statement of Grades. The Faculty reported that many students do not collect their
Statement of Grades.
Therefore, your Committee finds that so long as the Statement of Grades is issued with
clarity of purpose and intent, which the current format does, then it is a policy decision of
the Faculty of Law as to whether to issue the Statement of Grades. As acknowledged by
the Student, issuing of the Statement of Grades is a policy decision of the Faculty which
requires balancing a number of goals. Again, it is not the jurisdiction of this Committee
to change Faculty policy but rather ensure that it is applied fairly and consistently.
On the issue of whether written instructions were required for the assignment which was
the subject of the dispute in this case, Your Committee finds that while providing written
instructions may be best practice, they are not required. In this case, there was no
evidence to support the conclusion that there were deficiencies or confusion in the verbal
instructions provided.
Your Committee finds that the Faculty applied its policies fairly and reasonably and
therefore there is no justification for the requested remedy by the Student of replacing the
mark for the Course on the Student's transcript from B to "Credit". Similarly, there is no
justification or jurisdiction for Your Committee to require a letter of apology from the
Faculty.
The appeal is dismissed.

