Report 297

DATE:

   May 9, 2005

PARTIES:

   Ms. P (the Student) v. OISE/UT

Hearing Date(s):

   April 26, 2005

Committee Members:

   Prof. Emeritus Ralph Scane, Chair
   Prof. Clare Beghtol
   Mrs. Shari Graham Fell
   Mr. Stefan Neata
   Prof. Ian McDonald

Secretary:

   Mr. Andrew Drummond

In Attendance:

For the Appellant:

   Ms. K. Roach (Counsel)
   Ms. P. (the Student)

For OISE/UT:

   Ms. R. Cambell (Counsel)
   Ms. L. Cowin
   Mr. J. Mazurek

   Request to repeat the second practicum session. The Student failed the
   first and second practicum sessions and therefore failed the year in
   the B.Ed programme.Â  The Student claimed that her performance was
   adversely affected by her diabetes, which was diagnosed part way
   through the course, and that there was a lack of procedural fairness in
   her assessment, as the Associate teacher evaluating her discovered
   halfway through the practicum session that the Student had failed the
   earlier practicum session. The Committee considered the Studentâs
   medical condition and found that her classroom skills were adversely
   affected by the effects of her illness and that her supervisors did not
   have the opportunity to consider or take steps to mitigate these
   effects. The Committee found that had the Student not been suffering
   from the fatigue associated with diabetes, she may have been able to
   pass the practicum. The Committee considered the allegation of bias and
   found that the Associate teacher was aware that the Student had failed
   the first practicum session, and that as per the Divisional Appeals
   Committee Decision, there should always be two independent assessments
   of a teacher candidate. The Committee stated that it is not necessary
   for the Student to prove, or for the Committee to find, that bias
   actually existed and entered into the decision to fail the Student in
   order to allow the appeal. The appropriate test approved by courts is
   âwhether a reasonably informed bystander could reasonably perceive bias
   on the part of the adjudicator.â The Committee stated that an
   adjudicatorâs knowledge of a previous failure might positively
   predispose the adjudicator to finding negative factors to justify
   failing the student again and discourage him or her from advancing
   positive arguments in favour of the student as forcefully as he or she
   might otherwise do. In addition to the Associate teacher, the Committee
   found that the faculty advisor in the second practicum was also the
   faculty advisor in the first practicum. The Committee found that the
   combination of these two sources of possible bias, operating in the
   assessment of a student whose then relevant skills would not provide
   much margin over a minimum pass and which were adversely affected by
   her illness, met the threshold test for reasonable apprehension of
   bias. A minority of the Committee found that, but for the effects of
   the illness on the Studentâs performance, she would still not have been
   able to overcome the defects in her classroom performance and that the
   flaws in the Studentâs performance during the second practicum were
   already a matter of serious concern before the Studentâs failure in the
   first practicum became known. Appeal allowed. The Committee ordered
   that the failure in the second practicum be vacated and that the
   Student have the opportunity to repeat the practicum during the next
   round. The Committee stated its concern regarding the Facultyâs appeal
   process which does not allow a student appealing a failed first
   practicum to continue to the second until the appeal is determined. The
   Committee stated that it did not wish to form a conclusion on the
   matter but recommended that the process be reconsidered because it
   appears to create a financial disincentive to the exercise of a right
   to appeal.
   [1]View Report

References

   1. file:///media/12657
