UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
GOVERNING COUNCIL
REPORT NUMBER 297 OF THE ACADEMIC APPEALS COMMITTEE
May 9, 2005

Your Committee reports that it held a hearing on Tuesday, April 26, 2005, at which the following
members were present:
Professor Emeritus Ralph Scane, Chair
Professor Clare Beghtol
Mrs. Shari Graham Fell
Mr. Stefan Neat a
Professor Ian McDonald
Secretary: Mr. Andrew Drummond
In Attendance:
For the Appellant:
Ms. K. Roach (Counsel)
Ms. P (The Student)
For Ontario Institute for Studies in Education of the University of Toronto (OISE/UT):

Ms R. Campbell (Counsel)
Ms. L. Cowin
Mr. J. Mazurek
This is an appeal from the decision of the Divisional Appeal Committee of OISE/UT, dated
December 5, 2002, which dismissed an appeal from the decision of the Appeals Standing
Committee dated July 11, 2002. The latter decision dismissed a petition from the Student to be
allowed to repeat the second practicum session, taken in the Winter Term of 2002, which she had
failed. As the Student had also failed the practicum session taken in the Fall Term of 2001, this
resulted in failure of her year in the B.Ed programme.
The Student entered the B .Ed/Ontario College of Teachers Certificate of Qualification
programme in the Fall Term of 200 l. ln that and the following term, she successfully completed
the required course work. However, to obtain the degree and certificate, a candidate must also
successfully complete two practicum sessions, one in each term. It is OISE/UT policy that, if a
student fails the first practicum session, but passes the second, the student will be permitted to
repeat the earlier session to attempt to pass it. However, if both practicums are failed on the first

2

attempt, the student is not permitted to repeat either, but fails the year. As the Student did not
appeal the failure of the earlier practicum, the failure in that practicum session was not before
your Committee, and must stand.
Before your Committee, the Student requested relief from her failure in the second practicum on
two grounds:
(1) her performance was adversely affected by an illness, diabetes, which was only
diagnosed part way through that course;
(2) there was a lack of procedural fairness in her assessment, in that the classroom teacher
who was evaluating her discovered about half way through the practicum session that the Student
had failed the earlier practicum session.
With respect to the medical condition, the Student was told in January, 2002, that diabetes was
suspected, and a diagnosis of "mild diabetes mellitus" was made in mid-March, 2002. The
Student had visited her doctor because of her feeling of fatigue and stress. Her supervisors in the
second practicum were not advised of this problem until two or three days before it ended, so had
no opportunity to consider or take any steps designed to mitigate <he effects of the illness.
However, as a result of her mid-point evaluations, her faculty supervisor and the classroom
teacher had reduced her load somewhat. The Student's complaints of unusual fatigue during the
second practirnm are corroborated to some extent by the Swnmative Evaluation r!f' Field
Experience Elementary, completed by the classroom teacher, or Associate. She commented,
"[The Student's I interaction with students showed caring but lacked enthusiasm. She became
stressed and extremely tired in the course of the three weeks of teaching." Fatigue is a known
possible consequence of diabetes that is not well controlled. The stress element may have been
in large part a result of worries over criticisms of her performance in the practicums, but it also
may have been added to substantially by the Student's concerns over her symptoms, and her
doctor's suggestion, in January, 2002 that she might be diabetic.
With respect to the perception of bias, the Student gave evidence that, on the last day of the
second practicum, the Associate teacher told her that she, the Associate, had known for about
two weeks of the Student's failure in the first practicum. OISE/UT did not seek to refute this
allegation by the Student, although it was aware of it from previous levels of appeal.
Accordingly, your Committee accepts that the allegation is factually correct. The Divisional
Appeal Committee of OISE/UT did not comment on this matter in its reasons, but the Appeals
Standing Committee did comment that "the associate teacher in the second practicum should not
have known about the first failed practicum since there should always be two independent
assessments of a teacher candidate". However, neither of the two lower appeal committees found
the grounds relied upon sufficiently compelling to grant the appeal.
In considering the allegation that there was a sufficient perception of bias to require that the
decision in question be vitiated, your Committee understands that it is not necessary for the
Student to prove, or your Committee to find that bias actually existed and entered into the
decision to fail the Student in the second practirnm in order to give effect to this ground of
appeal. A test approved by the courts is, "whether a reasonably informed bystander could

3

reasonably perceive bias on the part of an adjudicator."
In the assessment of the two grounds of appeal, your Committee is divided. The view of the
minority is that neither individually nor cumulatively do the facts applicable to these grounds
justify allowing the appeal. The minority does not believe that, but for the effects of the
Student's diabetes on her performance, she would have been able to sufficiently overcome the
defects in her classroom performance, and in particular of her performance when dealing with the
class as an entirety, which concerned the Associate teacher and her Faculty advisor, and resulted
in a failure. Nor does the minority consider that the test for perception of bias was met here. The
flaws in her classroom performance during the second practicum were a matter of serious
concern by the time of the mid-point evaluation, when the knowledge of the failure in the earlier
practicum first came to the Associate teacher.
The majority of your Committee finds that both grounds are operative here, and at least
cumulatively justify granting relief to the Student. The majority considers that, at the best, the
classroom skills of the Student at the time in question were marginal, and the results of the
illness would adversely affect them. If this ground of appeal stood alone, the majority, or some
of it, might have come to the same final conclusion as the minority. However, the majority notes
that the evaluation was by no means totally negative, and cannot dismiss the possibility that, had
the Student been able to muster more vigour, the Associate teacher might have been able to
persuade herself that the Student had edged past the required threshold. It is here that the issue of
possible bias comes in. A decision to fail a student is one which few teachers mTive at without
great regret, except in the most obvious cases, and it is seldom made without reconsidering to
ensure that everything which might be put forward in the student's favour has been fully weighed.
The danger of knowing that the student has previously failed in the same subject matter is not
only that the assessor might be positively predisposed to find negative factors to justify failing
the student again, but more insidiously, might unconsciously be discouraged from trying harder
to find positive reasons to raise the student to a pass. In addition to the knowledge of the
Associate teacher, the faculty advisor in the second practicum was also the faculty advisor in the
earlier one, and necessarily knew the result of the first during the second. Your Committee was
told that this situation is uncommon, but is sometimes necessitated by the logistical problems
encountered in supervising a large number of teacher candidates spread geographically over a
wide area. The possibility of bias operating unconsciously here is similar. While it is the
responsibility of the Associate teacher to make the pass/fail decision, the faculty advisor consults
and mediates in problem areas. Again, knowledge of a previous failure might discourage a
person in that position from advancing positive arguments in favour of the student as forcefully
as he or she might otherwise do. The majority of your Committee finds that the combination of
these two sources of possible bias, operating in the assessment of a student whose then relevant
skills \vould not provide much margin over a minimum pa,s at best, and which were to some
extent adversely affected by her illness, does meet the threshold test for reasonable apprehension
of bias, and requires relief.
The appeal is allowed. The failure in the second practicum is vacated, and the Student shall have
an opportunity to repeat it during the next round of practicums. If the Student fails the retry

4

hereby allowed her, her failure in the year will be confirmed. If the Student achieves a pass on
the retry, then, in accordance with what your Committee was advised was the normal practice at
OISE/UT, she will be afforded an opportunity to retry the failed first practicum. If she passes
that, she may proceed to her degree. If she fails that, again her failure in the year will be
confirmed. Before the practicum is retried, the University's Accessibility Office should be
consulted to advise as to whether accommodation for the diabetes is now required.
On a further matter, your Committee is concerned with an aspect of the appeal process at
OISE/UT as it concerns practicums. OISE/UT was not asked to be prepared to discuss this, and
your Committee therefore does not wish to form a conclusion on the matter at this time. Your
Committee was told that, where students fail the first practicum, and are considering an appeal,
they are often advised not to appeal, but to proceed to the second, and, if they pass that, they will
be given chance to repeat the first. The reason for giving this advice is that, except for the very
first level of appeal, it is almost impossible in practice to complete higher levels of appeal,
should such be necessary, before the second round of practicums starts. If a failed first practicum
is under appeal, the student is not allowed to continue to the second until the appeal is finally
determined. This in turn means that even if the student is finally successful on the appeal, she or
he may suffer a serious delay in graduating and qualifying for a teaching certificate. This appears
to create a powerful financial disincentive to the exercise of a right of appeal. Your Committee
recommends that the process be reconsidered in this light.

Andrew Drummond, Acting Secretary

33945

Ralph Scane, Chair

