Report 421

DATE:

   July 4, 2023

PARTIES:

   S.R.K. ("the Student"). v. the Toronto School of Theology

HEARING DATE(S):

   This appeal was conducted on the basis of written submissions.

Senior chair:

   Professor Hamish Stewart

APPEARANCES:

FOR THE STUDENT APPELLANT:

   The Student

FOR THE Toronto SCHOOL OF THEOLOGY

   Catherine Fan, Paliare Roland Rosenberg Rothstein LLP

   The Student appeals to the Committee regarding the manner in which the
   Toronto School of Theology (‚TST‚) conducted her third comprehensive
   examination.

   The Student was enrolled in the Doctor of Theology (ThD) program in
   2012. She successfully completed her course work and language
   requirements, with the next step being to pass three comprehensive
   exams. The focus of this case is on the third exam of the comprehensive
   exams which is an analytic or comprehensive essay with an oral defence
   of the essay. The minimum passing mark was B+ (77%) and according to
   the ThD handbook, a student who fails to attain the minimum grade in
   any of the comprehensive exams on the first attempt may take a
   supplementary examination with a maximum of two supplementary
   examinations.

   The Student received a B on both the first and second comprehensive
   exam, and a B- on the analytic essay. However, the Student had not
   orally defended the essay. The TST posited that there was no purpose in
   continuing to the oral defence as there was no possibility the Student
   could pass, given that she had failed all three comprehensive exams and
   could only take two supplementary examinations. She was withdrawn from
   the program.

   The Student appealed to the TST‚s Graduate Studies Council Academic
   Appeals Committee (GSCAAC), and her appeal was dismissed. She appealed
   the GSCAAC‚s decision to the Committee on several grounds, but the
   Committee only accepted the following ground: given that the third
   comprehensive exam had an oral defence and analytic essay it was
   unreasonable to interpret the relevant policy as preventing the Student
   from proceeding to the defence. The Student was provided with the
   remedy in Report 413 of being allowed back to the ThD program for a
   minimum of one full semester and would receive an overall grade to the
   third examination after the oral defence.

   In 2021, the Student was informed she had received a B- on the analytic
   essay and its defence. Due to having failing marks on all three
   comprehensive exams, she was ineligible for supplemental examinations.
   The Student was told she would be withdrawn from the ThD program
   effective November 18, 2021. Professor Billet stated that if the
   Student believed the remedy was not properly implemented, she may wish
   to look for further redress from the AAC and that if she believed the
   ThD regulations were not correctly applied, she still had the right to
   make an appeal through the channels of recourse listed in the ThD
   handbook.

   The Student appeals to the Committee on the basis that the TST did not
   properly implement the remedy in Report 413. One of the remedies the
   Student seeks includes re-doing the analytic essay and defence with
   different but relevant examiners. The Senior Chair attempted to arrange
   a conference with both parties but due to unexpected difficulties the
   parties were invited to make written submissions regarding whether the
   Committee had jurisdiction. The Student submitted that the appeal
   continues off the previous appeal while the TST submitted that while
   the Committee has jurisdiction over the meaning of the remedy ordered
   the Committee had no jurisdiction to grant the remedies sought by the
   Student and should dismiss the appeal for want of jurisdiction,
   pursuant to section 3.1.7 of the AAC‚s Terms of Reference .

   The Student raised three grounds of appeal. The first was that five
   days were given to her for writing the analytic essay due to the
   confusing administration. Second, when the Student was taking the oral
   examination, she was in a serious mental crisis caused by unsent and
   falsely written report by the examiner that was found in the academic
   appeal process. Third, the Student was forced to take the oral defence
   with the examiner the Student had the serious stress with. The
   Committee finds that with respect to the first reason, the appeal does
   not concern the implementation of the remedy. As for the second and
   third grounds, there is nothing granted in the remedy in Report 413
   that implies the oral defence should be examined by examiners other
   than those who read the analytic essay. Should the Student want to
   argue that there were procedural flaws in the administration of the
   oral defence, the proper venue is an appeal to the GSCAAC.

   The Senior Chair finds that the remedy granted by the Committee in
   Report 413 was implemented according to its terms. The appeal is
   quashed.
   [1]View Report

References

   1. file:///media/30611
