FILE: 2004/05-05

UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
TRIAL DIVISION
Members of the Panel:
Julie K. Hannaford, Co-Chair
Stephane Mechoulan, Faculty Panel Member
Tina Wong, Student Panel Member

IN THE MATTER of the University of Toronto Act, 1971, S.O. 1971, c. 56, as
amended;

AND IN THE MATTER of the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic
Matters, 1995;
AND IN THE MATTER of disciplinary charges against Mr. Z.

Jenn(f"er Krotz, Downtown Legal Services, for the accused

Lily I. Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel, for the University

Witnesses:

Tim Hutchinson, Archivist, University of Saskatchewan
Joe Cox, Librarian, Faculty of Information Studies
Joan Cherry, Vice-Dean, Faculty of Information Studies
FIS student
C. Z., accused

c:.i I.11,

BACKGROUND

fl]

A hearing of the Trial Division of the University Tribunal was convened at 5:00
p.m. on Monday, October 25, 2004 in the Council Chamber, Simcoe Hall, to consider the
following charges brought under the Code (1" Behaviour on Academic Matters, 1995
against Mr. Z. by letter dated July 25, 2002 from the Provost, Professor Vivek Goel:

32361 v.2

IN THE MATTER of Disciplinary Charges Against Z.
1. On or about March 10, 2004, you knowingly represented as your own, an idea
or expression of an idea, and/or work of another in connection with a form of
academic work, namely, Assignment #3 on the topic of Speech Application
Language Tags (SALT), an assignment that you submitted with
to
fulfill the course requirements of FIS-2178, contrary to Section B .I. l ( d) of the
Code of Behavior on Academic Matters, 1995 ("Code"). Pursuant to Section B
of the Code you are deemed to have acted knowingly if you ought reasonably
to have known that you represented as your own, an idea or expression of an
idea or work of another.

ca.

2. In the alternative, on or about March 10, 2004, you knowingly engaged in a
form of cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or
misrepresentation in order to obtain academic credit or other academic
advantage of any kind in an assignment submitted to fulfill course
requirements in FIS- 2178 contrary to Section B.I.3(b) of the Code. Pursuant
to Section B of the Code you are deemed to have acted knowingly if you
ought reasonably to have known that you engaged in any form of cheating,
academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or misrepresentation in order to
obtain academic credit or other academic advantage of any kind.
When the hearing commenced on October 25, 2004, Mr. Z., for whom English is
a second language, appeared on his own behalf. The panel quickly became concerned
with Mr. Z.'s ability to understand the proceedings and effectively represent himself
because of his obvious difficulties with English. The panel was advised that, but for
these charges, Mr. Z. was otherwise eligible to graduate and that there was a pending
convocation on November 17, 2004. Mr. Z. therefore expressed his desire that the
proceedings should continue and the University was content to proceed at that time as
well. Notwithstanding the positions of the accused and the University, the panel, of its
own motion, adjourned the hearing until November 4, 2004 to enable Mr. Z. to seek legal
advice and representation.

[2]

[3]
When the proceeding resumed on November 4, 2004, Ms. Jennifer Krotz, of
Downtown Legal Services, appeared on behalf of Mr. Z.. The panel was content to
proceed on that basis.
[4]
The first witness that the panel heard was Tim Hutchinson, an Archivist with the
University of Saskatchewan, who in the spring term 2004 was the instructor for the
course FIS-2178. Mr. Hutchinson was in attendance for the hearing on October 25, 2004,
however as he was unable to be physically present for the November 4, 2004 hearing, his
evidence was provided via videoconference from Sa-.katoon.

[5]
The charges that are the subject matter of this proceeding pertain to the third of
three written assignments in the Course FIS 2178 (alternately refened to as "LIS 2178")
"Designing Electronic Descriptive Tools". The course focused on digital access to
archival material including the use of a highly specialized hypertext markup language
used to archive materials. Assignment 3 was worth 20% of the final grade in the course.

- Page 2 of 5 -

IN THE MATTER of Disciplinary Charges Against Z.

[6]
There was no dispute that Mr. Z., along with Mr. IJI, was the author of the
impugned paper. There was no dispute that Mr. Z. wrote the second half of the impugned
paper and Mr.
wrote the first half. There is no dispute that the second half of the
impugned paper contains direct quotes which are not cited. There is no dispute that the
sources consulted in the second half of the paper all appear in the bibliography with one
exception. The issue in dispute is whether or not Mr. Z. "ought reasonably to have
known" that he was committing an academic offence. Or to put it another way, the
standard to which the University may reasonably hold a graduate student in these
circumstances.

IJI

REASONS FOR DECISION AND SANCTION
[1]
The panel considered the evidence of Mr. Hutchinson, Mr. Cox, and Vice-Dean
ChetTy as it related to the course that gave rise to the paper written by Mr. Z.. What was
compelling - m1d different - about the course and the paper was that the research and end
product required significant reliance on Internet based resources. In the words of Vice
Dean Cherry, the assignment was an "Internet heavy assignment". As such, there was a
greater prospect that plagiarism would occur. What further complicated this case was the
history of plagiarism associated with assignments like the one given Mr. Z. in this course:
in the past, similar assignments were set, and remarkable instances of plagiarism arose.
For example, in the Spring session of 2002, in the same course, the same assignment was
set, and out of 30 students, there were 10 allegations of plagiarism.

[2]
The history of problems with plagiarism arising in similar assignments in
previous years was considered against the remedial efforts related to plagiarism
undertaken by the Faculty. The panel was struck by the considerable efforts made by the
faculty to enhance the knowledge of the students about citation. The panel observed that
the faculty offered numerous courses at various times about citation methods. These
courses were voluntary for the student body. However, the panel accepted that the
faculty as a whole was taking significant steps to stem the temptation to copy information
from the ever-expanding information sources - and particularly associated with web
based research. Finally, the panel considered the fact that for this particular assignment,
a bibliography was specifically required, but in text citation was not specifically adverted
to in the paper requirement. The panel recognized that in text citation is something that
need not be required specifically in any research and writing assignment because the
nature of proper reference to sources would of course prescribe in text citation where
verbatim text is relied on.
[3]
After hearing the evidence of Mr. Z., and of Mr.·• and after hearing about the
way that Mr. Z. understood the concepts of citation, it became evident to the panel that
Mr. Z. had developed a standard for citation of sources and a standard for citing verbatim
sources that was at best less than acceptable. However, it was evident that this mode of
citation had followed Mr. Z. through his career in the school without incident. The panel
did not see this mode of conduct as excusable. But the panel was concerned that a more

- Page 3 of 5 -

IN THE MATTER of Disciplinary Charges Against Z.
rigorous enforcement of citation standards might have alerted Mr. Z. and the student
body in general to the dangers of failure to recognize and cite sources properly.

[4]
Mr. Z. believed he had cited sources correctly by including the sources in a
bibliography. He believed that a rather haphazard in text citation method was acceptable.
He had an incomplete understanding of the nature and conduct of citation. He did not
understand or adopt or adhere to one particular mode of citation (such as the APA
method) and he could not demonstrate that he had an internally consistent approach to
citation of sources. But it was clear that his approach to citation, such as it was, was
honest and honestly held, and it was clear to the panel, that he submitted his paper in
good faith, and without any intention to portray the work of someone else as his own.
[5]
Mr. Z. is pursuing a degree in the field of information science. Proper citation
and proper reference to sources for one's work is critical to the holding of a degree in this
field as much as it is in any other field of study.
[6]
It is for the above reasons that the panel entered a conviction but combined that
conviction with sanctions that would underline the importance of citations, that would
emphasize and reinforce the considerable efforts of the Faculty to stem plagiarism and
promote a standard for citation of works and that would address the mischief that
underlies plagiarism. It is for these reasons that the sanction requires that Mr. Z. fully
apprise himself of the citation methods that are acceptable by taking citation courses in
their entirety, and that the authors whose work was referenced and relied on be written to,
and that the paper is to be re written in its entirety with a consistent acceptable citation
style throughout. It is for the above reasons that the panel required a reprimand along
with a reduction in the grade. Finally, the panel wished to underline the importance of
fidelity to proper citation generally as well as the resources available to students to learn
about citation, as well as the consequences of both advertent and inadvertent failure to
abide by these rules and protocols of citation. It is for this reason that the panel
prescribed publication of its reasons and the sanctions.

SANCTION
[1]
There will be an oral and written reprimand to be delivered by Vice-Dean Cherry
to Mr. Z ..
[2]
Mr. Z. will be required to resubmit the written assignment number three (3) in
course LIS 2178 Designing Electronic Descriptive Tools, Group Research Paper and
Presentation with the following further directions:
(a) The paper will be resubmitted as it is currently written, in its entirety,
but with proper citations prepared by Mr. Z.
(b) Mr. Z. is to use APA citation style with either footnotes or in-line
citations together with a properly cited bibliography.

- Page 4 of 5 -

IN THE MATTER of Disciplinary Charges Against Z.

[3]
Mr. Z. is to write a letter to each author whose work was referenced in the written
assignment number three, acknowledging the reference made to the work of the author.
A copy of the letter is to be delivered to Vice Dean Cherry.
[4]

A 10% reduction of the final grade assigned to Mr. Z. for the course FIS 2178.

[5]
There is to be a notation of this proceeding and of the conviction of Mr. Z. on his
transcript to remain until such time as Mr. Z. has completed courses called CO2, C03,
C04 on citation, which Mr. Z. should be able to take at no extra cost in the near or
immediate future, or such other courses on citation that are the equivalent;
[6]
The decision of the panel is to be published in its entirety, if possible, with the
student's name withheld. In the alternative, the reasons for sanction with the student's
name withheld are to be published.

April 14, 2005

Julie K. Hannaford

Date

Chair

- Page 5 of 5 -

