Case #04-05-05

   DATE: information not available
   PARTIES: University of Toronto v. Mr. Z.
   Hearing Date(s): October 25 and November 4, 2004
   Panel Members:
   Julie K. Hannaford, Co-Chair
   Stephane Mechoulan, Faculty Panel Member
   Tina Wong, Student Panel Member
   Appearances:
   Jennifer Krotz, DLS, for the Student
   Lily I. Harmer, for the University
   Witness:
   Tim Hutchinson, University of Saskatchewan
   Joe Cox, Librarian, Faculty of Information Studies
   Joan Cherry, Vice-Dean, Faculty of Information Studies
   Chuan Luo, FIS student
   C.Z., accused
   Trial Division - s. B.i.1(d) of Code â plagiarism â quotes not cited in
   co-authored term paper â inability to understand proceedings due to
   English language difficulties - hearing adjourned by Panel - standard
   to which a graduate student ought reasonably to have known about the
   commission of an academic offenceÂ  - requirement for in-text citation
   not required for research and writing assignments - unacceptable and
   inexcusable standard of citation throughout academic career without
   incident â flawed approach to citation honestly held â paper submitted
   in good faith â finding of guilt - sanctions imposed underlined
   importance of citations and emphasized Faculty efforts to stem
   plagiarism - oral and written reprimand delivered by Vice-Dean;
   requirement that paper be resubmitted with proper APA style citations;
   requirement that Student write a letter to each author referenced in
   paper; ten per cent grade reduction for course; notation on transcript
   until CO2, CO3, and CO4 courses completed; and report to Provost
   Student charged under s. B.i.1(d), and alternatively, s. B.i.3(b) of
   the Code. The charges related to allegations that the Student submitted
   a term paper, co-authored with another student, the Studentâs portion
   of which contained direct quotes which were not cited.Â  The Panel
   stated its concerns with the Studentâs inability to understand the
   proceedings and represent himself because of his difficulties with
   English. Notwithstanding the position of the parties, the Panel, of its
   own motion, adjourned the hearing to enable the Student to seek legal
   advice. It was not at issue that the paper contained direct quotes
   which were not cited. The issue in dispute was whether or not the
   Student ought reasonably to have known that he was committing an
   academic offence and the standard to which the University may
   reasonably hold a graduate student in that regard. The Panel considered
   that the assignment did not specifically advert to the requirement for
   in-text citation. The Panel observed that in text citation need not be
   required specifically in any research and writing assignment. The Panel
   considered the evidence of the Student, his co-author and the Studentâs
   understanding of the concept of citation and found that the Student had
   developed a standard of citation that was less then acceptable and
   inexcusable but which had followed him through his career at the
   University without incident. The Panel stated its concern that a more
   rigorous enforcement of citation standards might have alerted the
   Student, and the student body in general, to the dangers of failing to
   recognize and cite sources properly. The Panel found that the Studentâs
   approach to citation, although flawed, was honestly held and that he
   submitted his paper in good faith, and without any intention to portray
   the work of someone else as his own. The Panel entered a conviction
   combined with sanctions that underlined the importance of citations,
   emphasized and reinforced the efforts of the Faculty to stem
   plagiarism, promoted a higher standard of citation, and addressed the
   mischief of plagiarism.Â  The Panel imposed an oral and written
   reprimand, delivered by the Vice-Dean; a requirement that the Student
   resubmit the paper with proper APA style citations; a requirement that
   the Student write a letter to each author referenced in the paper,
   acknowledging the reference made to the work, with a copy of the
   letters to be delivered to the Vice-Dean; a ten per cent reduction of
   the final grade in the course; a notation of the Studentâs transcript
   to remain until the Student had completed courses CO2, CO3, and CO4 on
   citation, or equivalent courses; and that the decision of the Panel be
   published in its entirety, or alternatively, that the reasons for
   sanction be published.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12991
