Case No.: 993
THE UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
IN THE MATTER OF charges of academic dishonesty filed on December 17, 2018,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters, 1995,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Act, 1971 , S.O. 1971, c. 56 as amended S.O. 1978,
c.88

BETW EEN:
UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO

- and -

itl -

(the " Student" )

Reasons for Decision Re: Hearing in Student's Absence
Hearing Date: March 27, 2019

Members of the Panel:
Ms. Cheryl Woodin, Chair
Professor Kenneth Derry, Faculty Panel Member
Mr. Andrew Opper, Student Panel Member
Hearing Secretary:
Ms. Krista Osbourne, Administrative Clerk and Hearing Secretary, Office of the Appeals,
Discipline, Faculty Grievances
Appearances:
Ms. Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg Rothstein LLP

Not in Attendance:
the Student

2

1.

The Trial Division of the University Tribunal was convened on March 27, 2019 to
consider charges brought by the University of Toronto ("the University") against
the Student under the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic
Matters, 1995 ("the Code").

2.

On December 17, 2018, the Student was charged under the Code with knowingly
forging or in any other way altering or falsifying an academic record and/or
uttering, circulating or making use of such academic record (the “Charges”) in
connection with a degree certificate dated June 18, 2008 in his name, purporting
to grant him an Honours Bachelor of Science degree from the University (the
“Degree”).

3.

The Charges arose following a request to the University on January 4, 2018 from
the Canadian Consulate in Shanghai, China to verify the authenticity of the
Degree, which had been provided to the Consulate by the Student.

4.

The Student did not attend the hearing and was not represented.

5.

The onus of proof is on the University to demonstrate that it provided a student
with reasonable notice of the hearing.

6.

In this case the hearing was adjourned to permit the University to provide
additional evidence and make supplementary submissions regarding steps taken
to provide the Student with notice of the hearing. Supplementary submissions
were received on May 3, 2019. They included an Affidavit of Jacqueline Cummins.

7.

With the benefit of those submissions, the panel has determined that the hearing
should proceed on the next reasonably available date without further notice to the
Student.

3
Service on the Student
8.

A hearing of this Tribunal was convened on March 27, 2019, to address the
Charges. A Notice of Hearing was sent to the parties from the Office of Appeals,
Discipline and Faculty Grievances on March 13, 2019 in accordance with the
requirements of section C.II.(a)(4) of the Code and Rules 9(c) and 14 of the
Tribunal’s Rules of Practice and Procedure (the “Rules”).

9.

The Student attended the University from the fall of 2003 until he withdrew in the
winter 2006 term. He next enrolled in courses in the fall of 2009. The last term in
which he attended classes was the 2010 Winter term.

10.

In accordance with the University’s Policy on Official Correspondence with
Students, students enrolled at the University of Toronto are required to maintain
current contact information in their Repository of Student Information (“ROSI”)
record, and to update that information if it changes.

11.

The University’s Policy on Official Correspondence with Students came into effect
on September 1, 2006, before the Student stopped attending the University.

12.

Pursuant to Rule 9 of the Rules, a Notice of Hearing may be served on a student
by various means, including by sending a copy of the document by courier to the
student’s mailing address in ROSI or by emailing a copy of the document to the
student’s email address in ROSI.

13.

The University complied with Rule 9.

14.

In addition, the University attempted to communicate the hearing date to the
Student using a “gmail” address which he had provided to the University on
August 1, 2007 when he submitted a form to request to re-activate his student
record.

15.

The University has also advised that the Canadian Consulate in Shanghai
communicated to the Student that it needed to verify the Degree with the
University. The Student withdrew his request to the Canadian Consulate in

4
Shanghai before the Consulate’s inquiry was completed. The Student was
therefore on notice of the Consulate’s intention to communicate with the
University about the degree which is the subject of these charges.
16.

Pursuant to sections 6 and 7 of the Statutory Powers Procedure Act (the “Act”)
and Rule 17 of the Rules where reasonable notice of an oral hearing has been
given to a party in accordance with the Act or the Rule, as the case may be, and
the party does not attend the hearing, the Tribunal may proceed in the absence
of the party and the party is not entitled to any further notice in the proceeding.

17.

The University has requested that the Tribunal proceed with this hearing in the
absence of the Student.

18.

Based on the totality of the attempts made to provide notice to the Student, the
Tribunal has concluded that the Student was given reasonable notice of the
hearing. The University’s efforts to serve and communicate with the Student
comply with both the Rules and the Act. The hearing shall proceed in the Student’s
absence without further notice to the Student.

Dated at Toronto this 4th day of July, 2019

___________________________________
Ms. Cheryl Woodin, Chair

