Case 993 - Hearing in Student's Absence

   DATE:Â Â July 4, 2019
   PARTIES: University of Toronto v. K.Q.

   HEARING DATE: March 27, 2019

   Panel Members:
   Ms. Cheryl Woodin, Chair
   Professor Kenneth Derry, Faculty Panel Member
   Mr. Andrew Opper, Student Panel Member

   Appearances:
   Ms. Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg
   Rothstein LLP

   In Attendance:
   Ms. Krista Osbourne, Administrative Clerk & Hearing Secretary, Appeals,
   Discipline and Faculty Grievances

   Not in Attendance: The Student

   The Student was charged with academic misconduct under s. B.i.3(a) of
   the Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters, 1995 (the â Code â) on the
   basis that he knowingly forged, circulated or made use of a forged
   academic record, namely, a degree certificate dated June 18, 2008, in
   the Studentâs name, purporting to grant him an Honours Bachelor of
   Science degree from the University. The charges arose following a
   request to the University from the Canadian Consulate in Shanghai,
   China, to verify the authenticity of the degree certificate submitted
   to it by the Student.

   Neither the Student nor a legal representative of the Student appeared
   at the hearing. The hearing was adjourned to permit the University to
   provide additional evidence and make supplementary submissions
   regarding steps taken to provide the Student with notice of the
   hearing.

   The Tribunal noted that the onus of proof is on the University to
   demonstrate that it has provided the Student with reasonable notice of
   the hearing. In this case, the notice of hearing was sent to the
   Student in accordance with the requirements of section C.II.(a)(4) of
   the Code and Rules 9(c) and 14 of the Tribunalâs Rules of Practice and
   Procedure (the â Rulesâ ). The Tribunal noted that students enrolled at
   the University are required to maintain current contact information in
   the ROSI system and to update that information if it changes. Under
   Rule 9 of the Rule s, a notice of hearing may be served on a student by
   sending a copy by courier to the studentâs mailing address in ROSI or
   by emailing a copy to the studentâs email address in ROSI. The
   University complied with this rule in this case. In addition, the
   University attempted to communicate with the Student using a âGmailâ
   address that the Student had previously provided to the University. The
   Panel was also advised by the University that the Canadian Consulate in
   Shanghai had communicated to the Student that it needed to verify the
   degree with the University and that the Student then withdrew his
   request to the Consulate. The Student was therefore on notice of the
   Consulateâs intention to communicate with the University regarding the
   degree the subject of the charges. Finally, the Tribunal noted that
   under sections six and seven of the Statutory Powers Procedure Act (the
   â Actâ ) and Rule 17 of the Rules , where reasonable notice of an oral
   hearing has been given to a party in accordance with the Act or the
   Rules and the party does not attend, the Tribunal may proceed in the
   absence of that party and the party is not entitled to any further
   notice in the proceedings. Based on the totality of the attempts made
   to provide notice to the Student, the Tribunal concluded that the
   Student was given reasonable notice of the hearing. It ordered that the
   hearing proceed in the Studentâs absence and without further notice to
   the Student.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/28420
