Case #498

   DATE: February 16, 2010
   PARTIES: University of Toronto v. M.S.
   Hearing Date(s): October 21, 2009
   Panel Members:
   John A. Keefe, Chair
   Professor Graeme Hirst, Faculty Member
   Elena Kuzmin, Student Member
   Appearances:
   Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel for the University
   Elaine Ishibashi, Associate Registrar
   Kristi Gourlay, Manager of Student Academic Integrity
   Sam Solecki, Deanâs Designate for Academic Integrity
   Trial Division â s. B.1.3(a) of Code; s. B.1.3(b) of Code; s. B.1.7(a)
   of Code â forged documents â forged medical certificate â forged auto
   insurance invoice - forged accident report â hearing not attended â
   reasonable notice of hearing provided â adjournment requested â
   adjournment granted on condition that no future adjournments be
   grantedÂ  â no prior offences â grade assignment of zero for five
   courses; five-year suspension; five-year notation on transcript; and
   report to Provost; recommendation that the Student be expelled as per
   s. C.ii.(b)(i) of Code; and permanent notation on academic record
   Student charged with six offences under the Code. The charges related
   to allegations that the Student forged a medical certificate, an auto
   insurance claim, and an accident report as part of a request to defer
   examinations for two courses, to extend deadlines for coursework for
   four courses, and as part of a late withdrawal request for one course.
   The Student had requested an adjournment for a previous hearing which
   was granted on the condition that no future adjournments would be
   entertained. The Student did not attend the subsequent hearing and no
   further request for adjournment was made. The Panel noted that although
   the evidence presented at the hearing was hearsay, the Panel is not
   governed by strict rules of evidence and it would admit the evidence
   subject to weight. The designate for academic integrity testified that
   the Student admitted the documents were forged. The Student further
   acknowledged that by submitting the documents she had violated the
   Code. The Student was warned by the designate that any statements made
   could be used against her in a proceeding. The Panel considered
   previous cases with forgery and observed that forgery is treated as one
   of the most serious offences. The Student deliberately forged several
   documents including the signature of a physician on a medical
   certificate. The Panel also took into account the numerous attempts to
   schedule a hearing and the conduct of the Student which demonstrated a
   lack of respect for the University and its processes. The Panel
   recommended expulsion with a permanent notation on the Studentâs
   academic record, imposed a suspension of five years, and a grade of
   zero in the affected courses.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12751
