THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
TRIAL DIVISION

IN THE MATTER of charges of academic dishonesty made on October 23, 2007,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University o/Toronto Act, 1971, S.O. 1971, c. 56 as amended
S.O. I 978, c. 88
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic
1\Iatters, 1995

BETWEEN:
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO

-ANDM.

(M.

) S.

Hearing Date: October 21, 2009
Members of the panel:
•
Mr. John A. Keefe, Barrister and Solicitor, Chair
•
Professor Graeme Hirst, Department of Computer Science, Faculty Panel
Member
•
Ms. Elena Kuzmin, Student Panel Member
Appearances:
•
Ms. Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel of the University of Toronto,
Paliare Roland Barristers
•
Ms. Elaine Ishibashi, Associate Registrar, Faculty of Arts and Science
•
Dr. Kristi Gml!'lay, Manager of Student Academic Integrity, Faculty of Arts and
Science
•
Professor Sam Solecki, Dean's Designate for Academic Integrity, Faculty of Arts
and Science
In Attendance:
•
•
•

Ms. M
S
, the Student, not in attendance
Ms. Betty-Ann Campbell, Law Clerk, Paliare Roland Barristers
Ms. Natalie Ramtahal, Coordinator, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances,
Office of Governing Council

REASONS FOR DECISION

I.

The University Tribunal was convened on Wednesday, October 21, 2009 to hear charges
under the Code of Behaviour on Academic ,Hatters, 1995 (the "Code"), against Ms

M

s

(the "Student"). The Student was informed by letter dated October 23,

2007 from Professor Edilh Hillan, Vice-Provost, Academics, that she had been charged
with academic offences as set out in the attached charges. (Schedule A)

2.

The original Notice of Hearing was sent to the Student on October 29, 2008 with a
proposed hearing date of the January 14, 2009. There were many attempts to schedule a
hearing and adjournments were requested. A hearing was scheduled for June l 6, 2009.
The Student requested an adjournment of the June 16, 2009 hearing and did not attend
that hearing. The June 16, 2009 hearing was adjourned on conditions set out in the
Endorsement of the Chair of the Tribunal, Rodi ca David, one of which was that a hearing
date would be scheduled which would be peremptory to the Student, meaning that no
fm1her adjournments would be entertained, and that the hearing would have to proceed at
that time.

3.

Notice of Hearing was sent to the Student on August 27, 2009

setting Wednesday,

October 21, 2009 at 5:30 p.m. as the date of the hearing.
4.

The Student did not attend the hearing on October 21, 2009 and no request was made for
an adjournment.·
I

5.

The Tribunal considered whether to proceed in the absence of the Student. The Tribunal
concluded that the Student was provided with adequate notice of the hearing and decided
to proceed with the hearing in the absence of the Student.

THE EVIDENCE

6.

University Counsel submitted a book of documents including the original charges which,
together with the particulars of the charges as set out in the original notice to the Sh1dent
dated October 23, 2007, are set out in Schedule A.

7.

The University's first witness was Elaine Ishibashi, Associate Faculty Registrar,
Ms Ishibashi's gave evidence of the background leading to the Student's request for
deferred examinations for each of courses RLG200Yl and SOC339Hl, course work
extension for each of courses RLG200Yl, SOC339Hl, SOC205Yl and SOC356Yl and
late withdrawal for SOC348H 1.

8.

In support of these various requests, the Student submitted a document dated Friday, May
11, 2007, which is a standard form University of Toronto, Faculty of Arts and Science
document entitled "Petition to the Committee on Standing".

9.

The Petition was accompanied by a letter from the Student dated Friday, May 11, 2007
which described the reason for the request. The Student indicated that she had been in a
serious car accident on February 8, 2007 and severely injured her lower back which made
it difficult for her to complete her courses,

10.

The Student submitted a further letter on Wednesday, May 15, 2007 which supported her
request for a late withdrawal in SOC348H1, In support of hei' Petitioi1, the Student
enclosed two medical certificates, an Auto Insurance Standard Invoice and an accident
~

report.

11.

One of the medical certificates was dated February 12, 2007. The medical ce1iificate is a
standard form University of Toronto Student Medical Certificate which was signed by the
Student on February 12, 2007. It was purportedly signed by Dr. G. Murtoza, on February
12, 2007. A second standard form University of Toronto Stndent Medical Certificate was
also submitted. It was signed by the Student on March 19, 2007 and was purportedly
signed by Dr. G. Murtoza on March 19, 2007.

12.

The Petition was also suppmied by an auto insurance standard invoice dated February 12,
2007 purportedly signed by Dr. Murtoza. This document indicated that an accident had
occurred involving the Student on February 8, 2007.

13.

The Petition was also suppmied by a document entitled "RBC Insurance Traffic Accident
Report Form". This form referenced an accident on February 8, 2007 and contained
information concerning the police officer's name and badge number and a police report
number.

14.

Ms Ishibashi testified that she issued a Petition Decision on June 20, 2007 granting late
withdrawal without academic penalty in connection with course SOC348H I. In respect
of the other courses, she asked the Student to provide further documentation indicating
her inability to attend the final examinations due to ill health noting that the medical
certificates were dated February and March.

I 5.

The Student then submitted a third University of Toronto Student Medical Certificate
dated June 22, 2007 sighed by the Student and purportedly signed by Dr. Murtoza, but
the doctor's signature was not dated.

16.

Representatives of the University made fmiher inquiries of the doctor's office because
the physician's CPSO number was not on the medical certificate. Representatives of the
University contacted the clinic and were advised that the Student had not been in the
clinic on any of the dates indicated and that Dr. Murtoza had never treated her.

17.

Kristi Gourlay, Manager, Office of Student Academic Integrity then investigated further.
She testified at the hearing that she contacted the office manager at the clinic where Dr.
Murtoza worked and was told that Dr. Mmioza did not see the Student on any of the
dates indicated and had not seen her at all and that he did not complete the Certificates.
Ms Gourlay faxed a note to a representative of the clinic asking him to review the various
medical certificates and the auto insurance standard invoice and to advise if the
signatures were those of Dr. Murtoza.

18.

Jeff Levy of Springdale Complete Medical Centres in Brampton, Ontario responded by
facsimile transmittal on September 4, 2009 with a note from Dr. Golan Murtoza
indicating that he did not see the Student on February 12, 2007, March 19, 2007, or on
June 22, 2007. In the note Dr. Mmioza stated "in fact, I have never seen a M
S

19.

". He also.indicated that the signatures on the medical certificates were not his.

Ms Gourlay also contacted the Peel Regional Police Force and was advised that the
information contained on the accident report was incorrect. The badge number did not
match the name of the officer and there was nothing in their system to verify the details
of the accident.

20.

The Tribunal noted that the evidence of Ms Gourlay in connection with the statements
from the police, as well as some of the other information obtained from the medical clinic

was hearsay.

The Tribunal noted that although the evidence was, strictly speaking,

hearsay, the Tribunal is not governed by the strict rules of evidence and it would admit
the evidence subject to weight.
21.

After the initial investigation, the Student was advised by letter dated September 4, 2007
that she was entitled to meet with the Dean or his representative. The meeting was
originally scheduled for Wednesday, September 19, 2007, but it occurred on September
20, 2007.

22.

Professor Sam Solecki, the Dean's Designate for Academic Integrity testified that, at a
meeting on September 20, 2007, the Student admitted that the documents were forged
and acknowledged that by submitting the documents to the University that she had
committed offences under the Code.

23.

Professor Solecki testified that, at the outset of the meeting, he gave the Student a
warning indicating that any statements made by the Student could be used against the
Student in a subsequent proceeding.

24.

Professor Solecki testified that the Student attended at the meeting by herself and the
meeting took the better part of 30 minutes. It became apparent during the course of the
meeting that the Student was assisted in the preparation of the forged documents by an
accomplice who worked at the clinic. The Student was reluctant to give the _name of the_
accomplice. In the course of the meeting, the Student acknowledged that the documents
had been forged and that, by submitting the documents, she had committed offences
under the Code. Professor Solecki testified that the Student's demeanour at the meeting
was one of "remarkable confidence".

25.

Following the meeting, on October 5, 2007, Professor Solecki wrote to the Student
confirming the substance of the meeting including the following statement:
During our discussion, you admitted that all five of the documents had
been forged and acknowledged that by submitting them you had
committed offences under the Code)'
11

Tribunal's Conclusion on the Evidence

26.

The Tribunal concluded that the Student's admission corroborated all of the other
evidence submitted at the hearing.

27.

Upon the basis of all the evidence, the Tribunal concluded that it was appropriate to
register a conviction in respect of counts 2, 3, 6, 10, 11 and 13(a). In registering the
convictions on these counts, the Tribunal took into account the concept of double
jeopardy and that the auto insurance standard invoice was not an academic record or
official University document. This is true, as well, for the RBC Insurance Accident
Report. Although these are not official University documents, submitting them with the
Petition is a form of fraud or misrepresentation. For this reason, the Tribunal concluded
that a conviction on count 13(a) was appropriate.

Tribunal's Conclusion on the Appropriate Penalty

28.

The Student's conduct clearly violated all of the University's Policies and Guidelines
with respect to ethical conduct. The Tribunal considered the Student's conduct to be at
the most serious end of the spectrum in terms of the principle of integrity of the
l

reputation of the University.

29.

The Tribunal considered numerous cases before other panels of the University's Tribunal
that considered sentencing guidelines in matters of academic offences. These cases set
out the following sentencing criteria:

30.

(a)

the character of the person charged;

(b)

the likelihood of the repetition of the offence;

(c)

the nature of the offence committed;

(d)

any extenuating circumstances surrounding the commission of the offence;.

(e)

the detriment to the University occasioned by the offence; and

(f)

the need to deter others from committing a similar offence.

The Tribunal als.o considered several cases submitted by University Counsel dealing with
other cases involving forgery. Although not binding and recognising that each case is
unique, it is clear that forgery is treated as one of the most serious offences in the
University environment and most cases result in expulsion.

31.

In this case, conduct involved a deliberate plan to deceive the University by submitting
several forged documents, which included forged signatures of a physician on medical
certificates. The Student submitted three forged medical ce1tificates and one insurance
report with a forged signature of the doctor.

32.

The panel also took into account the conduct of the Student in c01rnection with the
hearing itself. The Sh1dent did not appear at the hearing and, as a result, the Tribunal was
not in a position to consider any mitigating circumstances. The only mitigating factor is
;

that the Student is a first offender.

3 3.

The Tribunal also took into account the numerous attempts to schedule a hearing and the
conduct of the Student in connection with that process which demonstrated a lack of
respect for the University and its processes.

34.

The Student did not come forward and take responsibility for her actions or provide the
Tribunal with any explanation for her conduct. The Tribunal was not in a position to
consider any mitigating circumstances or any indication that the Student had any
willingness to abide by the University's Guidelines or its Code of Conduct in the future.

35.

Under the circumstances, the Tribunal concluded that it. was appropriate to rhake a
recommendation of expulsion.

CONCLUSION

36.

The Tribunal recommends the following sanctions:
(1)

That the President recommend to Governing Council that the Student be expelled
from University.

(2)

If this recommendation is accepted, that a permanent notation of the expulsion be
recorded in the Student's academic record.

(3)

Pending the decision of the Governing Council, that the Student be suspended
-from the University for a period of five {5) years with a corresponding notation on
the Student's academic record and transcript for that same period.

(4)

That a grade of zero be assigned to the Student in course numbers RLG200Y I,
SOC3391-Il, SOC205Yl, SOC356Yl; and SOC348HI.

(5)

That the decision be reported to the Provost for publication in the University's
newspaper with the Student's name withheld.

DATED February 3, 2010

\58 I 1207

