UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
GOVERNING COUNCIL
REPORT NUMBER 277 OF THE ACADEMIC APPEALS COMMITTEE

To the Academic Board,
University of Toronto
Your Committee reports that it held a hearing on Monday, February 24, 2002, at which
the following were present:
Professor Ed Morgan, Chair
Dr. Alice Dong
Ms. Durré Hanif
Professor Ellen Hodnett
Professor John Furedy
Mr. Paul Holmes, Judicial Affairs Officer (Secretary)
In Attendance:
Mr. G.S., the student
Professor Rashmi Desai, Associate Dean, School of Graduate Studies
Professor J.D. Lavers, Associate Chair, Graduate Studies, Department of
Electrical and Computer Engineering
This is an appeal from a decision of the Graduate Academic Appeals Board (“GAAB”)
dated June 28, 2000, which dismissed the appeal of the student, Mr. G.S., from the
decision of Associate Dean Cormack of the School for Graduate Studies, which had in
turn dismissed the student’s request to change a failing grade which he received in the
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering’s course ECE1757G. The course
was originally taken by the student in the Fall of 1995, and the student’s performance in
the course was re-evaluated in August 1998.
Upon receiving a failing grade for the course, Mr. G.S. first requested a review by the
course instructor, Professor Corinna Lee. She undertook the review and confirmed her
original mark. Mr. G.S. then appealed to the Associate Chair of Graduate Studies,
Professor A. Leon-Garcia, who requested, and received, a further review of the grade
from Professor Lee. By letter dated September 9, 1996, Professor Leon-Garcia advised
Mr. G.S. that he would not revise the failing grade. Mr. G.S. then appealed to the
Department’s Appeals Committee. On that appeal, the Committee directed that Mr. G.S.
could write a new examination to count for 50% of the course grade, but Mr. G.S.

Report Number 277 of the Academic Appeals Committee
declined to do so, explaining that he had other commitments. At this point, the Appeals
Committee decided to replace the existing failing grade with a grade of “Incomplete”.
Mr. G.S.’s next step was to appeal to Associate Dean Cormack on March 7, 1997. This
appeal was dismissed, and so Mr. G.S. filed a further appeal to the Applications and
Memorials Committee (the predecessor to the present GAAB) on September 11, 1997.
That appeal, however, did not proceed, as the Graduate Department and Mr. G.S. both
agreed that there would be a further re-evaluation by Professor Lee, which was to take
place in mid-December 1997. As it turned out, Mr. G.S. objected to the marking
distribution which Professor Lee proposed using for the new evaluation. Mr. G.S.
therefore refused to proceed with the re-evaluation by Professor Lee, and on January 11,
1998 he requested a further reconsideration of this matter.
On March 9, 1998, the Department’s Appeals Committee ordered a re-evaluation of Mr.
G.S.’s projects for the course by a new examiner. Professor P. Chow, Chair of the
Computer Group within the Graduate Department, arranged for the re-examination to by
done by Professor David Lewis. Professor Chow scheduled the re-evaluation for August
20, 1998, and by letter dated June 8, 1998 set out for Mr. G.S. the procedure and the
means by which the final course grade would be established once the results of the reevaluation were received.
The re-evaluation by Professor Lewis took place as scheduled, and once again Mr. G.S.
received a failing grade. This was then appealed by Mr. G.S. to the Associate Chair of
Graduate Studies of the Department, Professor Venetsanopoulos, who dismissed the
appeal after reviewing the reports of Professor Lewis and Professor Chow. Mr. G.S.
further appealed to Associate Dean Cormack, who also dismissed the appeal, leading to
Mr. G.S.’s next step of appealing his course grade to the GAAB. In a unanimous
decision, GAAB dismissed Mr. G.S.’s appeal, and he has now sought to exercise his
ultimate right of appeal to this Committee.
In its decision of June 28, 2000, the GAAB held that the re-evaluation by Professor
Lewis in August 1998 represents a new point of departure for this appeal. This
Committee agrees with GAAB’s holding. Any possible flaws in the previous evaluations
were cured once the Department’s Appeals Committee directed a re-evaluation and that
re-evaluation took place. At the hearing, Mr. G.S. raised an argument about Professor
Lewis’ qualifications to conduct the re-evaluation, but the Committee finds no
evidentiary basis for that complaint. Professor Lewis is an expert in computer simulation
language, and all of the evidence points to his being more than qualified to conduct the
re-evaluation which he was mandated to do.
Mr. G.S. raises two objections to the procedures pursued by Professor Lewis in the reevaluation. The first of these is that Professor Lewis’ grade turned out to be lower than
Professor Lee’s original grade. The committee finds no merit to this objection. A student
who requests a re-evaluation of course work is always open to the possibility of a
reduction in the grade. It is a measure of the objectivity of Professor Lewis’ re-evaluation
that he did not assess Mr. G.S.’s work as against the yardstick of Professor Lee’s grade

Page 2 of 3

Report Number 277 of the Academic Appeals Committee
but rather assessed it on its own strengths. The fact that Mr. G.S. came up even shorter on
this re-evaluation does not in any way undermine the strength or fairness of the reevaluation.
Mr. G.S.’s second objection to Professor Lewis’ re-evaluation is that Professor Lewis
apparently never consulted with Professor Lee before determining the new grade. Again,
this Committee finds no merit in Mr. G.S.’s objection. Professor Lewis is independently
expert in the field under examination, and was not obliged to consult with Professor Lee
regarding Mr. G.S.’s re-evaluation. Indeed, such a consultation might itself have been
considered improperly collusive. Professor Lewis acted properly in conducting the reevaluation independently. Mr. G.S. has not made out any case of unfairness in the reevaluation process.
The balance of Mr. G.S.’s objection to Professor Lewis’ re-evaluation goes not to process
but to the substance of the grade. This Committee is not in a position to re-evaluate Mr.
G.S.’s course work, and, indeed, there is no reason to do so given Professor Lewis’
expertise in the field and the fairness of the process in which he engaged. For these
reasons, the appeal is dismissed.
As a final point, the Committee notes that Mr. G.S. advised it during the course of his
submissions that he had surreptitiously tape recorded one of his conversations with
Professor Lewis. Although this plays no role in the Committee’s disposition of this
appeal, the Committee members wish it to be known that they take a dim view of such
conduct. Recording a conversation with a member of the university community without
that person’s consent is contrary to the atmosphere of good faith in which the business of
the university is conducted. The environment prevailing in the university requires that
matters such as these be approached in a manner which respects the integrity of all
persons – faculty, students, and administration – involved in the process.

March 27, 2003

Paul J. Holmes
Secretary

Ed Morgan
Chair

#25526 v3

Page 3 of 3

