Case #463

   DATE: July 8, 2008
   PARTIES: University of Toronto v. M.C.
   Hearing Date(s): May 21, 2008
   Panel Members:
   Ms. Lisa Brownstone, Chair
   Professor Ikuko-Lee
   Mr. Adrian Asselin, Student
   Appearances:
   Ms. Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel
   Dr. Kristy Gourlay, Manager, Office of Student Academic Integrity
   Ms. Sarah Crowder, Student Counsel, DLS
   Ms. M.C., the Student
   Mr. Max Shapiro, Observer, DLS
   Trial Division ‚ s. B.i.3(a) of Code ‚ forged academic records ‚
   altered ROSI record ‚ Agreed Statement of Facts ‚ guilty plea ‚
   contested hearing on sanction ‚ no remorse or understanding of gravity
   of actions ‚ aggravating factors that the records were at the heart of
   the University‚s system, that position of trust was violated and that
   alteration made at the source of record ‚ mitigating factors that the
   Student was undergoing personal stresses and hardships and that
   alterations were relatively contained and made in a short period of
   time ‚ University Submission on penalty accepted ‚ recommendation that
   the Student be expelled as per s. C.ii.(b)(i) of Code; five-year
   suspension pending expulsion decision; and report to Provost
   Student charged with two offences under s. B.i.3(a) and alternatively,
   two offences under s. B.i.3(b) of the Code. The charges were in
   relation to allegations that the Student accessed her own ROSI academic
   record and initially changed her failing grade in a course to a ‚WDR,‚
   and on a later date re-accessed ROSI and cancelled the course from her
   academic record. The Student worked for the University in a clerical
   position that gave her access to ROSI. The matter proceeded based on an
   Agreed Statement of Facts and a contested hearing on sanction. The
   Student pleaded guilty to the charges under s. B.i.3(a) of the Code.
   Based on the Agreed Statement of Facts, the Panel found the Student
   guilty of the charges. The Panel observed that the Student did not
   express remorse or explicit understanding of the gravity of her
   actions. The aggravating circumstances that the Panel considered were
   the fact that the records were at the heart of the University‚s system;
   that from the position of trust which the Student occupied she chose a
   course of conduct to benefit herself and disadvantage others; that the
   Student made the change at the source of the record so that the
   alteration would be permanent; and that the University must be in a
   position to rely on and protect the integrity of its records. The
   mitigating circumstance that the Panel considered included the fact
   that the Student was undergoing personal stresses and hardships, and
   that the alterations were relatively contained and made in a short
   period of time. The Panel accepted the University‚s submission on
   penalty. The Panel recommended to the President, further to s.
   C.ii.(b)(i) of the Code, that the Student be expelled from the
   University; a suspension of five-years pending the expulsion decision;
   and that a report be issued to the Provost.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12704
