Case #633

   DATE: May 11, 2012
   PARTIES: University of Toronto v. Q.W.
   Hearing Date(s): March 22, 2012
   Panel Members:
   Mr. Paul Morrison, Chair
   Prof. Richard Day, Faculty Member
   Ms. Alice Kim, Student Member
   Appearances:
   Ms. Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel for the University
   Mr. Lorne Gross, Counsel for the Student
   In Attendance:
   Ms. Q.W., the Student
   Prof. John Browne, Dean's Designate
   Mr. Christopher Lang, Director, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty
   Grievances

   Trial Division â s. B.i.1(a) and s. B.i.3(a) of Code â forged documents
   â submitted forged petitions, statements, and medical certificates on
   six different occasions in the span of two years for five courses â
   Agreed Statement of Facts â guilty plea â finding of guilt â Joint
   Submission on Penalty â Panel considered the offences very serious â
   Studentâs cooperation, remorse and pledge not to repeat, and being a
   first time offender were mitigating factors â Panel would have
   considered a more severe penalty if not for the Joint Submission â the
   high threshold to reject a joint submission was not met in this case â
   grade assignment of zero for courses; five-year suspension; seven-year
   notation on transcript; report to Provost

   Student charged under s. B.i.1(a) and s. B.i.3(a) of the Code . The
   charges related to allegations that the Student submitted forged or
   falsified petitions, petition statements, medical certificates, and a
   police collision report, to defer exams in five different courses on
   six different occasions over the course of two years. The parties
   submitted an Agreed Statement of Facts. The Student pleaded guilty to
   most of the charges, and the Panel found the Student guilty under s.
   B.i.1(a) and s. B.i.3(a) . The parties also submitted a Joint
   Submission on Penalty. The Panel found the offences of knowingly
   falsifying petitions for academic favour to be very serious. The Panel
   stated that the Studentâs cooperation, remorse of her conduct and
   pledge not to repeat as well as the fact that the Student had no prior
   discipline history were mitigating factors. However, without the Joint
   Submission, the Panel would have considered a more severe penalty given
   that the pattern of elaborate falsehood, undertaken deliberately to
   obtain academic advantage, was antithetical to the core values as set
   out in the Code . Nevertheless, the Panel recognized that to reject a
   joint submission, it has to be of the view that accepting the Joint
   Submission would bring the administration of justice into disrepute.
   This threshold could not be met in this case. The Panel accepted the
   Joint Submission and imposed a grade assignment of zero in the five
   courses; a five-year suspension; a seven-year notation on her
   transcript or until graduation, whichever was to occur first; and a
   report be issued to the Provost.

   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12821
