Case #567

   DATE: January 21, 2010
   PARTIES: University of Toronto v. C.K.S.L.
   Hearing Date(s): November 20, 2009
   Panel Members:
   Laura Trachuk, Chair
   Shakar Meguid, Faculty Member
   Sybil Derrible, Student Member
   Appearances:
   Robert Centa, Assistant Discipline Counsel for the University
   Mr. C.K.S.L., the Student
   In Attendance:
   Berry Smith, Vice-Dean, School of Graduate Studies
   Ms. Natalie Ramtahal, Coordinator, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty
   Grievances, Office of Governing Council

   Trial Division â s.B.i.1(b) of Code â unauthorized assistance â TA
   assisting three students during a final examination and two terms tests
   in exchange for money â finding of guilty on eight charges of providing
   unauthorized assistance â sentencing factors in University of Toronto
   and Mr. C (1976-77) â little evidence of Studentâs character â likely
   to recommit offence â breach of trust â among the most serious offences
   â initial denial of offences - length and scope of the scheme â
   detriment to the University â need for deterrence â students are
   subject to the Code even if they commit offence while employed as a TA
   ( University of Toronto and A, January 14, 2009) â Panel found the TA
   had a âcorrupt commercial enterpriseâ with no precedent in the
   university jurisprudence - University of Toronto and Ms. VWSL (April 6,
   2006), which deals with purchased work, used as precedent for the
   seriousness of TAâs offence - Tribunal imposed a sanction of: 1) a five
   year suspension, 2) a recommendation of expulsion, and 3) a report to
   the Provost.

   The Student, a PhD student and TA, was charged under section B.i.1(b)
   of the Code, due to allegations of assisting three students to provide
   unauthorized assistance with a final examination while the Student was
   a teaching assistant (charges 1-3) or, alternatively, with assisting
   the three students to engage in cheating on the final examination under
   section B.i.3(b) of the Code (charges 4-6). Four days before the
   hearing the Student was charged with additional charges: 1) under
   section B.i.1(b) of the Code with assisting the three students to
   obtain unauthorized assistance during the first term test in a course
   (charges 7-9); and 2) under section B.i.3(b) of the Code for assisting
   two of the three students to obtain unauthorized assistance during the
   second term test in a course (charges 10-11). In the alternative to
   charges 7-9, the Student was charged with assisting the three students
   to engage in cheating on the first term test under section B.i.3(b) of
   the Code (charges 12-14). In the alternative to charges 10 and 11, the
   Student was charged with assisting two of the three students to engage
   in cheating under section B.1.3(b) of the Code (charges 15-16). The
   parties submitted an agreed statement of facts and a joint book of
   documents. The Student admitted offering to help three students cheat
   in the course in exchange for $1500 each, that he received $1500 from
   two of the students and $1400 from one of the students, and that he
   provided answers to three of the students during the first term tests,
   to three of the students in the second term test, and to all three of
   the students during the final examination. The Student denied
   allegations when he was confronted by the Professor and the Dean of the
   School of Graduate Studies and helped the students devise stories to
   tell at their respective Deanâs meetings, but admitted his offences
   after being told that the students had signed confessions implicating
   him in the scheme. At the hearing the Student claimed that he did not
   offer to help the students cheat in exchange for money, but that they
   made the offer to him, and that he needed the money in order to provide
   for his family. The Student plead guilty to charges 1-3 and 7-11. The
   other charges, which were laid in the alternative, were withdrawn.
   During sentencing deliberations the Student raised his academic record
   as a Student, the fact that he would have no further opportunities to
   commit such offences, and that he would not be able to finish and
   defend his thesis due to the withdrawal of his thesis supervisor. The
   Tribunal considered the sentencing factors in The University of Toronto
   and Mr. C (1976-77). The Tribunal 1) had little evidence of the
   Studentâs character, 2) found that the Student was likely to commit an
   offence again if he thought he would not get caught, 3) that the nature
   of the offence was an âextraordinary breach of trustâ and that it was
   the most serious offence a T.A. could commit and among the most serious
   that a University community member could commit, 4) that there were a
   few mitigating factors such as remorse and a guilty plea but that there
   were more aggravating factors such as long denial of the offences, the
   length and scope of the scheme, and the breach of trust, 5) the
   detriment to the University occasioned by the offence and 6) the need
   to deter others from committing a similar offence. The Tribunal found
   that it was unlikely that the Student could be reformed. The Tribunal
   rejected the Studentâs argument that the penalty should affect his
   status as a T.A., rather than his status as a student, on the grounds
   that students retain their status as students and are subject to the
   Code even if they commit offences while working as TAs ( University of
   Toronto and A, January 14, 2009). The Tribunal noted that there was no
   precedent in the Tribunal jurisdprudence for the Studentâs âcorrupt
   commercial enterpriseâ, but that the University of Toronto and Ms. VWSL
   (April 6, 2006), which dealt with purchased work, also described the
   seriousness of the Studentâs offences. Tribunal imposed a sanction of:
   1) a five year suspension, 2) a recommendation of expulsion, and 3) a
   report to the Provost.

   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12747
