Case 1344

FILE:

   Case # 1344 (2022-2023)

DATE:

   November 4, 2022

PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v. M.R. (âthe Studentâ)

HEARING DATE(S):

   September 21, 2022, via Zoom

PANEL MEMBERS:

   Christopher Wirth, Chair

   Professor Alexander Koo, Faculty Panel Member

   Jessica Johnson, Student Panel Member

APPEARANCES:

   William Webb, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg
   Rothstein LLP
   Ryan Shah, Articling Student, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare
   Roland Rosenberg Rothstein LLP

Not in Attendance:

   The Student

HEARING SECRETARY:

   Nadia Bruno, Special Projects Officer, Office of Appeals, Discipline
   and Faculty Grievances

   The Student was charged withÂ two counts of knowingly using or
   possessing an unauthorized aid or obtaining unauthorized assistance in
   connection with a final exam in two different courses, contrary to
   section B.i.1(b) of the Code. For each course, they were also charged
   alternatively with one count of knowingly using or possessing an
   unauthorized aid or obtaining unauthorized assistance in connection
   with a final exam, contrary to section B.i.3(b) of the Code.

   The Student did not attend the hearing, nor were they represented. The
   University submitted evidence showing the various attempts made to
   provide notice to the Student. The Panel was satisfied that the Student
   had been given reasonable notice of the hearing in compliance with the
   notice requirements of sections 6 and 7 of the Statutory Powers
   Procedure Act , rules 9, 16, and 17 of the University Tribunalâs Rules
   of Practice and Procedure , as well as the Universityâs Policy on
   Official Correspondence with Students . The Panel decided to hear the
   case on its merits in the absence of the Student.

   The Panel considered evidence that both exams had been administered
   online due to the Covid-19 pandemic and that the course instructors
   found that questions from and answers to the exams had been posted to
   Chegg.com during each exam period. An investigation revealed that the
   Studentâs Quercus account had been accessed during the exams and that
   the Studentâs IP address was the same IP address from which the
   Studentâs email account viewed the Chegg questions and answers.
   According to the Panel, the evidence was clear that someone using the
   Studentâs University of Toronto email address and IP address had
   accessed answers to questions from these exams posted on Chegg.com,
   during the time they were writing these exams. For each course, the
   Panel found the Student guilty under section B.i.1(b) of the Code for
   knowingly obtaining unauthorized assistance. The University withdrew
   the remaining charges.

   In determining sanction, the Panel considered the Universityâs evidence
   that the Student had two prior offences relating to the use of
   unauthorized aids. The Panel observed that the Student had undermined
   the grades-based system of evaluation and broke the honour code that is
   essential to modern learning. In that regard, the pandemic and the
   resulting required online learning provides more opportunities for
   students to cheat, requiring the University to go to considerable
   lengths to detect and uncover studentsâ misconduct. It also commented
   that in todayâs online world, it is easy for students to find new ways
   to access unauthorized assistance and so any sanction must denounce
   cheating on tests and deter others in order to protect the academic
   integrity of the University. Students must understand that this kind of
   misconduct will have serious repercussions, so that they will be
   dissuaded from the temptation to consider cheating. The Panel accepted
   the Universityâs submission that by using Chegg.com, a
   subscription-based website, the Student committed a serious form of
   academic misconduct, while considering the range of sanctions provided
   by prior decisions of this Tribunal in similar circumstances, and given
   the Studentâs prior academic offences, a period of 3 years and 11
   months suspension of the Student from the University rather than
   expulsion was appropriate.

   The Panel imposed the following sanctions: a grade of zero in both
   courses; a suspension of almost four years; a notation on the Student's
   transcript of almost five years; and a report to the Provost for
   publication .
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/30765
