Case No: 1344
THE UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
IN THE MATTER OF charges of academic dishonesty filed on February 10, 2022,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic
Matters, 1995,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Act, 1971, S.O. 1971, c. 56 as
amended S.O. 1978, c. 88
B E T W E E N:
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
- AND M

R

REASONS FOR DECISION
Hearing Date: September 21, 2022, via Zoom
Panel Members:
Mr. Christopher Wirth, Chair
Professor Alexander Koo, Faculty Panel Member
Ms. Jessica Johnson, Student Panel Member
Appearances:
Mr. William Webb, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg Rothstein LLP
Mr. Ryan Shah, Articling Student, Paliare Roland Rosenberg Rothstein LLP
Hearing Secretary:
Ms. Nadia Bruno, Special Projects Officer, Appeals, Discipline and Faulty Grievances
Not in Attendance:
Mr. M

R

A Panel of the Trial Division of the University Tribunal was convened on September
21, 2022 by videoconference to consider charges brought by the University of
Toronto (the “University”) against M

R

(the “Student”) under the

University’s Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters, 1995 (the “Code”).
Preliminary Issue: Proceeding in the Absence of the Student
The hearing was scheduled to begin at 9:45 a.m. Neither the Student, nor anyone
on the Student’s behalf, were logged onto the Zoom link at that time. The Panel
waited until 11:35 a.m. to start the hearing. The University then requested that the
Panel proceed with the hearing in the Student’s absence.
Pursuant to Rule 16 of the University Tribunal Rules of Practice and Procedure
(the “Rules”), notice of an electronic hearing must include the date, time, place and
purpose of the hearing; a reference to the statutory authority under which the
hearing will be held; information about the manner in which the hearing will be held;
and a statement that if a person does not attend the hearing, the Panel may
proceed in the person’s absence. Rule 17 provides that where notice of an
electronic hearing has been given to a person and that person does not attend the
hearing, the Panel may proceed with the hearing in the party’s absence. The Rules
conform to sections 6 and 7 of the Statutory Powers Procedure Act (the “SPPA”),
which set out the notice requirements.
Pursuant to Rule 9, a notice of hearing may be served on a student by various
means, including by emailing a copy of the document to the student’s email
address contained in the University’s Repository of Student Information (“ROSI”).
The University’s Policy on Official Correspondence with Students dated
September 1, 2006 expressly states that students are responsible for maintaining
on ROSI a current and valid mailing address and University-issued email account,
and that “[f]ailure to do so may result in a student missing important information
and will not be considered an acceptable rationale for failing to receive official
correspondence from the University.” Students are expected to monitor and

2

retrieve their email on a frequent and consistent basis. Students have the right to
forward their University issued email account to another email account, but remain
responsible for ensuring that all University email communications are received and
read.
The onus of proof is on the University to establish that it provided the Student with
reasonable notice of the hearing in accordance with these Rules.
In this case, the University provided evidence relevant to service by way of the
evidence of four witnesses: Jade Hazell (“Ms. Hazell”), an Academic Integrity
Assistant in the Academic Integrity Unit at the University, Kimberly Blake (“Ms.
Blake”), a Legal Assistant at the law firm of Paliare Roland Rosenberg Rothstein
LLP, Andrew Wagg (“Mr. Wagg”), an Incident Report Architect at Information
Security, Information Technology Services at the University and Samanthe Huang
(“Ms. Huang”), an Administrative Assistant with the Appeals, Discipline and Faculty
Grievances Office, Office of the Governing Council at the University. These four
witnesses provided their evidence by affidavit, which were accepted by the Panel
pursuant to Rule 61 of the University Tribunal’s Rules of Practice and Procedure
(the “Rules”).
The contents of the affidavits (without Exhibits) of these four witnesses are set out
below:
a) Evidence of Ms. Hazell
Ms. Hazell’s affidavit provides as follows:
1.

I am an Academic Integrity Assistant in the Academic Integrity Unit (“AIU”) at the
University of Toronto Mississauga. As such, I have personal knowledge of the
matters set out in this affidavit. Where I do not have personal knowledge of a
matter, I state the source of my information and that I believe it to be true.

2.

The AIU is responsible for investigating allegations of academic misconduct and
arranging meetings between students and the Dean or Dean’s Designate in

3

accordance with the process set out in the Code of Behaviour on Academic
Matters (the “Code”).
3.

In 2020, our office received allegations from the Department of Mathematical and
Computational Sciences that M

R

(the “student”) used or possessed an

unauthorized aid or obtained unauthorized assistance in connection with his
MAT224 and MAT236 exams in Winter 2020.
4.

From December 16, 2020, to January 12, 2021, I tried to schedule a meeting
between the student and the Dean’s Designate for Academic Integrity to discuss
the allegations that the student committed an academic offence. On January 12,
2021, the student confirmed that he would attend a dean’s meeting that was
scheduled for later that day. I have attached a copy of these emails to my affidavit
as Exhibit A.

5.

On January 12, 2021, I waited in the zoom meeting room for approximately 20
minutes, but the student did not attend the meeting. I emailed the student to inform
him that the meeting had been cancelled because he did not attend. I have
attached a copy of this email to my affidavit as Exhibit B.

6.

On January 13, 2021, I sent the student an email urging him to contact the AIU as
soon as possible. I have attached a copy of this email to my affidavit as Exhibit C.

7.

To date, the AIU has received no further correspondence from the student.

8.

I have attached a copy of the student’s academic record, as of August 26, 2022,
to my affidavit as Exhibit D.

b) Evidence of Ms. Blake
Ms. Blake’s affidavit provides as follows:
1.

I am a legal assistant at the law firm Paliare Roland Rosenberg Rothstein LLP. I
work with William Webb, an associate at Paliare Roland, and Tina Lie, a partner
at Paliare Roland. Both Mr. Webb and Ms. Lie act as Assistant Discipline Counsel
to the University of Toronto. As such, I have knowledge of the matters contained

4

in this affidavit. Where I do not have direct knowledge of a matter contained in this
affidavit, I state the source of my knowledge and that I believe it to be true.
2.

The Academic Integrity Unit (“AIU”) at the University of Toronto Mississauga
provided my office with a copy of the contact information for M

R

(the

“student”) in the University’s Repository of Student Information (“ROSI”). I have
attached a copy of the student’s contact information to my affidavit as Exhibit A.
A.

Charges and disclosure

3.

On February 10, 2022, the Office of the Vice-Provost, Faculty and Academic Life
served the charges in this matter by email to m

.r

@mail.utoronto.ca, which

is the student’s University email account. I have attached a copy of the email and
charges to my affidavit as Exhibit B.
4.

On April 6, 2022, Ms. Lie emailed the student a disclosure letter, a disclosure brief,
and a copy of the University’s Policy on Official Correspondence with Students. I
have attached a copy of the email and the disclosure letter to my affidavit as
Exhibit C.

B.

Hearing

5.

On June 10, 2022, Ms. Lie emailed the student about scheduling a hearing date.
Ms. Lie advised that if she did not hear back by June 17, 2022, she would request
a hearing date be scheduled. I have attached a copy of this email to my affidavit
as Exhibit D.

6.

Mr. Webb has advised me that: on June 20, 2022, he called the student at the
number that the student had provided in ROSI, he spoke with the student’s mother,
he gave the student’s mother his phone number, and asked her to have the student
contact him about an important confidential matter. Later that day, Mr. Webb sent
the student an email that confirmed the details of this call. I have attached a copy
of this email to my affidavit as Exhibit E.

7.

Mr. Webb has advised me that: on June 20, 2022, the student called Mr. Webb
from the number

and that they discussed the charges in this matter.

Later that day, Mr. Webb sent the student an email that asked him to continue

5

checking his University of Toronto email. Mr. Webb sent the student information
about pro bono legal services (Downtown Legal Services), information about feefor-service lawyers, and the disclosure materials. I have attached a copy of this
email to my affidavit as Exhibit F.
8.

On July 5, 2022, Mr. Webb emailed the student about scheduling a hearing date.
Mr. Webb advised that if he did not hear back, by July 11, 2022, he would request
a hearing be scheduled. I have attached a copy of this email to my affidavit as
Exhibit G.

9.

On July 20, 2022, Mr. Webb emailed the Office of Appeals, Discipline and Faculty
Grievances (“ADFG Office”) to request a hearing be scheduled for September 14,
2022, at 1:45 PM. Later that day, Mr. Webb sent another email to the ADFG Office
amending his request and asking that a hearing be scheduled for September 21,
2022, at 9:45 AM. The student was copied on both of these emails. I have attached
a copy of these emails to my affidavit as Exhibit H.

10.

On July 21, 2022, the ADFG Office issued a Notice of Electronic Hearing to take
place via zoom on September 21, 2022, at 9:45 AM. The ADFG Office sent the
notice to the student at m

.r

@mail.utoronto.ca. I have attached a copy of

this email and the attached Notice of Electronic Hearing to this affidavit as Exhibit
I.
11.

Ryan Shah, an articling student at Paliare Roland, has advised me that: on
September 9, 2022, he tried to call the student twice at

, the student

did not pick up, and Mr. Shah left a voicemail that informed him of the date and
time of the hearing and urged the student to contact Mr. Webb to discuss this
matter.
12.

On September 9, 2022, Mr. Shah emailed the student copies of the affidavits of
the University’s witnesses. Mr. Shah stated that the University would rely on the
affidavits at the hearing and asked the student to let our office know whether he
intended to cross-examine any of the affiants. I have attached a copy of this email
to my affidavit as Exhibit J.

6

13.

To the best of my knowledge, the student has not contacted our office since his
phone call with Mr. Webb on June 20, 2022.

c) Evidence of Mr. Wagg
Mr. Wagg’s affidavit provides as follows:
1.

I am an Incident Report Architect at Information Security, Information Technology
Services at the University of Toronto (the “University”). As such, I have knowledge
of the matters contained in this affidavit. Where I do not have direct knowledge of
a matter contained in this affidavit, I state the source of my knowledge and that I
believe it to be true.

2.

Information Technology Services provides many services to the University,
including management of the email accounts used by students. To access an email
account one needs to input both the user’s login id and the password for that
account. The Microsoft 365 Exchange portal automatically records the last time
someone accessed a particular university-issued email account. This is denoted
with the code “LastUserActionTime.” The LastUserActionTime log only updates
when someone logs in to a university-issued email account.

3.

On August 4, 2022, I checked the portal records to determine the last time
someone accessed the email account m

.r

@mail.utoronto.ca. In order to

view the LastUserActionTime log, I ran a PowerShell script.
4.

I determined that the last time someone accessed this e-mail account was on July
25, 2022, at 2:53:18 PM, local Toronto time.

d) Evidence of Ms. Huang
Ms. Huang’s affidavit provides as follows:
1.

I am an Administrative Assistant with the Appeals, Discipline and Faculty
Grievances Office (“ADFG Office”), Office of the Governing Council, University of
Toronto (the “University”) and, as such, have knowledge of the matters contained
in this affidavit.

7

2.

On February 11, 2022, I served M

R

(the “student”) with a letter regarding

the charges that were filed against him, together with copies of the charges, the
Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters, the Rules of Practice and Procedure and
a pamphlet for Downtown Legal Services. I served the student with these
documents by email at m

.r

@mail.utoronto.ca, which is the email address

that the student had provided in the Repository of Student Information (“ROSI”).
Copies of my email and letter (without enclosures) are attached to my affidavit as
Exhibit A.
3.

On July 20, 2022, I received an email from William Webb, Assistant Discipline
Counsel to the University, requesting to schedule an electronic hearing for the
student for September 14, 2022 at 1:45 PM. Subsequently, On July 20, 2020, I
received an additional email from Mr. Webb amending his request and asking that
a hearing be scheduled for September 21, 2022 at 9:45 AM. The student was
copied on both of Mr. Webb’s email.

4.

On July 21, 2022, I served the student with the Notice of Electronic Hearing for a
hearing on September 21, 2022 at 9:45 AM, together with copies of my letter
regarding the charges that were filed against the student and enclosures (which
included the charges) by email. I advised the student that the hearing would be
conducted using the Zoom videoconferencing platform and I provided the student
with the coordinates to access the videoconference. A copy of Mr. Webb’s emails,
my emails, and the Notice of Electronic Hearing are attached to my affidavit as
Exhibit B.

5.

All of my emails to the student were sent to m

.r

@mail.utoronto.ca. I did not

receive a “bounce back” message to any of my emails, indicating that they could
not be delivered.
6.

I have not received a response from the student to any of my correspondence. To
the best of my knowledge, the student has not contacted my office.

The evidence is that the Student was aware of the Charges, but is uncertain as to
whether the Student reviewed them, the disclosure or the Notice of Electronic

8

Hearing. However, the Rules do not require actual notice. The University can serve
the Student, but cannot make the Student actually read what is served.
The University did everything it could reasonably have done to contact the Student
and did take the steps it was required to under the Rules. The Student was made
aware of the charges in his telephone conversation with Assistant Discipline
Counsel on June 20, 2022. The Panel was satisfied it was more likely than not
that the Student had made a deliberate choice some time ago to avoid and turn
his back on any official communications from the University. That choice has
consequences.
Therefore, in light of the evidence and the submissions of Assistant Discipline
Counsel, the Panel was satisfied that the Student had been given reasonable
notice of the hearing in compliance with the notice requirements of the SPPA and
the Rules. The Panel decided to hear the case on its merits in the absence of the
Student.
Charges and Particulars
The charges alleged against the Student as filed by the Provost on February 10,
2022 are as follows:
1.

On or about April 7, 2020, you knowingly used or possessed an unauthorized aid
or obtained unauthorized assistance in connection with the final exam in
MAT224H5 (“MAT224”), contrary to section B.I.1(b) of the Code.

2.

In the alternative, on or about April 7, 2020, you knowingly engaged in a form of
cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or misrepresentation not
otherwise described in the Code in order to obtain academic credit or other
academic advantage of any kind in connection with the final exam in MAT224,
contrary to section B.I.3(b) of the Code.

3.

On or about April 8, 2020, you knowingly used or possessed an unauthorized aid
or obtained unauthorized assistance in connection with the final exam in
MAT236H5 (“MAT236”), contrary to section B.I.1(b) of the Code.

9

4.

In the alternative, on or about April 8, 2020, you knowingly engaged in a form of
cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or misrepresentation not
otherwise described in the Code in order to obtain academic credit or other
academic advantage of any kind in connection with the final exam in MAT236,
contrary to section B.I.3(b) of the Code.

The particulars related to charges 1, 2, 3 and 4 are as follows:
1.

At all material times you were a student enrolled at the University of Toronto
Mississauga.
MAT224

2.

In Winter 2020, you enrolled in MAT224H5S (Linear Algebra II).

3.

As a result of the covid19 pandemic, the final exam in MAT224 was administered
online on April 7, 2020 from 9:00 to 11:30 am. Students were required to complete
the exam independently.

4.

Chegg.com is a subscription based website that allows subscribers to post
problems to the site, which are then answered by “experts”. Subscribers are also
able to access the questions and answers posted by others on the site.

5.

On April 7, 2020, during the final exam in MAT224, you accessed questions and
answers from the final exam that had been posted on Chegg.com. The use of
Chegg.com was not authorized. In accessing the questions and answers, you
sought to obtain and/or did obtain unauthorized assistance in the final exam.

6.

You knowingly submitted the final exam in MAT224 with the intention that the
University of Toronto Mississauga rely on it as containing your own ideas or work
in considering the appropriate academic credit to be assigned to your work.
MAT236

7.

In Winter 2020, you enrolled in MAT236H5S (Vector Calculus).

10

8.

As a result of the covid19 pandemic, the final exam in MAT236 was administered
online on April 8, 2020 from 9:00 to 12:00 pm. Students required to complete the
exam independently.

9.

On April 8, 2020, during the final exam in MAT236, you accessed questions and
answers from the final exam that had been posted on Chegg.com. The use of
Chegg.com was not authorized. In accessing the questions and answers, you
sought to obtain and/or did obtain unauthorized assistance in the final exam.

10.

You knowingly submitted the final exam in MAT236 with the intention that the
University of Toronto Mississauga rely on it as containing your own ideas or work
in considering the appropriate academic credit to be assigned to your work.

The Student’s Position
Given that the Student was not present nor represented, he was deemed to have
denied the charges. As a result, the hearing proceeded on the basis that the
University bore the burden of proving the charges on the balance of probabilities.
Overview
In addition to the previously identified affidavits, the University tendered the
evidence of one witness, Professor Jacopo De Simoi (“Professor De Simoi”), an
Associate Professor in the Department of Mathematical and Computational
Sciences (the “Department”) at the University and is the head of the academic
integrity initiative in the Department who provided his evidence by affidavit, which
was accepted by the Panel pursuant to Rule 61 of the Rules.
After careful deliberation, and having considered all the evidence, the Panel found
that on the balance of probabilities the evidence was sufficiently clear, cogent and
convincing to discharge the burden of proof on the University and found that the
Student had committed academic misconduct.
The Evidence
The contents of Professor De Simoi’s affidavit (without Exhibits) is set out below.

11

a) Evidence of Professor De Simoi
Professor De Simoi’s affidavit provides as follows:
1.

I am an Associate Professor in the Department of Mathematical and Computational
Sciences (the “Department”) at the University of Toronto Mississauga. I am the
head of the academic integrity initiative in the Department. As such, I have
personal knowledge of the matters set out in this affidavit. Where I do not have
personal knowledge of a matter, I state the source of my information and I believe
it to be true.

A.

MAT224H5S (Linear Algebra II)
1.

2.

The course

In Winter 2020, M

R

(the “student”) enrolled in MAT224H5S (Linear

Algebra II) (“MAT224”). I have attached a copy of the MAT224 syllabus to my
affidavit as Exhibit A.
3.

Students were required to write a final exam, which was worth 50% of their grade
in MAT224. The exam was administered on April 7, 2020, from 9:00 am to 12:00
pm. Due to the pandemic, the exam was administered online. There were multiple
versions of the exam. The different versions of the exam used the same underlying
questions, but some questions used different variables.

4.

The exam instructions stated that students were required to work on their own. The
exam instructions stated that students were not permitted to receive help from any
other person or the internet:
What resources am I NOT allowed to use?
•

You are expected to do the test yourself, and on your own (without help
from any other person.)

•

The internet.

Rules during the exam:
•

You may not transmit or receive information from any other individual,
whether in person, digitally, or by some other means.

12

•

You may not access the internet, except to download and print your test,
to submit it digitally through Crowdmark, and possibly ask questions of the
instructors.

[Emphasis in original]

5.

I have attached a copy of the exam instructions to my affidavit as Exhibit B.

6.

I have attached blank copies of the various versions of the MAT224 exam to my
affidavit as Exhibit C.

7.

On April 7, 2020, at 11:45 AM EST the student submitted his MAT224 exam. I have
attached two copies of the student’s exam to my affidavit as Exhibit D. One copy
of the student’s exam contains feedback, and one copy contains no feedback.
2.

8.

Chegg and the MAT224 exam

Chegg is a subscription-based website that allows students to post problems to
the site, which are then answered by so-called “experts”. Subscribers are able to
access the questions and answers posted by others on the site. A copy of the
chegg.com/study webpage is attached to my affidavit as Exhibit E. The webpage
advertises that a “Chegg Study” subscription costs $14.95/month and will allow
subscribers to take a photo of their questions and get an “expert” to answer them.

9.

Chegg has an “Honor Code”, in which it states that its services are not intended to
be used for any sort of cheating or fraud. Chegg permits instructors to request an
“honor code investigation” for alleged violations of its “code”. I have attached a
copy of the Chegg “Honor Code Policy” to my affidavit as Exhibit F.

10.

In May 2020, the department formed an initiative to address professors’ concerns
about academic integrity issues, including the issue that questions from exams in
several courses had been posted to Chegg. I was the head of this initiative and
was responsible for investigating over 400 cases of suspected academic
misconduct in relation to Chegg.

11.

The course instructor found that questions from and answers to the MAT224 exam
had been posted to Chegg during the exam period. I have attached a copy of the
MAT224 exam questions and answers that were posted to Chegg to my affidavit
as Exhibit G.

13

12.

The course instructor reported the issue to the department. The department
requested that Chegg conduct an Honour Code investigation into the matter. The
Chegg Honor Code Team sent the department an Excel spreadsheet which
provided details of the “askers” and “viewers” of the questions that had been
identified. The Chegg Honor Code Team noted that all dates and times provided
are in PST. I have attached a copy of the Chegg data for the MAT224 exam to my
affidavit as Exhibit H.

13.

The Chegg data organizes questions by “Question ID” numbers. The Chegg data
shows that someone posted questions from and answers to the MAT224 exam
during the exam period. In particular:
(a)

Question ID 46797783: a Chegg user posted screen shots of question 1
from Version B of the MAT224 exam on April 7, 2020 at 6:07 AM PST. The
answer was posted on April 7, 2020 at 6:43 AM PST.

(b)

Question ID 46797859: a Chegg user also posted screen shots of
questions 1 from Version D of the MAT224 exam on April 7, 2020 at 6:08
AM PST. The answer was posted on April 7, 2020 at 6:54 AM PST.

14.

The Chegg data shows that a subscriber from the University of Toronto with the
@gmail.com and the internet protocol (“IP”) address

email address m

viewed these Chegg Question IDs during the MAT224 exam. In
particular:
(a)

m

@gmail.com viewed Question ID 46797783 several times

between 7:08 and 7:09 AM PST, which was after the answer had been
posted to Chegg.
(b)

m

@gmail.com viewed Question ID 46797859 several times

between 6:12 and 6:13 AM PST, which was before the answer had been
posted to Chegg.
15.

I have compared the student’s solutions to the Chegg solutions. For questions 1(a)
and 1(b), there are relatively few similarities between the steps in their solutions,
but both the student and Chegg (Question ID 46797783) arrive at the same correct
final answer.

14

16.

For Question 1(c), the student and Chegg (Question ID 46797783) use the same
method, but they arrive at different final answers. In particular:
(a)

Method: the student and the Chegg solution both use the same method
and describe the method in the same imprecise way. The solutions suggest
that dimension is a property of a matrix; dimension is a property of vector
space, but it is not a property of a matrix. The calculation that the student
provides, “Moreover, dimension for an nxn symmetric matrix is 2(3)/2 = 3”,
also lacks sufficient justification and appears to come from nowhere.
Professor Pawliuk, the course instructor, has advised me that he reviewed
the student’s answer, and that this is not a method he would expect
students to know because he did not teach this method in the course.

(b)

Final Answer: Chegg provides an answer to Question 1 on Version B of the
MAT224 exam, which contained the variable “4”. The student provides an
answer to Question 1 on Version D of the MAT224 exam, which contained
the variable “2”. Both answers are correct for their respective versions of
the MAT224 exam.

17.

I have attached a copy of a chart comparing the student’s MAT224 exam answers
and the Chegg answers to my affidavit as Exhibit I.

B.

MAT236H5S (Vector Calculus) (“MAT236”)
1.

18.

The course

In Winter 2020, the student enrolled in MAT236H5S (Vector Calculus) (“MAT236”).
I have attached a copy of the MAT236 syllabus to my affidavit as Exhibit J.

19.

The syllabus contained a section on academic integrity that stated students were
expected to be familiar with the Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters. The
syllabus stated that no aids were permitted on the MAT236 exam.

20.

Students were required to write a final exam, which was worth 52% of their grade
in the course. The exam was administered on April 8, 2020, from 9:00 am to 12:00
pm. Due to the pandemic, the exam was administered online. The MAT236 exam
contained a statement about academic integrity: “The University of Toronto

15

Mississauga and you, as a student, share a commitment to academic integrity.” I
have attached a blank copy of the MAT236 exam to my affidavit as Exhibit K.
21.

On April 8, 2020, the student submitted his MAT236 exam. I have attached a copy
of the student’s MAT236 exam to my affidavit as Exhibit L.
2.

22.

Chegg and the MAT236 Exam

The course instructor for MAT236 found that questions from and answers to the
MAT236 exam had been posted to Chegg.com during the exam period. I have
attached a copy of the MAT236 questions and answers that were posted to Chegg
to my affidavit as Exhibit M.

23.

The course instructor reported the issue to the department. The department
requested that Chegg conduct an Honour Code investigation into the matter. The
Chegg Honor Code Team sent the department an Excel spreadsheet which
provided details of the “askers” and “viewers” of the questions that had been
identified. The Chegg Honor Code Team noted that all dates and times provided
are in PST. I have attached a copy of the Chegg data for the MAT236 exam to my
affidavit as Exhibit N.

24.

The Chegg data shows that someone posted several questions from and answers
to the MAT236 exam. In particular:
(a)

Question ID 46885838: a Chegg user posted screen shots of question 3 on
April 8, 2020, at 6:42 AM PST. The answer was posted on April 8, 2020, at
8:41 AM PST.

(b)

Question ID 46885196: a Chegg user posted screen shots of question 8 on
April 8, 2020, at 6:27 AM PST. The answer was posted on April 8, 2020, at
10:43 AM PST.

25.

The Chegg data shows that a subscriber from the University of Toronto with the
email address m

@gmail.com and the IP address

two Chegg Question IDs during the Exam. In particular:

16

viewed

(a)

m

@gmail.com viewed Question ID 46885838 several times

between 6:57 and 7:47 AM PST, which was before the answer had been
posted to Chegg.
(b)

m

@gmail.com viewed Question ID 46885196 several times

between 9: 6:53 and 8:29 AM PST, which was before the answer had been
posted to Chegg.
C.

The student’s internet protocol address

26.

Quercus is the University’s main online teaching and learning platform. Quercus is
a web-based platform in which students can access course content, submit
assessments, and take tests. To access Quercus, a student needs to input their
user login id and the password for their account.

27.

Quercus generates various logs of activity, including page view reports. Page view
reports use alphanumeric codes to refer to certain types of information, such as
users, courses, and quizzes. Page view reports show the IP address that is
associated with a user’s Quercus activity.

28.

As part of their investigation into the alleged academic misconduct, the University
of Toronto Mississauga obtained a copy of the page view report for the student.

29.

The student’s page view report shows that the student’s Quercus account was
accessed multiple times on the date of the MAT224 exam (April 7, 2020) and on
the date of the MAT236 exam (April 8, 2020) from the IP address
is the same IP address from which m

. This

@gmail.com viewed the Chegg

questions and answers to the MAT224 exam and the MAT236 exam. In particular:
(a)

MAT224: the student’s Quercus account was accessed several times from
the IP address 135.0.95.57 on April 7, 2020, between 9:01 and 11:53 AM
EST. m

@gmail.com accessed Chegg several times from the IP

address

on April 7, 2020 between 9:12 and 10:09 AM EST

(6:12 and 7:09 AM PST).
(b)

MAT236: the student’s Quercus account was accessed several times from
the IP address

on April 8, 2020, between 9:47 AM and 11:46

17

AM EST. m

@gmail.com accessed Chegg several times from

the IP address

on April 8, 2020 between 9:53 and 11:46 AM

EST (6:53 and 8:29 AM PST).
30.

I have attached a copy of the Quercus data to my affidavit as Exhibit O.

The Panel had no questions for Professor De Simoi and this concluded the
University’s evidence.
University’s Submissions
Assistant Discipline Counsel submitted that Professor De Simoi’s evidence,
supports a finding on the balance of probabilities that the Student committed the
academic offences as alleged.
Standard of Proof
The onus is on the University to establish, based upon clear and convincing
evidence on a balance of probabilities, that the academic offences charged have
been committed.
Decision of the Tribunal
Based on the evidence and the submissions by counsel for the University, the
Student was found guilty of one count of knowingly obtaining unauthorized
assistance in connection with the final exam in MAT224H5, contrary to section
B.I.1.(b) of the Code and of one count of knowingly obtaining unauthorized
assistance in connection with the final exam in MAT236H5, contrary to section
B.I.1(b) of the Code as alleged in Charges 1 and 3 filed by the Provost on February
10, 2022.
Given these findings, the University withdrew allegations 2 and 4.
Reasons for Decision
The evidence of Professor De Simoi clearly demonstrated that the Student was
made aware that when writing the exam for MAT224H5, he was required to work

18

on his own and was not permitted to receive help from any other person or the
internet and that when writing the exam for MAT236H5, he was not permitted to
use any aids, to commit to academic integrity and to be familiar with the Code of
Behaviour on Academic Matters.
Despite this, the evidence was clear that someone using the Student’s University
of Toronto email address and IP address, accessed answers to questions from
these exams posted on Chegg.com, during the time he was writing these exams.
As such, the Panel was satisfied on the balance of probabilities that it was the
Student who accessed answers to these exams posted on Chegg.com while he
was writing these exams and as such, the Student committed the academic
offences of knowingly obtaining unauthorized assistance in connection with the
final exam in MAT224H5, contrary to section B.I.1.(b) of the Code and that he also
knowingly obtained unauthorized assistance in connection with the final exam in
MAT236H5, contrary to section B.I.1(b) of the Code as alleged in Charges 1 and
3 filed by the Provost on February 10, 2022.
Sanction
The University’s Evidence
The University provided the Panel with a Book of Documents (Sanction)
containing the Affidavit of Jade Hazell (Sanction).
The contents of Ms. Hazell’s affidavit (without Exhibits) is set out below:
a) Evidence of Ms. Hazell
Ms. Hazell’s affidavit provides as follows:
1.

I am an Academic Integrity Assistant in the Academic Integrity Unit (“AIU”) at the
University of Toronto Mississauga. As such, I have personal knowledge of the
matters set out in this affidavit. Where I do not have personal knowledge of a
matter, I state the source of my information and that I believe it to be true.

19

2.

The AIU is responsible for investigating allegations of academic misconduct and
arranging meetings between students and the Dean or Dean’s Designate in
accordance with the process set out in the Code of Behaviour on Academic
Matters (the “Code”).

3.

The AIU maintains a database of academic integrity allegations against students.
There is a “Discipline Case Report” for each allegation in the database, which
records the details relating to the allegation and the outcome.

4.

According to the AIU’s records, M

R

(the “student”) has committed two

prior offences.
A.

First Offence: Unauthorized Aids or Assistance in CSC108

5.

In Fall 2017, the student registered in CSC108H5F: Introduction to Computer
Programming. On December 4, 2017, the student submitted an assignment that
was worth 10% of his final grade in the course.

6.

On December 8, 2017, the student admitted that he used an unauthorized aid or
obtained unauthorized assistance in connection with his CSC108 assignment. The
matter was resolved at the departmental level. The student was sanctioned with a
grade of zero on his CSC108 assignment. I have attached a copy of the Discipline
Case Report for this offence to my affidavit as Exhibit A.

7.

On January 11, 2018, Professor Konstantin Khanin, then-Chair of the Department
of Mathematical & Computational Sciences, sent a letter to the student describing
the sanction imposed by the department. I have attached a copy of this letter as
Exhibit B.

B.

Second Offence: Unauthorized Aids or Assistance in MAT202

8.

In Winter 2020, the student registered in MAT202H5S: Introduction to Discrete
Mathematics. On April 3, 2020, the student submitted an assignment that was
worth 3% of his final grade in the course.

9.

On September 17, 2020, the Academic Integrity Unit sent the student a letter that
alleged the student obtained unauthorized assistance in connection with his

20

MAT202 assignment. The letter stated that the student could attend a Dean’s
Designate meeting to discuss the allegations, or sign and return an admission
form. I have attached a copy of this letter to my affidavit as Exhibit C.
10.

On December 11, 2020, the student signed and returned the admission form to the
Academic Integrity Unit. The student admitted that he obtained unauthorized
assistance in connection with his MAT202 assignment and accepted the proposed
sanction. I have attached a copy of the student’s signed admission to my affidavit
as Exhibit D.

11.

The matter was resolved at the divisional level. The student was sanctioned with
a grade of zero on his MAT202 assignment, a further reduction of 3 marks from
his final grade in MAT202, and an annotation on his academic transcript from
September 1, 2020 to September 1, 2021. I have attached a copy of the Discipline
Case Report for this offence to my affidavit as Exhibit E.

The University provided the Panel with a Book of Authorities containing a number
of prior decisions of this Tribunal and a chart summarizing them.
The University’s Submissions
Counsel for the University submitted that the proper sanctions to be imposed on
the Student should be:
(a)

a final grade of zero in MAT224H5 in Winter 2020;

(b)

a final grade of zero in MAT236H5 in Winter 2020;

(c)

a suspension from the University of Toronto from the date of this order for
a period of 3 years and 11 months;

(d)

a notation of the sanction on his academic record and transcript for a period
of 4 years and 11 months; and

21

(e)

that the Tribunal further order that this case be reported to the Provost for
publication of a notice of the decision of the Tribunal and the sanction
imposed, with the Student’s name withheld.

Assistant Discipline Counsel reviewed with the Panel the chart summarizing the
sanctions which have been given to students by this Tribunal in prior similar cases.
Assistant Discipline Counsel then reviewed with the Tribunal the principles relative
to sanction as set out in The University of Toronto and Mr. C. (Case No. 1976/773, November 5, 1976) (“Mr. C.”), namely:
(a)

The character of the Student;

(b)

The likelihood of a repetition of the offence;

(c)

The nature of the offence committed;

(d)

Any extenuating circumstances;

(e)

The detriment to the University caused by the misconduct; and

(f)

The need for general deterrence.

In this regard, Assistant Discipline Counsel submitted that as the Student did not
attend the hearing, there is no evidence as to his character and so that is a neutral
factor.
Further, the fact that this conduct occurred during the early days of the pandemic
which was a difficult time for students could be a mitigating factor.
However, the Student’s prior academic offences makes the likelihood of repetition
very likely and his use of Chegg.com was an aggravating factor.
Assistant Discipline Counsel further submitted that the request for a 3 years and
11 months suspension rather than a 4 year one, was designed to permit the

22

Student to be able to enroll to resume his studies at the University for the fall of
2026.
Sanction Decision
After deliberations, the Tribunal ordered that the following sanctions shall be
imposed on the Student:
(a)

a final grade of zero in MAT224H5 in Winter 2020;

(b)

a final grade of zero in MAT236H5 in Winter 2020;

(c)

a suspension from the University of Toronto from the date of this order for
a period of 3 years and 11 months;

(d)

a notation of the sanction on his academic record and transcript for a period
of 4 years and 11 months; and

(e)

that the Tribunal further order that this case be reported to the Provost for
publication of a notice of the decision of the Tribunal and the sanction
imposed, with the Student’s name withheld.

An Order was signed at the hearing by the Panel to this effect.
Reasons for Sanction
The Panel considered the submissions of Assistant Discipline Counsel and the
factors and principles relevant to sanction in Mr. C, supra, as set out above.
In addition to these factors, the Panel considered the affidavit of Ms. Hazell
contained in the University’s Book of Documents on Sanction and the other
decisions of this Tribunal involving similar misconduct as contained in the
University’s Book of Authorities and the sanctions imposed. However, the Panel
remained cognizant of the fact that no two cases are identical and that it is not
bound by past decisions of this Tribunal. However, the Tribunal does try to develop

23

a consistent body of cases so that students are treated fairly and consistently in
similar circumstances.
By cheating on the final exams in MAT224H5 and MAT236H5, the Student
undermined the grades-based system of evaluation and broke the honour code
that is essential to modern learning. In that regard, the pandemic and the resulting
required online learning provides more opportunities for students to cheat,
requiring the University to go to considerable lengths to detect and uncover
students’ misconduct.
In today’s online world, it is easy for students to find new ways to access
unauthorized assistance and so any sanction must denounce cheating on tests
and deter others in order to protect the academic integrity of the University.
Students must understand that this kind of misconduct will have serious
repercussions, so that they will be dissuaded from the temptation to consider
cheating.
The Panel accepted the University’s submission that by using Chegg.com, a
subscription-based website, the Student committed a serious form of academic
misconduct, while considering the range of sanctions provided by prior decisions
of this Tribunal in similar circumstances, and given the Student’s prior academic
offences, a period of 3 years and 11 months suspension of the Student from the
University rather than expulsion was appropriate.
Dated at Toronto, this 4th day of November 2022

Original
signed by:
______________________________________
Mr. Christopher Wirth, Chair
On behalf of the Panel

24

