Case No.: 993
THE UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
IN THE MATTER OF charges of academic dishonesty filed on December 17, 2018
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters, 1995,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Act, 1971, S.O. 1971, c. 56 as am. S.O. 1978, c. 88

B E T W E E N:
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
- and K

Q

(the “Student”)

Reasons for Decision
Hearing Dates: March 27, 2019 and July 26, 2019

Members of the Panel:
Ms. Cheryl Woodin, Chair
Professor Kenneth Derry, Faculty Panel Member
Mr. Andrew Opper, Student Panel Member
Appearances:
Ms. Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland, Rosenberg Rothstein
LLP
Hearing Secretary:
Ms. Jennifer Dent, Associate Director, Office of the Appeals, Discipline, Faculty
Grievances
Not in Attendance:
The Student

2
Introduction
1.

The Trial Division of the University Tribunal was convened on March 27, 2019 to
consider charges brought by the University of Toronto ("the University") against
the Student under the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic
Matters, 1995 ("the Code").

2.

The Student was unrepresented and did not attend the meeting. The hearing
was adjourned pending supplementary submissions. On May 3, 2019 the
University provided supplementary submissions to demonstrate the Student was
provided with reasonable notice of the hearing.

3.

On July 4, 2019 the panel released a decision (attached as Appendix A)
confirming that reasonable notice of the hearing had been provided to the
Student and that the hearing would proceed in the Student’s absence.

4.

The Trial Division of the University Tribunal reconvened on July 26, 2019 in the
Student’s absence.

The Charges and Particulars
5.

The Charges and Particulars alleged against the Student are as follows:

Charges
1.

In or about December 2017 and/or January 2018 you knowingly forged or
in any other way altered or falsified an academic record, and/or uttered,
circulated or made use of such forged, altered or falsified record, namely, a
document which purported to be your certificate for the degree of Honours
Bachelor of Science dated June 18, 2008, contrary to section B.I.3(a) of the
Code.

2.

In the alternative, in or about late 2017 and/or January 2018 you knowingly
engaged in a form of cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud
or misrepresentation not otherwise described in order to obtain academic

3
credit or other academic advantage of any kind, contrary to section B.I.3(b)
of the Code, in connection with a document which purported to be your
certificate for the degree of Honours Bachelor of Science dated June 18,
2008.
Particulars:
3.

At all material times you have been a student at the University of Toronto
(“University”).

4.

In or about late 2017 and/or January, 2018 you provided to the Canadian
Consulate in Shanghai, a document that purported to be a degree certificate
confirming that you had fulfilled the requirements of the University of
Toronto and admitting you to the degree of Honours Bachelor of Science
with Distinction, dated June 18, 2008 (“Degree Certificate”).

5.

Contrary to the information contained in the Degree Certificate:
(a)

you have not fulfilled the requirements for admission to a degree from
the University,

(b)

you are not eligible to receive and have not received a degree from
the University, and

(c)

in particular you have not received the Degree Certificate from the
University.

6.

You provided the forged, altered and falsified Degree Certificate knowing
that it was forged, altered, and/or falsified when you circulated it by
providing it to the Canadian Consulate.

7.

You had an obligation to provide accurate and truthful information and not
to misrepresent your academic record. You had an obligation not to provide
forged or falsified documents to the Canadian Consulate.

4
The Evidence Related to the Charges
6.

Evidence was submitted on behalf of the University through affidavits
tendered by Jacqueline Cummins, Law Clerk at Paliare Roland Rosenberg
Rothstein LLP (“Paliare Roland”), and Sana Kawar, Manager at the
University of Toronto Transcript Centre in the Faculty of Arts and Science.

7.

The evidence was admitted on the basis of Rule 61 of the Tribunal’s Rules.
The Tribunal had no questions for the affiants regarding their evidence.

8.

Ms. Kawar gave evidence that on January 4, 2018, the University received
a request from the Canadian Consulate in Shanghai, China (the
“Consulate”) to verify the authenticity of an Honours Bachelor of Science
degree granted to the Student dated June 18, 2018.

9.

The Consulate was not satisfied as to the authenticity of the transcript
because the colour of the seal and the signatures were not the same as
other University of Toronto degrees.

10.

Ms. Kawar responded to the Consulate on the same day to request the date
of birth for the Student. The Consulate provided the date of birth and Ms.
Kawar accessed the Student’s ROSI account.

11.

The ROSI showed that the Student:
(a)

first registered with the University of Toronto Mississauga in 1st
Year Studies in Computer Science in the 2003 Fall term;

(b)

was enrolled in courses between the 2003 Fall term and the 2005
Fall Term;

(c)

was granted late withdrawal without academic penalty in the 2006
Winter term;

(d)

enrolled in classes again the 2009 Fall and 2010 Winter terms, still
in 1st Year studies in Computer Science;

(e)

was place on academic probation at the end of the 2010 Winter
term;

5

12.

(f)

had not enrolled at the University in any term since the end of the
2010 Winter term; and

(g)

had earned a total of 4.0 credits with a cumulative grade point
average of 1.04.

At the time that the Student represented he had achieved a degree from the
University, he had not even earned the four credits he ultimately completed.

13.

There is no University evidence to support the representation made by the
Student that he had ever been awarded an Honours Bachelor of Science
Degree from the University of Toronto.

The clear and uncontroverted

evidence disproves this representation.
14.

Ms. Kawar correctly determined that the University had never conferred a
degree on the Student. The University in turn advised the Consulate of this
fact.

Decision of the Tribunal on the Charges
15.

The University must establish on a balance of probabilities through clear
and convincing evidence that an academic offence has been committed by
the Student.

16.

On the evidence presented, it is clear that the Student knowingly produced
a forged and fraudulent degree to the Canadian Consulate in Shanghai,
China purporting to be a certificate for the degree of Honours Bachelor of
Science dated June 18, 2008.

In light of the evidence regarding the

Student's actual academic standing with the University, this can only be
explained as a deliberate attempt to misrepresent, and grossly overstate,
his academic progress.
17.

The Tribunal is so satisfied and finds that the Student is guilty of charge #1.

18.

Counsel for the University advised that if the Tribunal convicted the Student
on charge #1, the Provost would withdraw charge #2 and this was done.

6
Decision of the Tribunal on the Penalty
19.

20.

The University sought the following penalty:
(a)

That the Student be immediately suspended from the University for
a period of up to five years;

(b)

That the Tribunal recommend to the President of the University that
he recommend to the Governing Counsel that the Student be
expelled from the University;

(c)

That a permanent notation shall be placed on the Student’s
academic record and transcript; and

(d)

That this case be reported to the Provost for publication of a notice
of the decision of the Tribunal and the sanction or sanctions
imposed, with the name of the student withheld.

The suspension is intended to cover the period between this decision and
any expulsion confirmation.

21.

An appropriate penalty is determined by reference to what are called the
Mr. C. factors (Case No. 1976/77-3, November 5, 1976), which are to
achieve the goals of reformation, deterrence and protection of the public.
Each case requires consideration of how and in what combination these
factors will determine the result.

22.

The penalty must reflect the fact that the offence had the capacity to
undermine the University's integrity and, as a result, the credibility of those
who receive a degree from the University.

23.

The University asserts that forged transcripts are a growing concern and
that it is important that students (former, current and future) be aware of the
consequences of this conduct which, if not sanctioned, has the effect of
undermining the very core of how the university recognizes academic
accomplishment and signals its intention to protect the integrity of its
degrees to the world.

24.

Strong denunciation of the conduct is therefore required.

7
25.

The Student made limited progress towards attaining a degree while
enrolled at the University and is no longer enrolled at the University. In
these circumstances, reformation of this Student is of limited relevance to
the analysis.

26.

In this case, there are no mitigating factors relevant to the assessment of a
penalty. The Student has not acknowledged his responsibility for serious
misconduct. He has taken no steps to participate in this process although
there is a reasonable basis to conclude he was aware that the University
had been put on notice of the offence committed by virtue of communication
he received from the Consulate as set out in our reasons of July 4, 2019.

27.

The requested penalty is consistent with the developed body of uniform
decisions from this Tribunal for similar offences in which there are no
extenuating circumstances which might justify a different penalty.

28.

The penalty as requested by the University as set out above is granted.

29.

The case shall be reported to the Provost for publication of a notice of the
decision of the Tribunal and the sanction imposed, with the name of the
Student withheld.

Dated at Toronto this 1st day of November, 2019

________________________________
Ms. Cheryl Woodin, Chair

APPENDIX A
Case No.: 993
THE UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
IN THE MATTER OF charges of academic dishonesty filed on December 17, 2018,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters, 1995,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Act, 1971, S.O. 1971, c. 56 as amended S.O. 1978,
c. 88

BETWEEN:
UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
- and K

Q

(the “Student”)

Reasons for Decision Re: Hearing in Student’s Absence
Hearing Date: March 27, 2019
Members of the Panel:
Ms. Cheryl Woodin, Chair
Professor Kenneth Derry, Faculty Panel Member
Mr. Andrew Opper, Student Panel Member
Hearing Secretary:
Ms. Krista Osbourne, Administrative Clerk and Hearing Secretary, Office of the Appeals,
Discipline, Faculty Grievances
Appearances:
Ms. Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg Rothstein LLP
Not in Attendance:
the Student

2

1.

The Trial Division of the University Tribunal was convened on March 27, 2019 to
consider charges brought by the University of Toronto ("the University") against
the Student under the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic
Matters, 1995 ("the Code").

2.

On December 17, 2018, the Student was charged under the Code with knowingly
forging or in any other way altering or falsifying an academic record and/or
uttering, circulating or making use of such academic record (the “Charges”) in
connection with a degree certificate dated June 18, 2008 in his name, purporting
to grant him an Honours Bachelor of Science degree from the University (the
“Degree”).

3.

The Charges arose following a request to the University on January 4, 2018 from
the Canadian Consulate in Shanghai, China to verify the authenticity of the
Degree, which had been provided to the Consulate by the Student.

4.

The Student did not attend the hearing and was not represented.

5.

The onus of proof is on the University to demonstrate that it provided a student
with reasonable notice of the hearing.

6.

In this case the hearing was adjourned to permit the University to provide
additional evidence and make supplementary submissions regarding steps taken
to provide the Student with notice of the hearing. Supplementary submissions
were received on May 3, 2019. They included an Affidavit of Jacqueline Cummins.

7.

With the benefit of those submissions, the panel has determined that the hearing
should proceed on the next reasonably available date without further notice to the
Student.

3
Service on the Student
8.

A hearing of this Tribunal was convened on March 27, 2019, to address the
Charges. A Notice of Hearing was sent to the parties from the Office of Appeals,
Discipline and Faculty Grievances on March 13, 2019 in accordance with the
requirements of section C.II.(a)(4) of the Code and Rules 9(c) and 14 of the
Tribunal’s Rules of Practice and Procedure (the “Rules”).

9.

The Student attended the University from the fall of 2003 until he withdrew in the
winter 2006 term. He next enrolled in courses in the fall of 2009. The last term in
which he attended classes was the 2010 Winter term.

10.

In accordance with the University’s Policy on Official Correspondence with
Students, students enrolled at the University of Toronto are required to maintain
current contact information in their Repository of Student Information (“ROSI”)
record, and to update that information if it changes.

11.

The University’s Policy on Official Correspondence with Students came into effect
on September 1, 2006, before the Student stopped attending the University.

12.

Pursuant to Rule 9 of the Rules, a Notice of Hearing may be served on a student
by various means, including by sending a copy of the document by courier to the
student’s mailing address in ROSI or by emailing a copy of the document to the
student’s email address in ROSI.

13.

The University complied with Rule 9.

14.

In addition, the University attempted to communicate the hearing date to the
Student using a “gmail” address which he had provided to the University on
August 1, 2007 when he submitted a form to request to re-activate his student
record.

15.

The University has also advised that the Canadian Consulate in Shanghai
communicated to the Student that it needed to verify the Degree with the
University. The Student withdrew his request to the Canadian Consulate in

4
Shanghai before the Consulate’s inquiry was completed. The Student was
therefore on notice of the Consulate’s intention to communicate with the
University about the degree which is the subject of these charges.
16.

Pursuant to sections 6 and 7 of the Statutory Powers Procedure Act (the “Act”)
and Rule 17 of the Rules where reasonable notice of an oral hearing has been
given to a party in accordance with the Act or the Rule, as the case may be, and
the party does not attend the hearing, the Tribunal may proceed in the absence
of the party and the party is not entitled to any further notice in the proceeding.

17.

The University has requested that the Tribunal proceed with this hearing in the
absence of the Student.

18.

Based on the totality of the attempts made to provide notice to the Student, the
Tribunal has concluded that the Student was given reasonable notice of the
hearing. The University’s efforts to serve and communicate with the Student
comply with both the Rules and the Act. The hearing shall proceed in the Student’s
absence without further notice to the Student.

Dated at Toronto this 4th day of July, 2019

___________________________________
Ms. Cheryl Woodin, Chair

