Case 993

DATE:

   November 1, 2021

PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v. K.Q.

HEARING DATE:

   March 27, 2019 and July 26, 2019

Panel Members:

   Ms. Cheryl Woodin, Chair
   Professor Kenneth Derry, Faculty Panel Member
   Mr. Andrew Opper, Student Panel Member

Appearances:

   Ms. Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg
   Rothstein LLP

In Attendance:

   Ms. Jennifer Dent, Associate Director, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty
   Grievances

Not in Attendance:

   The Student

   The Student was chargedÂ under s. B.i.3(a)Â of theÂ Code of Behaviour
   on Academic Matters, 1995,Â (âCodeâ)Â for knowingly
   forging,Â alteringÂ andÂ falsifying anÂ academic record, which he
   circulated. Specifically,Â the Student provided to the Canadian
   Consulate of Shanghai a document that purported to beÂ a certificate
   for the degree of Honours Bachelor of ScienceÂ from the University of
   Toronto.Â Alternatively, he wasÂ alsoÂ charged under s. B.i.3(b) of
   theÂ Code.

   Because the StudentÂ was unrepresented andÂ did not attend
   theÂ hearing, theÂ PanelÂ adjourned theÂ hearing, pending receipt of
   supplementary submissions by the UniversityÂ demonstrating that the
   Student had been provided with reasonableÂ notice of the
   hearing.Â Following receipt of the Universityâs submissions,
   theÂ PanelÂ subsequently released a decisionÂ concludingÂ that
   reasonable notice of the hearing had been provided to theÂ Student
   andÂ reconvenedÂ in the Studentâs absence.

   TheÂ PanelÂ held there was no evidenceÂ to support
   theÂ StudentâsÂ representation that he had been awarded an Honours
   Bachelor of ScienceÂ Degree from the University of
   Toronto.Â TheÂ UniversityâsÂ Repository of Student Information
   (ROSI)Â revealed that the Student hadÂ enrolled in several classes at
   the University, butÂ thatÂ theÂ University had never conferred a degree
   on the Student. Given the StudentâsÂ academic standing, the Panel
   described the Studentâs action as aÂ deliberate attempt to misrepresent
   and grossly overstate his academic progress.Â On a balance of
   probabilities, theÂ PanelÂ found theÂ Student guilty
   ofÂ contraveningÂ s. B.i.3(a)Â of theÂ Code.Â TheÂ University withdrew
   the charge underÂ s. B.i.3(b)Â of theÂ Code.

   In discussing theÂ penalty, theÂ PanelÂ noted thatÂ strong denunciation
   of the conduct is requiredÂ andÂ held that reformation of the Student
   is of limited relevanceÂ to theÂ analysisÂ on sanction because the
   Student had made limited progress towards attaining a degree while
   enrolled at the University and was no longer at the University.Â There
   were no mitigating factorsÂ and the Student had not acknowledged his
   responsibility forÂ hisÂ serious misconduct.

   TheÂ PanelÂ imposed the following sanctions:Â immediate suspension from
   the University for a period of up to five yearsÂ to cover period
   between Panelâs decision and expulsion
   confirmation;Â aÂ recommendationÂ to the PresidentÂ that the Student be
   expelled; a permanentÂ notation on the Studentâs academic record and
   transcript;Â thatÂ a report be issuedÂ to the Provost for publication
   of a notice of the decision of theÂ PanelÂ and the sanction imposed,
   with the name of the Student withheld.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/28694
