Case No. 1363
THE UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
IN THE MATTER OF charges of academic dishonesty made on May 2, 2022,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic
Matters, 2019,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Act, 1971, S.O. 1971, c. 56 as amended
S.O. 1978, c. 88
B E T W E E N:
UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
- and V

M

REASONS FOR DECISION
Hearing Date: June 7, 2023, via Zoom
Members of the Panel:
Douglas F. Harrison, Chair
Dr. Blake Poland, Faculty Panel Member
Jessica Johnson, Student Panel Member
Appearances:
Tina Lie, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg Rothstein LLP
Joe Berger, Co-Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg Rothstein LLP
Hearing Secretary:
Carmelle Salomon-Labbé, Associate Director, Office of Appeals, Discipline and Faculty
Grievances
Not In Attendance:
V

M

Charges and Hearing

-2-

1.

The Trial Division of the Tribunal held a hearing by videoconference on June 7, 2023, to

address the following charges brought by the University of Toronto (the “University”) against
V

(the “Student”) under the Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters, 2019

M

(the “Code”), which were set out in a letter to the Student dated May 2, 2022:

1.

On or about March 22, 2021, you knowingly obtained unauthorized assistance in
connection with Term Test 3 in CSC165H1S (the “Course”), contrary to section B.I.1(b)
of the Code.

2.

In the alternative, on or about March 22, 2021, you knowingly engaged in a form of
cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or misrepresentation not otherwise
described in the Code in order to obtain academic credit or other academic advantage of
any kind in connection with Term Test 3 in the Course, contrary to section B.I.3(b) of the
Code.

Particulars of the offences charged are as follows:

1.

At all material times you were a student enrolled at the University of Toronto Faculty of
Arts and Science.

2.

In Winter 2021, you enrolled in CSC165H1S (Mathematical Expression and Reasoning
for Computer Science).

3.

Term Test 3 in the Course was administered online on March 22, 2021 (the “Test”).

4.

Students were required to complete the Test independently, without obtaining any
assistance from other students (or other individuals).

5.

On March 22, 2021, you submitted your answers to the Test.

6.

You knowingly obtained unauthorized assistance from others on the Test, which you
knew was not permitted.

-3-

7.

In particular, you did not answer the question asked of you at Question 2 of the Test.
Instead, you provided an answer to a question asked in an alternate version. You obtained
the alternate version of the question from another source, and in doing so, obtained or
sought to obtain unauthorized assistance in the Test.

8.

You knowingly committed a form of cheating, academic dishonesty, or misconduct for
the purposes of obtaining academic credit and/or other academic advantage.

Service
2.

The Student did not attend the hearing. In order to proceed with the hearing in the

Student’s absence, the Tribunal therefore had to determine if reasonable notice was given to the
Student, as required by section 6 of the Statutory Powers Procedure Act, R.S.O. 1990, c. S.22
(the “SPPA”) and by rule 17 of the University Tribunal’s Rules of Practice and Procedure (the
“Rules”).
3.

On the issue of service, counsel for the University presented affidavit evidence from

Kimberly Blake and Andrew Wagg. This evidence, as outlined below, demonstrated that all
relevant materials in this matter were delivered to the Student via email to the Student’s email
address as recorded in the University’s Repository of Student Information (“ROSI”).
4.

Delivery by email to a student’s email address as recorded in ROSI is permitted and is

considered valid service for a hearing before this Tribunal by virtue of rule 13(c) of the Rules. It
is not necessary to physically deliver materials to effect valid service.

Pursuant to the

University’s Policy on Official Correspondence with Students (the “Policy”), the University and
its divisions may use email for delivering official correspondence to students. This Policy also
directs that students are responsible for maintaining and advising the University of their current
email address through ROSI. Students are expected to monitor their University email accounts
regularly.
5.

In the present case, an email was sent to the Student’s email address (as recorded in

ROSI) on August 31, 2021, by Professor Elizabeth Cowper, Dean’s Designate for Academic

-4Integrity. In this email, Professor Cowper said that the Student Academic Integrity office had
received a report from the Department of Computer Science that the Student had committed an
academic offence under the Code. In particular, the Student had allegedly obtained unauthorized
assistance or used an unauthorized aid during an online assessment on March 22, 2021, in the
course CSC165H1S (20211) (the “Course”, as defined above). Professor Cowper said that the
Student was entitled to an opportunity to meet with her to discuss the matter, which would allow
the Student a chance to explain what happened. She also said that based on that meeting she
could decide to impose a sanction, refer the matter to the Vice-Provost, or dismiss the case. She
also said that the Student could waive the meeting and admit to committing an academic offence,
in which case the Student would receive a mark of zero for the test in question and an annotation
in his transcript until August 31, 2022. If the Student wished to meet, she asked him to contact
the Student Academic Integrity team by September 15, 2021. She also advised the Student that it
was very important for him to meet with an academic advisor for support.
6.

From October 15, 2021, to November 5, 2021, the Student Academic Integrity Office of

the University’s Faculty of Arts and Science (“SAI”) sent three emails to the Student’s ROSI
email account, attempting to schedule a meeting between the Student and the Dean’s Designate
for Academic Integrity, to discuss the allegation of academic misconduct at issue. SAI did not
receive a response from the Student. On January 17, 2022, SAI sent the Student an email,
informing him that his file was being sent to the Vice-Provost for review, with the
recommendation that charges be laid and the Student’s case be heard by the University’s
Tribunal.
7.

On May 2, 2022, the Office of the Vice-Provost, Faculty and Academic Life sent an

email to the Student’s ROSI email address, serving the Student with a copy of a letter from
Professor Heather Boon, the University’s Vice-Provost, Faculty & Academic Life, attaching the
charges. On the same day, the Office of Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances (“ADFG”)
sent an email to the Student’s ROSI email account, serving the Student with a letter regarding the
charges filed, together with copies of the charges, the Code, links to the websites of Downtown
Legal Services and of the Law Society Referral Service, and a link to a database of past Tribunal
decisions.

-58.

Emails were sent to the Student, to his ROSI email account, by Tina Lie, a partner with

Paliare Roland Rosenberg Rothstein LLP (“Paliare Roland”), who acts as Assistant Discipline
Counsel to the University, as follows:
1.

May 17, 2022, Ms. Lie introduced herself to the Student and advised that
important documents and correspondence would be sent in future to the Student’s
contact email address;

2.

September 21, 2022, Ms. Lie attached a disclosure letter and PDFs of the
University’s Disclosure Brief and its Policy on Official Correspondence with
Students;

3.

March 22, 2023, she proposed dates for the hearing of this matter, asked the
Student to respond by March 29, 2022, regarding his availability, advised that the
hearing would proceed electronically via videoconference unless the Student
requested otherwise, and invited the Student to contact her to discuss the case; and

4.

March 31, 2023, Ms. Lie noted that she had not heard from the Student and
requested that the hearing for this matter be scheduled for June 7, 2023 at 9:45
a.m.

9.

On April 10, 2023, the ADFG Office served the Student, via the Student’s email address

in ROSI, with the Notice of Electronic Hearing for a hearing on Wednesday, June 7, 2023, at
9:45 a.m. Eastern Time (the “Notice”), together with copies of Professor Cowper’s and the
ADFG Office’s May 2, 2022, letters regarding the charges and enclosures. The email from the
ADFG Office also included the coordinates to access the Zoom videoconferencing platform for
the hearing.
10.

On May 16, 2023, Joseph Berger, a lawyer at Paliare Roland working with Ms. Lie,

emailed the Student, providing the Student with the affidavit evidence of the Provost’s witnesses,
and asked if the Student intended to conduct cross-examinations.

-611.

Neither Ms. Lie nor Mr. Berger received any correspondence or other response from the

Student. In addition, neither of them received a bounce back message indicating that their email
messages to the Student could not be delivered.
12.

At the request of Mr. Berger, on May 30, 2023, Andrew Wagg, Manager, Incident

Response, at Information Security, Information Technology Services at the University of
Toronto, checked the last time someone had accessed the Student’s university email account (the
contact email in ROSI). Mr. Wagg determined that the last time was on March 1, 2022, at 12:06
a.m. (Toronto time).
13.

In addition to their email address, students are required to provide a current telephone

number and mailing address in ROSI. On March 30 and April 19, 2023, Kimberly Blake, a legal
assistant at Paliare Roland who works with Ms. Lie, attempted to call the Student at the phone
number the Student provided in ROSI. On both occasions, her calls went to a recording that
indicated that the person was not available and inviting her to leave a message.
14.

When she called on March 30, 2023, Ms. Blake left a message indicating that she was

calling on behalf of Ms. Lie, who was prosecuting an academic discipline matter for the
University involving the Student and advising the Student to check his University email account,
before the voice message was cut off and the call was ended. She called back moments later and
left another message, asking that the Student call Ms. Lie and to check his University email
account. Ms. Blake also advised that Ms. Lie wanted to resolve the matter or set a hearing date,
and that if the Paliare Roland office did not hear back from the Student, they would attempt to
schedule a hearing date in June 2023.
15.

When she called on April 19, 2023, Ms. Blake left a detailed message for the Student

advising that a hearing date had been scheduled for June 7, 2023, that Ms. Lie wanted to speak
with the Student and advising the Student to check his University email account.
16.

As of June 2, 2023, no communication had been received by Paliare Roland from the

Student.

-717.

The Tribunal convened at 9:45 on the morning of June 7, 2023, in accordance with the

Notice. The Tribunal then waited 15 minutes to allow the Student or a representative of the
Student to sign in to the hearing. After that time, neither the Student nor a representative
appeared.
18.

The University complied with its obligations to provide reasonable notice of the charges

and the hearing to the Student by delivering all its letters and notices to the Student via the
Student’s email address in ROSI. The University even went beyond what was required by trying
to telephone the Student and leaving voicemail messages. The Student’s email was last accessed
on March 1, 2022, after SAI had emailed the Student at least four times about this matter. The
Student chose to ignore the University, at his peril. It is not necessary to find that the Student
received actual notice, or that the Student’s email address was last accessed after the charges
were sent to that email. It was the Student’s responsibility to check his email account or provide
another email address to the University if the one in ROSI was no longer current.
19.

This case is similar to University of Toronto and Y.P. (Case No. 1313, October 31, 2022).

In that case, it was clear the student was not checking their email by the time the charges and the
hearing notice were served. However, the student had been told in emails sent prior the last time
their email account was accessed, that they were subject to an allegation of academic misconduct
and meetings with the Dean’s Designate to discuss the matter were scheduled. The Tribunal in
that case determined that there had been reasonable notice of the charges and the hearing in
accordance with the notice requirements set out in the SPPA and the Rules and proceeded with
the hearing in the student’s absence.
20.

Accordingly, the Tribunal concluded that the Student had received reasonable notice of

the hearing and of the charges, and ordered that the hearing proceed in their absence, as
permitted by section 7(3) of the SPPA and rule 21 of the Rules.
Facts
21.

In support of the charges, Counsel for the University tendered an affidavit from Francois

Pitt, an Associate Professor, Teaching Stream, in the Department of Computer Science, in the

-8Faculty of Arts and Science, the contents of which are described below. As noted above, a copy
of this affidavit was emailed to the Student by Mr. Berger on May 16, 2023. Professor Pitt was
available if the Tribunal had any questions for him (it did not).
22.

In the Winter 2021 term, the Student was a student in CSC165H1S: Mathematical

Expression and Reasoning for Computer Science (as defined above, the “Course”). Professor
Pitt was the course coordinator and an instructor for the Course. The Course was designed to
provide students with an introduction to logical notation and reasoning, and an understanding of
using and developing precise expressions of mathematical ideas, including definitions and
theorems.
23.

Students in the Course were evaluated based on the results of 11 weekly preparation

assignments, five problem sets, five term tests, and four research surveys.

The Course’s

complete grading scheme was provided to all students in the course outline. The weekly
preparation assignments were together worth 5%, the problem sets were together worth 33%
(with set “0” worth 1% and sets 1-4 each worth 8%), the term tests were together worth 61%
(test “0” worth 1%, tests 1-3 each worth 12%, and test 4 worth 24%) and the four research
surveys were together worth 1%.
24.

The outline for the Course indicated, under the heading “Academic Integrity” on page 8,

that all work students submitted must be their own and that it is an academic offence to copy the
work or someone else, even someone who is not a student, unless that work is explicitly and
clearly attributed to its original source. Students were welcome to work appropriately with other
students.

However, collaboration on problem set and term test solutions was “strictly

forbidden”, other than between group members on problem sets.

The outline also stated,

“Certainly you must not let others see your solutions, even in draft form. Please do not cheat.”
25.

Term Test 3 in the Course (“Term Test 3”) was administered online on March 22, 2021,

using an online platform called “MarkUs”. It was available to students in the Course from 9:00
a.m. to 9:00 p.m. that day. Students in the Course were given 60 minutes to complete Term Test
3, starting from the time they first accessed it online. Students were required to complete the test
independently.

-926.

Term Test 3 consisted of four questions. Professor Pitt prepared multiple versions of

each of the four Term Test 3 questions, which were randomly assigned to students in the Course,
in order to prevent students from collaborating with each other on the test. There were six
different versions of Question 2 on Term Test 3. The Student received Version 4 of Question 2
(“Version 4”).
27.

The Student submitted his answers to Term Test 3 on March 22, 2021, in three separate

files (two files were submitted at 5:41 p.m.; the third and final file was submitted at 5:50 p.m.).
Along with his answers, the Student submitted a signed Academic Integrity Statement, attesting
to fact that he had “abided fully by the Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters”, that he had
“not commited [sic] academic misconduct” and that he was “aware of the penalties that may be
imposed if I have committed an academic offense”.
28.

The Student received an overall grade of 14.04 out of 16 on Term Test 3 (an earned grade

of 15/16, with a - 0.96 penalty for late submission).
29.

The T.A. marking the Student’s answer to Term Test 3, marked Question 2 as if the

Student had received Version 5 instead of Version 4, as the Student’s answer in fact
corresponded with Version 5. The Student therefore received a grade of 3/3 on Question 2 of
Term Test 3.
30.

Upon reviewing the Student’s Term Test 3 answers, Professor Pitt noticed the Student’s

answer to Question 2 corresponded with Version 5, rather than Version 4 which had been
distributed to the Student. This suggested to Professor Pitt that the Student had collaborated with
another Student in the Course, who had been provided Version 5, for the following reasons:

- 10 1.

On Version 4, in answering question 2(a) students were asked to provide a fourdigit long number. On Version 5, in answering question 2(a) students were asked
to provide a five-digit number. The Student provided a five-digit number,
consistent with what was asked in Version 5, not Version 4.

2.

On Version 5, in answering question 2(a) students were asked to produce a
number which included “exactly two 0’s and three one’s, with no leading 0’s”.
This was not a component of the question in Version 4. The Student’s answer to
2(a) (“10011”) contained exactly two 0s and three ones, without a leading 0,
consistent with what was requested in Version 5, not Version 4.

3.

On Version 4, in answering question 2(a) students were asked to make their
answer as large as possible, whereas in Version 5 students were asked to make
their answer as small as possible. The Student's answer was consistent with
Version 5, by using digits that were as small as possible under the constraints of
the problem given in Version 5.

4.

On Version 4, in answering question 2(b) students were asked to provide a threedigit long number. On Version 5, in answering question 2(b) students were asked
to provide a four-digit number. The Student provided a four-digit answer
(“FEDC”), consistent with what was asked in Version 5, not Version 4.

- 11 5.

On Version 4, in answering question 2(b) students were asked to write a number
in base 8 (with the subscript 8), while on Version 5, 2(b) students were asked to
write a number in base 16 (with the subscript 16). The Student provided an
answer in base 16, consistent with what was asked in Version 5, not Version 4.

6.

On Version 4, in answering question 2(b) students were asked to make their
answer as small as possible, whereas in Version 5 students were asked to make
their answer as large as possible. The Student's answer was consistent with
Version 5, by using digits that were as large as possible under the constraints of
the problem.

7.

On Version 4, in answering question 2(c) students were asked to write a number
in base 16 (with a subscript 16), while on Version 5, in answering question 2(c)
students were asked to write a number in base 8 (with a subscript 8). The Student
provided an answer in base 8, consistent with what was asked in Version 5, not
Version 4.

8.

On Version 4, in answering question 2(c) students were asked to make their
answer as large as possible, whereas in Version 5 students were asked to make
their answer as small as possible. The Student's answer was consistent with
Version 5, by using digits that were as small as possible under the constraints of
the problem given in Version 5.

31.

On May 6, 2021, Professor Pitt met with the Student regarding alleged academic

offences.
32.

The matter was forwarded to the University’s Department of Computer Science and

ultimately to SAI.
Finding on Charges

- 12 33.

The Student was charged under section B.I.1(b) of the Code, by which it is an offence to

obtain unauthorized assistance in any academic examination or term test or in connection with
any other form of academic work.
34.

The Student was also charged, in the alternative, under section B.I.3(b) of the Code, by

which it is an offence to engage in any form of cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct,
fraud or misrepresentation not otherwise described in the Code, in order to obtain academic
credit or other academic advantage of any kind.
35.

The Student knew that he was not permitted to collaborate with other students during a

Term Test.
36.

Having considered the evidence of Professor Pitt, and in particular the instances in which

the Student’s answer to Question 2 of Term Test 3 corresponded with the correct answers to
Version 5 of that question, despite the Student’s test containing Version 4, the Tribunal finds that
on a balance of probabilities, the Student violated the Code by collaborating with someone who
had received Version 5, or by somehow improperly accessing answers to Version 5.
37.

Accordingly, the Tribunal finds that the Student is guilty of the offence of obtaining

unauthorized assistance in a term test, contrary to s. B.I.1(b) of the Code.
38.

Upon these findings, Counsel for the University advised that the University was

withdrawing the alternative charge, as set out in paragraph 2 of the charges (see paragraph 1,
above).
Sanction
39.

Section C.II.(B) of the Code sets out that the Tribunal may impose a range of sanctions

on a student who has been convicted under the Code, ranging from an oral reprimand to a fiveyear suspension or, more severely, a recommendation to the President of expulsion or to
Governing Council of cancellation of a degree. The Tribunal may also order that any sanction it
imposes be recorded on the student’s academic record and transcript for a period of time and

- 13 may also report any case to the Provost, who may publish a notice of the decision and sanction in
the University newspapers, with the name of the student withheld.
40.

The Code also contains, in Appendix “C”, the Provost’s Guidance on Sanctions, section

B.8(b) of which provides, “absent exceptional circumstances, the Provost will request that the
Tribunal: … suspend a student for two years for any offence involving academic dishonesty,
where a student has not committed any prior offences”.
41.

In this instance, the University sought an Order that the Student receive a final grade of

zero in the Course and a two-year suspension, along with a notation on the Student’s record and
transcript for three years and a report to the Provost for publication with the Student’s name
withheld.
42.

This request was in part based on sanctions handed down by the Tribunal in previous

cases, the Provost’s Guidance on Sanctions (but which are not binding on this tribunal), and on
the factors laid down by this Tribunal in University of Toronto and Mr. C (Case No. 1976/77-3,
November 5, 1976) (“Mr. C”).
43.

The reasons for decision in Mr. C set out factors that a tribunal should consider when

imposing a sanction:

44.

a.

The character of the person charged;

b.

The likelihood of a repetition of the offence;

c.

The nature of the offence committed;

d.

Any extenuating circumstances surrounding the commission of the offence;

e.

The detriment to the University occasioned by the offence; and

f.

The need to deter others from committing a similar offence.

With respect to factors (a) and (d), character and extenuating circumstances, respectively,

there was no evidence one way or the other before the Tribunal. The Student did not participate

- 14 in the process beyond his initial meeting with Professor Pitt in May 2021. There is no evidence
of remorse or insight, no evidence of a willingness to take responsibility for his actions and no
evidence of a willingness to learn from his mistakes. The onus was on the Student to put
forward mitigating evidence and none was presented.
45.

With respect to factor (b), likelihood of repetition, the Student was in the Winter term of

his first year at the time of the test and has not enrolled at the University since (although it
appears the Student transferred five International Baccalaureate higher level credits to his
Academic Record in the Summer 2021 term). There is no evidence of a pattern of misconduct
but also nothing to show that the Student has learned from his mistake or that he appreciates its
gravity. Again, there is no evidence of remorse or insight on the Student’s part.
46.

With respect to factors (c), (e) and (f), the nature of the offence, the detriment to the

University and the need for deterrence, respectively, obtaining unauthorized assistance, which
effectively allows the student to cheat by copying answers from another, improper source onto a
test, as the Student has committed, is an extremely serious offence that harms the institution and
the academic process. It is a serious breach of academic integrity and can be seen as an attempt
to defraud the University. It is always a temptation to seek assistance during a test administered
online. Here, the Student clearly gave in to that temptation to try to obtain a better result on the
test than he felt he could otherwise achieve. The fact that the Student was caught in this instance
is a testament to Professor Pitt’s system of employing different versions of the questions and to
his vigilance in noticing the anomalies in the Student’s answers. Not every instructor would, or
could, employ such a system. Therefore, the associated penalty must act as general deterrent
against this behaviour.
47.

As was noted by this Tribunal in University of Toronto v. T.J. (Case No. 1102, November

5, 2021), at para. 11(e), with respect to the need to deter others from committing similar offences
(factor (f) in Mr. C.):
[C]heating on exams must always be denounced and deterred in order to protect the
academic integrity of the University. In today’s online world, it is all too easy for
students to find new outlets for unauthorized assistance. Students must understand that

- 15 this kind of misconduct will have serious repercussions, so that they will be dissuaded
from the temptation to cheat when under pressure.

48.

It is accepted that there is no benchmark or starting point that a Tribunal is meant to

apply in sanctioning a student who has been found to have violated the Code. The sanction in a
particular case is to be determined based on the circumstances of that case. However, previous
decisions of the Discipline Appeals Board and this Tribunal have found that students must be
treated fairly and equitably when being sanctioned, and that there must be a general consistency
in the approach of the Tribunal generally (see University of Toronto v. B.S. (Case No. 697,
January 17, 2014 (Sanction)), at paragraphs 8-11).
49.

Counsel for the University directed the Panel to a number of previous decisions of the

University Tribunal on the issue of unauthorized assistance in tests or exams.
50.

In University of Toronto v. S.R. (Case No. 708, June 6, 2014), the student was found to

have collaborated with another student during a midterm test, in which they had been seated in
adjoining seats. The clear similarities between their test papers, particularly with respect to
identically incorrect answers, and evidence from a witness who had seen the student during the
test speaking with the other student in the adjoining seat, established that the student had
obtained unauthorized assistance during the test.

The student did not participate in the

proceeding. The Tribunal imposed a sanction of a mark of zero in the course, a two-year, fivemonth suspension, and a four-year notation.
51.

In University of Toronto v. X.Y. (Case No. 1147, November 11, 2021), the student was

found to have submitted, in a final exam administered online in April 2020, in a first-year
mathematics course, a number of answers that were obviously similar to answers submitted by
five other students, including answers with the same random mistakes as other students. The
student did not participate in the proceeding. The Tribunal found that the student was guilty of
having obtained unauthorized assistance in connection with a final exam, and concluded that it
was appropriate to impose a sanction of a mark of zero in the course, a two-year suspension, and
a three-year notation.

- 16 52.

Finally, in University of Toronto v. Y.C. and L.F. (Case Nos. 1372 and 1373, March 7,

2023), both students were found to have submitted, in a midterm exam administered online in
October 2020, in an introductory Calculus course, answers that were identical or virtually
identical, including the same steps and the same mistakes. Where questions called for written
answers, the students’ answers used virtually identical language. Neither student participated in
the proceedings. The Tribunal found both of them guilty of obtaining unauthorized assistance,
and imposed on both of them a sanction of a mark of zero in the course, a two-year suspension,
and a three-year notation.
53.

In the present case, the Student has no prior record of academic misconduct. However,

he has been found to have engaged in a serious breach of academic integrity. While the fact that
he chose not to participate in this process will not be considered an aggravating circumstance, he
passed up the opportunity to present evidence of mitigating or extenuating circumstances.
Accordingly, in light of the foregoing, the Tribunal concludes that the sanction requested by the
Provost is reasonable and appropriate in the circumstances of this case and is consistent with
prior decisions of this Tribunal.
54.

The Tribunal therefore orders that the following sanctions be imposed on the Student:
a) a final grade of zero in the course CSC165H1 in Winter 2021;
b) a suspension from the University for a period of two years from June 7, 2023; and
c) a notation of this sanction on the Student’s academic record and transcript for a period of
three years from June 7, 2023.

55.

In addition, the Tribunal orders that this case be reported to the Provost for publication of

a notice of the decision of the Tribunal and the sanctions imposed, with the name of the Student
withheld.

- 17 Dated at Toronto, this 8th day of September, 2023.

__________________________________
Douglas Harrison, Chair
On behalf of the Panel

