Report 381

DATE:

   April 28, 2016

PARTIES:

   Dr. R.E. (the Student) v. the Faculty of Medicine

Hearing Date(s):

   February 10, 2016

Committee Members:

   Ms. Sara Faherty, Chair
   Professor Paul Kingston
   Mr. Raiyyan Khan

Secretaries:

   Mr. Christopher Lang, Director, and Ms. Tracey Gameiro, Associate
   Director, Office of Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances

Appearances:

For the Student Appellant:

   Dr. R.E., the Appellant (âthe Studentâ)
   Mr. Jordan Goldblatt, Adair Barristers, Counsel

For the Faculty of Medicine:

   Dr. Glen Bandiera, Faculty of Medicine
   Dr. Lisa Bahrey, Department of Anesthesia
   Dr. Mark Levine, Department of Anesthesia
   Ms. Sari Springer, Littler LLP, Counsel

   Appeal from the decision of the Faculty of Medicine Faculty Appeals
   Committee and the PGME Board of Examiners to dismiss the Student from
   his Residency Program. The Student failed to meet the standards of his
   Remediation with Probation period. The terms of the Remediation Plan
   were set out in a document that set forth numerous elements of
   remediation, which was subsequently modified at the request of the
   Board of Examiners. The Faculty of Medicine determined that the Student
   failed on the first two required measures, and therefore did not
   administer the third measure. The Board of Examiners accepted the
   Facultyâs conclusions and dismissed the Student.

   The Student appealed to the Academic Appeals Committee. The Student
   identified six points in which the implementation of the Plan differed
   from the written agreement. The issue on appeal was whether aspects of
   the actual Remediation process were unjust and constituted substantial
   changes to the Remediation Plan, or whether they constituted changes at
   all. The Student asked for three remedies; namely, that the Committee
   determine that the Plan was not complied with, that he was entitled to
   a proper Remediation Program, and that he was entitled to a further
   period of Remediation. The Committee noted at the outset that the
   Studentâs request to be granted a further period of Remediation fell
   outside the purview of the AAC, which can determine whether the
   Facultyâs policies were applied fairly and whether the Student was
   entitled to reinstatement in the program, but not whether he was
   entitled to a further period of Remediation. The Committee noted that
   despite some administrative errors and miscommunications from the
   Faculty surrounding the Remediation Plan, the miscommunication was
   insignificant and the Planâs substantive goals were met. The Committee
   emphasized that modifications based on patient safety were well advised
   and could not form a basis for invalidating the Plan. Further, the
   Student did not demonstrate that the changes made to the Plan
   prejudiced him. The Committee also noted that though the
   miscommunication surrounding the Plan was unfortunate, the Student
   should have made an effort to resolve it, especially since the stakes
   were so high for him. The Committee concluded that the Student failed
   to achieve the medical expert grades and the necessary level of
   communication skills as set out in the Plan, and therefore that the
   Facultyâs Appeals Committeeâs decision was reasonable. Appeal
   dismissed.
   [1]View Report

References

   1. file:///media/12626
