Case 811

DATE:

   December 8, 2015

PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v Y.L.

Hearing Date(s):

   September 29, 2015

Panel Members:

   Sarah Kraicer, Chair
   Joel Kirsh, Faculty Member
   Simon Czajkowski, Student Member

Appearances:

   Robert Centa, Assistant Discipline Counsel
   Dylan Clark, Director of Contemporary Asian Studies
   Pamela Klassen, Deanâs Designate for Academic Integrity, Office of the
   Dean, Faculty of Arts and Science

In Attendance:

   Christopher Lang, Director, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances
   Johanna Braden, Observer
   Student charged under s. B.i.1(d) , s. B.i.1(f) and, in the
   alternative, s. B.i.3(b) of the Code . The charges related to
   allegations that the Student knowingly represented ideas from other
   sources as his own in the Essay for the Course and that the Student
   submitted the Essay for credit knowing that it contained references to
   sources that had been concocted. The Student was not present at the
   hearing. The Panel concluded that the efforts made to contact the
   Student by email were reasonable as per sections 6 and 7 of the
   Statutory Powers Procedure Act and Rule 17 of the University Tribunal
   Rules of Practice and Procedure. The Panel ordered that the hearing
   proceed in the Studentâs absence.
   The Student was found guilty with respect to the plagiarism and
   concoction charges. The University then withdrew the alternative charge
   of academic dishonesty not otherwise described. The Panel took into
   account the fact that the Student had considerable experience with
   academic work at the University at the time he submitted the Essay,
   supporting the finding that he either knew or ought to have known that
   the Essay contained plagiarism and concocted references. The Panel also
   noted that the Student had committed two prior acts of plagiarism, the
   latter of which resulted in a meeting with the Deanâs Designate only 3
   days before the Student submitted the plagiarized Essay at issue in
   this case. Though the Student acknowledged that he committed the
   offences at a meeting with the Deanâs Designate, the Panel did not
   consider this acknowledgment of responsibility to be a mitigating
   factor given his disregard for the two prior warnings he received. The
   Panel emphasized that the concoction of references exacerbates the
   seriousness of plagiarism because it adds a further element of
   dishonesty to the offence.
   The Panel noted that the likelihood that the Student would repeat this
   misconduct was high, and stated that a significant penalty is warranted
   to achieve specific deterrence in these circumstances. The Panel did
   not accept the Universityâs proposed penalty of a 3-year notation of
   the sanction on the Studentâs academic record, noting that 3 years was
   insufficient to reflect the Studentâs misconduct history, the
   likelihood that he would repeat the misconduct, and the need for
   specific deterrence. The Panel also noted that it would be
   inappropriate and misleading for this more serious offence to receive a
   notation period shorter than the notation for the earlier, less serious
   sanction. The Panel imposed a grade assignment of zero in the Course; a
   3-year suspension; a notation on the Studentâs academic record and
   transcript until his graduation from the University; and that the case
   be reported to the Provost for publication.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12887
