Case #1031

   DATE : November 11, 2019
   PARTIES : University of Toronto v. S.K.
   HEARING DATE : September 16, 2019

   Panel Members :
   Mr. F. Paul Morrison, Chair
   Dr. Chris Koenig-Woodyard, Faculty Panel Member
   Ms. Julie Farmer, Student Panel Member

   Appearances :
   Ms. Lauren Pearce, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland
   Rosenberg Rothstein LLP

   In Attendance :
   Krista Kennedy, Administrative Clerk and Hearing Secretary, Office of
   the Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances

   Not in Attendance :
   The Student

   The Student was charged with plagiarism under s. B.i.1(d) of the Code
   of Behaviour on Academic Matters, 1995 (the â Code â) on the basis that
   she knowingly represented the work of another as her own, in an essay
   submitted for academic credit.

   The Student entered a guilty plea to the charge. The Student did not
   appear at the hearing but had executed a Consent which recorded that
   the Student did not wish to attend or participate further in the
   proceedings. The parties entered an Agreed Statement of Facts (ASF).
   The Student admitted in the ASF that she knowingly submitted an essay
   for academic credit which included, without attribution, verbatim or
   nearly verbatim passages from a graduate thesis by another student. The
   Tribunal accepted the Studentâs guilty plea.

   The parties submitted a Joint Submission on Penalty. The Panel noted
   that the University had sanctioned the Student for two prior academic
   offences. It further noted that a panel is not obliged to accept a
   Joint Submission and that it remains the obligation of the Panel to
   impose a fit sentence in the circumstances of every case. The Panel
   stated, however, that the companion obligation by which a Panel is
   equally bound is that a Joint Submission may be rejected only in
   circumstances where to give effect to it would be contrary to the
   public interest or bring the administration of justice into disrepute.
   Only if a Joint Submission is truly unreasonable or unconscionable
   should it be rejected. The University filed a chart synthesizing the
   penalties imposed in comparable cases, and the Panel stated that it
   accepted that the penalty proposed was justifiably comparable to the
   penalties imposed in the comparable cases. The Panel accepted the Joint
   Submission of the parties.

   The Tribunal imposed the following sanctions: a final grade of zero in
   the affected course; a suspension from the University until April 30,
   2023; and a notation of the sanction on the Studentâs academic record
   and transcript until April 30, 2024. The Tribunal also ordered that the
   case be reported to the Provost for publication of a notice of the
   decision and the sanctions imposed, with the name of the Student
   withheld.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/28800
