Case #824

   DATE: June 15, 2016
   PARTIES: University of Toronto v O.S.
   Hearing Date(s): February 5, 2016
   Panel Members:
   William C. McDowell, Chair
   Markus Bussmann, Faculty Member
   Alberta Tam, Student Member
   Appearances:
   Robert Centa, Assistant Discipline Counsel
   Lucy Gaspini, Manager, Academic Integrity and Affairs, Office of the
   Dean, University of Toronto Mississauga
   Kathleen Yu, Instructor of the Course
   In Attendance:
   Christopher Lang, Director, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances
   Tracey Gameiro, Associate Director, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty
   Grievances
   Trial Division â s. B.i.1(a) of the Code â forged documents â Student
   altered his test paper before submitting it to his professor for
   re-grading â hearing not attended â reasonable notice of hearing
   provided â finding on evidence â finding on guilt â mitigating factor
   of no prior academic offences â grade assignment of zero; 2-year
   suspension; 3-year notation on the Studentâs academic record and
   transcript; case reported to Provost for publication
   Student charged under s. B.i.1(a) of the Code . The charge related to
   allegations that the Student altered his test paper before returning it
   to the Course Instructor for re-grading. The Student was not present at
   the hearing. The Panel took into account evidence of the Studentâs
   correspondence with University Counsel and the Office of Appeals,
   Discipline and Faculty Grievances in determining that he had reasonable
   notice of the hearing. The hearing proceeded in the Studentâs absence.
   Student found guilty with respect to the forged documents charge. The
   Panel took into account evidence that the Student made significant and
   obvious alterations to his test. The Panel noted that the Student had
   no prior convictions for offences of dishonesty and therefore imposed a
   penalty more lenient than it might otherwise be. The Panel imposed a
   grade assignment of zero; a 2-year suspension; a 3-year notation on the
   Studentâs academic record and transcript; and that the matter be
   reported to the Provost for publication.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12907
