THE UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
IN THE MATTER OF charges of academic dishonesty filed on November 6, 2015,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters,
1995,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Act, 1971, S.O. 1971, c. 56 as am. S.O.
1978, c. 88

B E T W E E N:
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO

- and -

-

O

S

REASONS FOR DECISION
Hearing Date: February 5, 2016
Members of the Panel:
Mr. William C. McDowell, Lawyer, Chair
Professor Markus Bussmann, Faculty Panel Member
Ms. Alberta Tam, Student Panel Member
Appearances:
Robert Centa, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Barristers
Ms. Lucy Gaspini, Manager, Academic Integrity & Affairs, Office of the Dean,
University of Toronto, Mississauga
Professor Kathleen Yu, Department of Economics, University of Toronto,
Mississauga

In Attendance:
Mr. Christopher Lang, Director, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances
Ms. Tracey Gameiro, Associate Director, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty
Grievances

--

Not In Attendance:
O
S
, Student

1.

Mr. ~ appeared before the Panel on February 5, 2016 charged

with a series of offences of academic dishonesty.
2.

Mr. Centa, on behalf of the Provost, indicated that the University only

sought a finding with respect to the first charge, namely,
On or after February 12, 2015, [Mr. ~ ] knowingly forged or in
any other way altered or falsified [his] test paper for Term Test #3 in
ECO202 ("Course"), which was a document or evidence required by the
University, or he knowingly uttered, circulated or made use of that forged,
altered or falsified document, contrary to section B.1.1 (a) of the Code.

3.

For the reasons that follow, we concluded that Mr. ~ committed

the offence in the first allegation, namely that he altered his test paper for Term
Test #3 in EC0202 ("Course"), and that the test paper was a document required
by the University. We also accepted that he had circulated the altered document,
contrary to s. B.1.1 (a) of the Code.

SERVICE

4.

Mr. Centa reviewed with us correspondence with Mr.

~

consisting of a series of emails between Mr. Centa and the student.

Mr.

~ initiated no further email correspondence after December 16, 2015.

He had received disclosure of the University's case against him, and we are
satisfied that he was aware that this hearing was to take place. We note that in

2

the correspondence from the Office of Appeals, Discipline and Faculty
Grievances, Ms. Krista Osborne advised Mr. ~ as follows:
You may choose to attend the hearing with or without
representation, or not to attend at all. If you do not attend, the
hearing may take place without you and you will not be entitled to
further notice in the proceeding. If you do not attend you will be
notified in writing of the outcome. [emphasis in the original]
In these circumstances we thought it appropriate to proceed.

THE FACTS

5.

Mr. ~ enrolled in the Course which was taught by Professor

Kathleen N. Yu at the University of Toronto Mississauga ("UTM"). The Course
canvassed various topics in macroeconomics, monetary assistance, and
economic stabilization policies, among others. The syllabus contained detailed
instructions with respect to the course work as well as the mechanics of grading.
6.

Professor Yu required that each student execute a document known as

the Course Syllabus Acknowledgement Form ("the CSAF"). This document
outlined the expectations from the point of view of the instructor as well as the
student.

Mr. ~ executed the CSAF on September 28, 2014.

In so

doing, he represented that he had read and understood the policies "stated in the
University's Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters and Code of Student
Conduct and will abide by those policies".
7.

On February 12, 2015, M r . ~ handed in Term Test #3. The test

canvassed policies which might be put in place to address the financial crisis of
2008, should those after effects continue to be felt in the economy in 2013. It
3

required that students draw graphs illustrating the labour market as well as other
components such as the aggregate supply and aggregate demand present in the
economy.
8.

Mr. ~ achieved a grade of 19 points out of a possible 50.

Unhappy with this result, he purported to submit Term Test #3 for re-grading.
Professor Yu is an extremely diligent instructor.

When she returns tests to

students, she first scans each test so there is a digital copy of the student's work
product. It seems that Mr. ~ was unaware of this, because he made
significant and obvious alterations to his test, to correct some fundamental errors
which he had made. He also made certain additions. To take the very simple
example, he had written in the original "since unemployed [sic] decreased, GEP
increased hence we show that as shift of variables AD [or aggregate demand] to
the right from point D to E in the AD/AS graph." This was incorrect; when he
submitted the paper for re-grading he had changed "AD" to "AS".
9.

He had also added significant statements to the essay portion of the exam

and modified the graphs which had been previously submitted.

Professor Yu

quickly realized that the test paper had been altered.

10.

The Panel inquired whether the illicit alterations would have improved the

mark. Quite fairly, Professor Yu said that she thought that this would have been
the effect, but had not concluded grading the paper once she realized that
portions of it had been altered.

4

11.

The alteration of the paper was obvious. On the evidence before us, there

did not appear to be any question that Professor Yu received the paper from Mr.
~ - We could not think of any alternate explanation on the record before
us, and accordingly found that Mr. ~ had committed the offence
charged.

PENALTY

12.

Mr. Genta provided us with a Brief of Authorities. There did not appear to

be a case directly on point. The decisions which we reviewed all involved either
students who had had prior convictions for offences of dishonesty or students
who had committed multiple offences which came on for hearing before the
Panel at the same time. For that reason, the penalty which we imposed was
somewhat more lenient than it might have been. We found that the following
sanction was appropriate:
(a)

Mr. ~ shall receive a grade of zero in the Course;

(b)

He shall be suspended from the University for 2 years from the date
of our Order, dated February 5, 2016;

(c)

A notation on his record shall remain for 3 years from the date of
our Order, dated February 5, 2016;

5

(d)

The matter shall be reported to Provost who may publish a notice of
the decision of the University Tribunal and the sanctions imposed,
with Mr.

name withheld.

w

DATED at Toronto, this

l s>day of June, 2016.

William C. McDowell, Co-Chair

6

