Case 03-04-02

DATE:

   April 16, 2004

PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v. Mr. P.

Hearing Date(s):

   January 28, 2003, February 4, 2004 and March 31, 2004

Panel Members:

   Michael Hines, Co-Chair
   Professor Arthur Silver, faculty member,
   Cynthia Wesley-Esquimaux, student member,

Appearances:

   Gleb Bazov, DLS, for Mr. P.
   Lily I. Harmer, for the University
   Paul Holmes, Judicial Affairs Officer
   Betty-Ann Campbell, Paliare Roland Rosenberg Rothstein LLP
   Mr. P., accused
   Student charged with five offences under s. B.i.1(a), and
   alternatively, five offences under s. B.i.3(b) of the Code. The charges
   related to allegations that the Student provided two forged letters and
   a forged Motor Vehicle Accident Report in support of a request to write
   a make-up lab final test in one course, and that the Student provided
   false information supporting his absence from a term exam in another
   course and a forged handwritten fax in support of the false
   information. Neither the Student nor counsel for the Student were
   present at the hearing. The Panel considered evidence that that there
   was a possibility that the Student no longer resided in Canada and
   found that it was appropriate to adjourn the hearing to make further
   efforts to locate and serve the Student with notice of the hearing. At
   the reconvened hearing, the Student pleaded guilty to the charges. The
   parties submitted an Agreed Statement of Facts. The Panel considered
   the Agreed Statement of Facts and the submissions of counsel and
   accepted the guilty plea. The Panel doubted the Studentâs credibility
   and found his testimony unreliable. The Panel found that the Studentâs
   actions were egregious and reprehensible. The Panel found that the
   Student lied repeatedly to his professors, forged numerous documents,
   implicated other organizations, including a police service and while
   admitting wrongdoing to the Dean in one case, he continued to lie about
   another in a clear and calculating attempt to avoid full
   accountability. The Panel considered the Studentâs submission that he
   was a changed person as a result of the birth of his son and that at
   the time of the events in question he was reacting to the stress of
   learning he was to become a father. The Panel found that the Studentâs
   lies began one month before he learned that he was to become a father.
   The Panel observed that stresses resulting from learning about becoming
   a father do not end with the birth of oneâs child. The Panel stated its
   discomfort with the prospect of the Student having to cope with future
   difficulties. The Panel considered the Studentâs academic history and
   status and found that his proximity to obtaining his degree was not a
   relevant factor to consider. The fact that the Student could have
   succeeded in meeting an acceptable academic threshold did not make up
   for the inconsistencies between his character and the core values of
   the University. The Panel accepted the Universityâs submission on
   penalty and imposed a mark of zero in the two courses; a recommendation
   to the President, further to s. C.ii.(b)(i) of the Code, that the
   Student be expelled from the University; and that a report be issued to
   the Provost.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12718
