UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
TillAL DIVISION
IN TI-ill MATTER charges of acadeniic dishonesty made on April 26, 2010, i:vlay 7, 20 l O (lnd
May 7, 2010;
AND IN THE MATTER of the University of Toronto Code ofBehaviour on Academic 1\,Ja1ters,
1995;
AND IN THE MATTER of the University of Toronto Act, 1971, S.O. 1971, c. 56, as amended
S.O. 19~~> C, 88;

BETWEEN:

THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
AND-

s

C

,N

H

l(

ANDM

Hearing Date: June 14, 2010
Members of the Pnncl:
Ms. Julie Hannaford, Darrister and Solicitor, Chair
Professor Andrea Litvak, Faculty of Social Work, Faci1lty Panel :lvfember
1v1r. Sybil Derrible, Student Panel r. Iembel'
1

Appearances:
Mr. Robert Centa, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Barristers
Iv!s. Camil1e Labclrnk, Law Student, Downtown Legal Servicesi for Ms. S .
Mr. Joshua Chan, Law Student, Downtown Legal Services, for Ms. N . H
Ms. Alyssa Manji, Law Student, Downtown Legal Services, for Ms. M ,

C

1

K

In Attendance:
Dr. Tamara Jones, Academic Integrity Ot11cer (formerly), Office of Student Academic Integrity
Professor John Browne) Dean's Designate, Office of Student Academic Integrlty
Ms. Rebecca Smith, Coordinator Student Crisis Response Program, Student Life, Office of the
Assistant Vice - President
l\ ls. Natalie Ramtahal, Coordinator, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances
1

1.

The charges in this case arise out of events that took place in the winter term of 2009,
when each of the Students were enrolled in a course taught at the University, called
"Modernism and Colonial Korea (EAS 333H1). The course was taught by Professor
Janet Poole ("Course").

2.

Professor Poole's syllabus for the course included a section about plagiarism. It included
extracts from the Code of Behaviour on Academic 1vlntters ("Code"), and the professor's
own statement about how plaginrism constitutes a breach of trust between the i.mtrnctor
and the student. The Students cnch received a copy of the syllabus. The portion of the
syllabus that referred to plngimism stated:
"I consider plagiarism to be a serious breach of trust between instructor and
student and will refer all cases to the appropriate authority according to U of T's
Code of Behnviom on Academic Matters. This code defines academic offences
Rs follows:

It is an or in any other way offence if a student knowingly;
o

0

•

o

forges alters or falsifies any document or evidence required by the
University, or utters, circulates or makes use of any such forged, altered or
falsified document, whether the record be in print or electronic form;
uses or possesses an un.mthorized aid or aids or obtain unauthorized
assistance in any academic examination or tem1 test or in cormection with
any other form of academic work;
personates another person, or has another person personate, at i:tny
academic examination or term test in coimection with any other fonn of
academic work;
represents as one's own any idea or expression of an idea or work of
another in any academic work, i.e., to commit plagiarism;
submits, without the knowledge and approval of the instructor to whom it
is submitted, any academic work for which credit has previously been
obtained or is being sought in another course or program of stndy in the
University ot elsewhere;
submits any academic work containing a purpo1tcd statement of fact or
reference to a source which has been concocted.
(http://www.ntoronto.ca/academicintegrity/acadernicoffenses.html)

2

If you are not clear what plagiarism is or are worried that you nrny unwittingly
plagiarise, pk<1se see the following link and/or come and talk to me:
ht lp ://www.,vri ting. uto ronto. ca/mi vice/us iug-sou rces/ho\v-not-to-plagia ri ze".

3.

Professor Poole assigned a paper ns part of the Course. Tbe paper was worth 30% of the
final grade. It was to be 8-10 pages long, and it wns due on iVlflrch 3, 20 l 0 [this was -111
extended deadline from Febnrnry 24 1 201 O].

4.

Each of the Students submitted their papers on March 3, 20 l 0. The details of the papers
submitted by each of the students are as follows:
(a)

Ms. C
("C

(b)

Ms. H

submitted a paper titled "Depiction of the City in 1930s Korean Fiction
Essny");
submitted a paper titled "Nostalgia m1d Modernity in Korean Fiction of

the 1930s" (''H
(c)
5.

r. 1s. K
1

Essay"); and

submitted a pnper titled "The City in 1930s fiction" ("K

Essay").

None of these papers were actually written by the Students. Each of the papers was
written by an unkhown person working for a business called "The Essay Place".

6.

The website for The Essay Place (www.theessayplace.com) lists its business address as
593 Yonge Street, S,1ite 216, Toronto, Ontario. The Essay Place writes custom essays for
students for prices starting at $28.00 per page. According to its website, The Essay
Place's "writers all have MA's, or PHD's in their field of expertise, and are looking to

pass on their knowledge to our clients."
7.

In submitting an essay for the Course that was _purchased from "The Essay Place'\ it is

clearly admitted by each of the Students that, with respect to their respective purchased
essays, she:
(a)

did no meaningful academic work;

3

(b)

knowingly submitted it in essentially the same form as she received it from The

Ess<1y Place.
(c)

knowingly represented the ideas of another person, the expression of the ideas of
another person, ,md the work of another person as her own;

(d)

knowingly committed plagiarism contrary to section B.1. l(d) of the Code; and

(e)

knew that she wns engaged in a form of cheating, academic dishonesty or
misconduct, fnmd, or m.isrepresentation in order to obtain ac8demic credit,
contrary to section B.1.3(b) of the Code.

The above admissions were made by each of the sh1dents in their Agreed Statement of

fact, pmi of their agreement to plead guilty to the charges that were laid following the
investigation related to the papers.

THE 1\'IBETINGS WITH THE DEAN'S DESIGNATE AND THE ADivTISSIONS MADE
BY THE STUDENTS
8.

Each of the Students met with Professor John Browne, the Dean's Designate for
academic i.J1tegrity at the Faculty of A1-ts and Science, University of Toronto, with respect
to the purchased essays that are at issue in this ciise.

9,

Ms. C

initially told Professor Browne thiit she had written the C

Essay herself.

Later in the meeting, she admitted that she had received editorial and grammatical
assistance from a friend who attended university in the United States, Eventually, after
being con-D:onted with the document properties of the essay that revealed that Michael
Thompson, the ovvner of The Essay Place, was listed jn the author field of the document,
she admitted to having purchased the essay submitted from The Essay Place.
10.

Ms,H

and Ms. K

, who met with Prof. Browne after Ms. C

met with him,

admitted to Professor Browne that they purchased their essays,

4

FINDING OF THE PANEL frf RESPECT
11.

The Panel reviewed the facts as set out by the students rmd the Universityj as ,veil ris the
documents provided in the Joint Book of Documents. On the basis of the facts, the panel
determined that it was appropriate to accept the pleas of the students and et1tered the
finding that the students \Vere guilty of the offences to which they pleaded.

BACKGROUND TO THE OFFENCES RELEV.ANT TO THE PENALTY
12.

This WRS not the first lime that the studeuts had cheated. In fact, each one of the Students
committed two other offences in addition to the offences that are the subject of these
hemfogs. These events are outlined below.

rvrn.'
13,

FIRST OFFENCE

In the Winter term of 2008 (one year before her enrolrnent in Professor Poole's coursB)
Ms. C

enrolled in PHY 205H. At that time, her friend S

PHY 205. Ms. J

used Ms. C

J

was also emoUed in

's computer to complete and print an essay she

submitted in PHY 205.

14.

1n \Vinter 2009 (the same time that she was enrolled in Professor Poole's course), Ms.

C

's then boyfriend, J

electronic copy of Ms. J

P

, enrolled in PHY 205. Ms. C

's essay. Mr. P

snbmitted fvfs, J

gave Nk P

an

's essay in virtually

unaltered form. He did no meaningful academic ·work on the priper before he submitted it.
Ms. C

, when confronted with the eventsi admitted ihat she committed the academic

offence of knowingly providing unauthorized assistance to a student contrary to section

B.J.l(b) of the Code.
15.

i'vfs. C

was sanctioned for having provided unauthorized assistance. She received a

notation on her academic record and trnnscdpt reading "Censured for Academic
lVflsconduct" from March 25, 2009, until. lvforch 24, 2011. Not only did she receive the
above menHoned sanction, but she received a le tier from Profossor BdttOll, outllning how

she had npologhed profusely> and outlining how she represented that she was Bware of
5

the University's regulations concerning plagiarism. The letter provided a stern wmning
against unacceptable behaviour in the University, and of the severity with \Vbich a flltme

offence would be treated, if it occurred.

MS.H'
16.

:~,; FIRST OFFENCE

In the Summer of 2008 l\ Is. H
1

enrolled in ECO 200. Jvfs. H

obtoined a defe1rnl of

the first term test in ECO 200, ,vhich was worth 25% of the final grade, from June 12 to
June 23, 2008.
17.

On June 19, 2008, J\ ls. H
1

req11csted a further deferral due to a family emergency. Ms.

provided the instructor with a screen shot of her e-ticket, which purportedly

I-I

showed her flying from Toronto to London, England at 11:10 mn on June 23, 2008.
Upon furthei· investigation, it became clear that Ms. H

's flight wns not depmiing for

London at 11: 10 am, as she had indicated, but rather, it was to depaii at 11: 10 pm.
18.

On August 6, 2008, Ms. H

admitted to violating the Code by altering the time of the

flight on the electronic itinernry because she was not prepared to write the test on June
23,
19.

Professor Sam Solecki, the Dean's Designate for Academic Integrity, suspended Ms.
H

for six months, from July 1, 2008, until December 3 t, 2008, and annotated her

transcript until ~1ay 31, 20 l 0, to reflect the offence, Professor Solecki wrote a letter to
1

Ms. H

, in which he noted that Ms. H

had admitted to altering her flight itinerary

so that she could escape writing the test, for which she was not prepared. Professor
Solecki also warned Ms. H

about the severity with which a future offence would be

treated, and affirmed the University would not tolerate unacceptnble behaviom.

MS. Kj
20.

'S FIRST OFFENCE

In Fall 2005, Ms. K.

enrolled in AST 101. fn November 2005, Ms. K

wrote fl mid-

term examination in AST 101, which was worth 25% of the final mark in the course,

6

21.

On December 1, 2005, :tv1s. K

admitted that she had permitted her friend to copy her

examination answer for a short-answer question and had provided her friend with
unauthorized assistance during !he mid-term exm11inatio11.
22.

Professor Brown, the Dean's Designate for Academic Integrity, gave Ms, K

a grade of

zero on the question she allowed })er frJend to copy} and put a two year annotation on her
academic record and transcript, 1,vhich expired on October 31, 2007. Professor Brown's
letter nffirmed that Ms. K

recognized that her actions were wrong, and her regret for

hnvfog engaged in the activity for which she was sanctioned. Professor Brown warned
Ms. K

that any further offence would be treated severely.

THE STUDI~NTS~ SECOND OFFENCE

23.

In Fall 2009, the Sh1dents cmolled in EAS 209. In October, they wrote a term test in

tutorial. The term test was worth approximately 2% of the final grade in the course.
24.

The Sh1dents and N R . S

submitted answers to the term test that were vi.rtually

identical.
25.

The Students admitted that they had copied from each other dming the test and that they
had each knowingly received unauthorized aid dming the test contrary to section BJ. t (b)
of the Code.

26.

On December 2, 2009, each of the Students admitted to Professor John Browne, the
Dean's Designate for Academic Integrity, that she had committed a second academic
offence.

27.

On Decem.ber 3, 2009, Professor Browne, imposed sanctions on the Students. Each of the
. Sh1dents received a final grade of zero in the course and a notation on her academic
record and transcript until she graduated from the University. Ms. H

also received a

four-month suspension from May 1, 2010, to Allgust 30, 2010.

7

28.

The letters sent by Professor Browne to the students outlined how each of the students
had apologized and expressed their regret for having committed this offence. fach letter
outlines the response of each student to having committed this second acndemic offence.
In the case of l\ ls. C
1

, there is an explana!ion that she was facing personal issues (a

stressful family situation) that caused her stress nnd anxiety, and that Ms. C

did not

plan to collnbornte 011 the quiz, but also that she did not realize how serious the offence
was because the quiz was w01ih such a small percentage of the final grade, In the c<1se of
Ms. H

, the letter outlined how Ms. H

said she did not plan to collaborate on the

quiz, and how she regretted and apologized for having committed this second offence, In
the case of Ms. K

, the letter outlined also how Ms. K

regretted and apologized t~r

her collaboration, that she did not plan to collaborate, bnt that since the quiz was worth
such a small percentage of the final grade, she did not realize the seriousness of the
collabornti on.

THE PRIOR ESSAY PURCHASE AND EVIDENCE GIVEN BY THE STUDENTS
29.

As noted above at paragraph 20, rds. H

30.

On October 20, 2009, Ms. H

. wus enrolled in EAS 209 in Fall 2009.

submitted <1n essay titled "What rdakes Orientalism and

How to go Beyond It." Thjs essay was not written by Ms, H

, The essay was the

work of an individual working in the business ealled The Essay Place. Ms. H
purchased this Essay and submitted it in the same month as she collaborated on the 2%
term test in this comse.
THE PENALTY PHASE OF THE HEARING
31.

The Students each gave evidence at the hearing. Each of the students was cross
examined. Each student took the opportunity to set out their explanation for having
committed the offence, and the extent of their remorse. They did so ag,iinst the backdrop
of their request that a penalty less severe than expulsion be levied against them - each of
the Students asked the panel to impose a sanction of suspension for five years. The
University was asking the panel to stispend the students, and, concurrently, request the
President to recommend to the Governing Council that the students be expelled, with a
8

report of the case (with names withheld). At issue, therefore was the propriety of a five

year suspension, as opposed to expulsion.
32.

The panel observed from the outset that the stl1dents were equally distraught, eqtmlly
tearf\Jl, nnd equally apparently traumatized by the seriousness of what they were facing.
Each student presented throughout as extremely nervous, and indeed, on many occasions,
tl1e sl11dents needed moments to compose themselves during the hearing and durilig their
testimony. At various times, there was m1diblc weeping.

33,

Ms. C

explained that she regretted having purchased her essay, saying that she "had

made the biggest mistake of her life". In her defence, she explained that her llfe at the
University had been punctuated by a series of family illness and hardship. ln August,
2008, her sister had surgery and in the result, she felt isolated, presumably because of the

distance bet-ween her and her sister. She could not be there to comfort her sister. Then,
in April, 2009, her mother bad an aneurism.

Again, she suffered from the distance

between her nnd her mother - she was not able to go and comfo11 her, In the summer of
2009, she learned thnt her family was undergoing financial hardship, and her mother was

unable to undergo a planned surgery. When her mother finally did have her surgery (in
October 2009), she could not go home to be with her. So, both she and her family were
undergoing severe pressmes.
34.

On her own behalf, Ms, C
complete her degree.

explained that she was under tremendous pressme to

She explained that i.n Korea, it is very difficult to obtoin

employment without a university degree. Even though she told lier parents in 2009 that
she wanted to take a year off, she was prevailed upon to continue to attend school. In
December 2009, upon telling her p<1rents of her problems, and saying she wanted to take
a semester away from school, her parents insisted that she stay on at school.
35.

Ms. C

sought counseling from the University - she attended on December 1 and 3,

2009, and, in 2010, on April 291\ May 5t11, and 2ih, and on ]line 9. The rep011 of her

counseling was made an exhibit, and the nature of the counseling related to how Ms.

C

was feeling distressed and an.,--dous, as a result of the anticipated tribunal hearing,

and a number of "family issues".
9

36.

So, i'vls. C

WflS cm1ght in a maelstrom of family pressure to continue flt her studies, and

Wfls obliged nevertheless to cope with the long distance comforting of her fomJly as they

persevered through financial hardship and illness. It wc1s this multivalent pressure tlrnt
informed and explained why she cheated - in Mal'ch 2009 (when she gave her boyfriend
an essay written by her friend); in October 2009 (when she collaborated and copied on a
quiz worth 2%); and in l\11arch 2010 (when she purchased an essay from The Essay Place
and presented it as her own work).
37.

Mr. Centa (on behalf of the University) explored i\ifs. C
examination. What the cross examination ofivls. C

's explanation under cross

focused on was the timing of her

commission of the offences, in relation to the warnings and sanctions that had been
imposed, together with her expressions of rem.orse and promises to abide by the
University policy about academic honesty.
examination was the fact that Ms. C

\Vlmt was highlighted during the cross

had met with the Dean's designate in September,

2009, in relation to the offence that occurred in lvlarch 2009 - when she gflve her

boyfriend an essay written by a friend - which essay her boyfriend copied. Only one
month later, Ms. C

conunitted a fmiher offence - she wrote a quiz using an

unauthorized aid, which she knew was wrong.

Ms. C

was caught using an

unauthorized aid, and, this led to a meeting with the Dean on December 3, 2009. It was
at this meeting thi:it Ms. C

was alerted to the seriousness of having committed not one,

bu1 two, offences, mid, she was once again remorseful, apologetic, and promised not to
comm.it another offence,
38.

And yet, c1s the cross examination showed, less than three months after this meeting, Ms.
C

committed the offence of purchasing an essay for submission i..n Professor Poole's

course. i'vls. C

c1<lmitted that she ordered the essay sometime in Febrnary, 2010, so

that it could be handed in on the due date in Mardi, 2010,
39.

Between January 1 and April, 2010, Ms. C

sought no counseling, and indeed, it is

clear that she kne\.V of the counseling services available - she had gone to the cotmseling
service in December 2009. At the very time that she was experiencing the stress that led
to the conunission of her third offonce, she eschewed the very assistance that the

10

University offered to help her avoid committing another offonce.

In fact, Ms. C

appears to have sought counseling only for stress related to the hearing in respect of the
charges against her - the report of the cmmselor only references that she had been deRling
with family issues,

The cross examination of Ms. C

counseling undertaken by Ms. C

revealed that the sporadic

appears to have been sought out only to address her

anxiety about the impending hearing, and not for the pmpose of coping with the
multitude of stresses she was experiencing, and which she said contributed to her
multiple instances of cheating,
40.

Ms. H

gave evidence nbout her extreme remorse for what she called the "mistakes"

she had committed, She said "words cannot express my remorse", Ms. H

told the

panel she would not commit the same "mistaken again. She wns very sorry. Ms. H
was also beset by family pressure: while she was studying at the Univcrsily, her father's
business in Korea foltexed, mid this had the effect of increasjng her stress levels. As Ms.
H

. stated, she \vas never confident in her ability as a student, and, she felt pressured by

the inquiries made by her parents about her grades.

In the face of these mounting

pressures - the tribulations of her father in his business, the insecurity and do1.1bt about
her own abilities, and the inquiries from home about her grades, Ms, H , purchased the
essay for Professol' Poole,s course, and for that "mistake'\ she said she was truly s01Ty.
Also, she promised to make amends for what she had done. lt was not clear exactly what
amends she planned to make, Ms. H

reported that she had begun to sec a counsclol' to

help her ckal with this - a report from the University counseling service (Exhibit 5)
showed that six days before the hearing, Ms. H

had presented to the University

counseling service. She received counseling for her anxiety, distress and confusion about
the hearing that she was going to attend.
41,

wlr. Centa's cross examination explored the timing of lv!s, H

,'s offences. It was made

clear that only one year after she had been suspended for falsifying a document (her
travel itinerary), she cheated on a quiz. Ms. H

admitted that although she did not

think the cheating on a test wo1th 2% was a "big deal", she understood very well in her
meeting ,vith the Dean on December 2, 2009, that cheating, even on a test wo1ih 2%, was
indeed a "big deal". And yet, in that same term> in October 2009, she had submitted a

11

purchased essay. Ms. H

stated in response to Mr. Centa's question about this essay

purchase, that she "hesitated over the price being charged for the essay", but then "went
ahead" and purchased it.
42.

At the time that Ms. H

was meeting with the Dean in December 2009, no one at the

University was awnre of the essay purchase tlrnt had occmred in October 2009, This
essay purchase was not addressed until after the charges in May, 2010 were laid. This
essay purchase is not the subject matter of this case. Nevertheless, it is relevant to the
penalty phase.
43.

·when she was meeting with the Dean in December 2009, about hci· cheating on the 2%
test, she promised not to make any more "mistakes", and on the strength of that promise,
the Dean deferred he1· suspension. Under cross examinntion by Mr. Centa, Ms. H
admitted that she repriid the Dean for his deferral and his acceptanee of Iler promise not to
cheat again, by purchasing another paper - this one for Professor Poole's comse, And on
that occasion, she was undeterred by tbe prke, Just as Ms. H

had promised the Dean

that she would not make any more "mistakes", so had she fervently vowed to the panel in
her testimony that she would "never make the same mistake again". Evidently, as Ms.
H
44.

agreed, her promise wns not to be relied upon.

Ms. K

was filled wiih regret as she gave her testimony. She took pains to explain the

series of offences in ·which she h<ld been cm1ght cheating. In the fall term of 2005, she

4S.

permitted a friend to copy from her mid term examination.

Four years later, she w~ls

caught cheating on the 2% test, just as Ms. H

had been caught.

For Ms. K

, and Ms. C

, her m1iversity life has been a financial as well as an emotional strngg!e:

before she was accepted at the University, her parents divorced. According to Ms. K

,

she has been struggling with her father's Jefosa1 to contribute or provide her with
fm@cial assistance - as she explained, going to the University "costs a fortune", and with
that cost comes the high expectations of hel' mother about her academic achievement.
Under the financial pressure, she h<1s been unable to visit her family~ and the more she is
distanced from her family, the more she became unable to study ef:ficientiy,

12

46.

Ivls. K

regards herself as unlucky - she thinks she is "the most unlucky person". She

did not learn enough from her prior offences, and now, having lenrned her lesson, she
rtskcd for a second clmnce - something she would use wisely if she was permilted lo
await the expiry of rt suspension to finish her degree sometime in the fu!me.
47,

Mr. C

explored the idea of second c1rnnces with Ms. K

, He recalled how Iv[s. K

had told the Denn that she hadn't really learned from her first offence, and that is why she
committed a second offonce (cheating on the 2% test). Ms. K

did tell the Dean rtt the

meeting arising from the second offence that she was truly sorry - that she was not going
to commit another offence again, Her protestations to the Dean about "learning from her
offences" were made to appear congruent with the prntestations presented to the panel
c1bout having learned from her offences and therefore needing a second chance.
48,

\Vhat evolved from the cross exAniination of 1vfs. K
offences of not only Ms, K

, but of Ms. C

relates to the backdrop for the

and Ms. H

as well. In answe1' to i'vfr,

Centa's questions about the planning and discussion tlrnt went into the purchase of the
essays for })rofessor Poole's course 1 Ms. K
Ms. K

explained how iv!s. C

, Ms. H

, and

aU discussed how !hey pfa1111ed to purchase essays for Professor Poole's

assignment. Not only did they discuss this, but they together admitted - to each other that each of them had two prior offences, and each of them knew that what they were
doing was wrong.

In Ms. K

,s cross examination, she ulso admitted that before

pmchasing the essay for Professor Poole's course, she considered her conversations with
the Dean's Designate, and it was only after considering her conversation with the Dean's
Designate in December 2009, that she decided to purchase her essoy.
REASONS FOR THE PENALTY IMPOSED (MAJORJTY)
49.

Having determined to accept the plea of each of the students, the panel addressed what
penalty ·was appropriate i.J1 the circumstances. The University requested the panel to
impose a penalty of expulsion, while the students requested the panel to impose a five
year suspension. The Code allows for a range of penalties to be imposed in the discretion
of the panel. Subsection C II (b) states;

13

Tribunal Sn.nctions

l,

One or more of the following sancllons mny be imposed by the Tribunal
upon the conviction of any student:
(n)
(b)

(c)
(d)
(e)
(t)

(g)
(h)

(i)

(j)

an oral and/or written reprimand;
nn oral and/or written reprimand and, with the permission of the
instructol', the resubmission of the piece of academic work in
respect of which the offence was conunitted, for evaluation. Such a
S'1nction shall be imposed only for minor offences and where the
student has committed no previous offence,
assignment of a grade of zero or a failure for the piece of academic
work in respect of which the offence was committed;
nssignment of a penalty in the fonn of a reduction of the final
grade in the course in respect of which the offence was committed;
denial of privileges to use any facility of the University, including
library and computer facilities;
a monetary fine to cover the costs of replacing damaged property
or misused supplies in respect of which the offence was
committed;
assignment of a grade of zero or a failure for any completed or
\.mcompleted course or courses in respect of which any offence was
committed;
suspension from attendance in a course or courses, a program, c1n
acndemic unit or division, 01' the University for such n period of
time up lo five years as may be determined by the Tribunal. Where
a student hns not completed a course 01· courses in respect of which
an offence has not been committed, withdrawal from the course or
comses without acndemic penalty shall be allowed;
recommendotion of expulsion from the University, The Tribunal
has power only to recommend that such a penalty be imposed. In
any such case, the recommendation shall be made by the Tribunal
to the President for a reeommendation by hhn or her to the
Governing Council. Expulsion shall mean that the student shall be
denied any finiher registration at the University in any program,
and his or her academic records and transcript shall record this
sanction permanently. Where a student has not completed a course
or courses in respect of whieh m1 offence lms not been committed,
withdrawal from the comse or courses without academic penalty
shall be allowed, lf a recommendation for expulsion is not adopted,
the Governing Council shall have the power to impose such lesser
penalty as it sees fit.
(i) reconunendation to the Governing Council for cancellation,
recall or _suspension of one or more degrees, diplomas or
certificates obtained by any graduate; or
(il) cancellation of academic standing or academic credits
obtained by any former student

14

who, while enrolled, committed any offence which if detected
before the granting of the degree, diploma, ceitificate, standing or
credits would, in the judgement, of the Tribunal, have resl1lted in a
· conviction and the application of a sanction sufficiently severe that
the degree, diploma, certificate, standing, credi(s or nrnrks would
not have been granted,

50.

2.

The hearing panel shall have the power to orde1· that any sanction imposed
by the Tribmwl be recorded on the student's ncademic record and
transcript for such length of time as the panel considers appropriate.

3.

The Tribunal may, if it considers nppropriate, report m1y case to the
Provost who may publish a notice of the decision of the Tribnnal and the
sanction 01· sanctions imposed in the University newspapers, with the
name of the student withheld.

In arriving at its decision to impose a five year suspension, we were referred to the
factors that ought to guide the determination of the appropriate penalty.
cousidel'ations are set out in the decision of C

These

· (Case 1975/76-04; November 5, 1976,

p. 13) as follows:

"\Vhat then are the principles that this Tribunal should follow in dealing with an
nppeal from sentence? First, in my opinion, punishment is not intended to be
retribution to get even, as it were, with the student for what he has done. It must
serve a useful function. The classicnl components of enlightened punishment are
reformation, deterrence nnd protection of the pllblic. In applying these criteria, a
tribunal should consider alt of the following;
a) the character of the person chmged;
b) the likelihood of a repetition of the offonce;
c) the nature of the offence committed;
d) any extenuating circumstances sufl'otmding the commission of the
offence;
e) the detriment to the University occasioned by the offence;
i) the need to deter others from committing a similar offence.

1n considering these matters, the Tribunal may have resort to the transcript of
evidence ff it fa available and to any material presented on the appeal which bears
on them,"

15

51.

The panel considered carefully all the submissions of the University and of the students
relating to the appropriate penalty to be imposed. TI1cre is no question but that the
offences committed by the tluee students are egregious, offensive, and made all the more
invidious because of their connection to an industry that capitalizes on cheating. That the
entel})l'ise of businesses like The Essf!y Place is growing is n fact, made n!J the more
distmbing by the difficulty of detecting when students have purchased an essay. Too
often, ns was the case in the V

\V

S

L

matter (Case 440; April 6, 2006),

detection of essay purchases will occur fortuitously - there is no 11 method" available to
determine when a student has purchased an essay. What we also recognized was the fact
that these businesses prey upon people exactly like Ms. C

, Ms, H

and Ivls. K

students who are for from home, suffering homesickness, and distance from their family,
and suffering from the vicissitudes of llniversity life as well. Such businesses as The
Essny Plnce offer an ephemeral, yet effective panacea to the student who is beset by
pressure from home to do well in the face of difficult schedules and difficult courses and
not enough time 01· personal resources to address their troubles through counseling. All
of these students felt isolated, frightened, lonely, and under massive pressure to obtain a
university degree, and they were under pressure to come home \Vith a degree because not
to do so would be to disappoint their fumily - who, in each case, was coping with
financial and medical pressures of their own, Their resort to The Essay Place was a last
resort - one unde1iaken to salvage them each from the prospect of returning home to the
disapproval of their fomily and peers, without a degree imd with the shame m1cl
humiliation of having foiled at the university that their family had laboured, sacrificed,
and paid for, in the hopes that they would have a reputable and honourable education.
52.

As much as the University is the victim of places like The Essay Place, so are each of the
three students. ]vls. C.

, Ms. H

, <1nd Ms. K

, in exchange for the significant cost of

a custom essay, now face the additional cost of losing their reputations, their honour with
theil' family, and the prospect of a future with a university degree.
53.

It ,vas evident to us that this last set of charges, and the purchase of an essay represented

the third in a series of offences. [It was also recognized that in the case of Ms. H

;, this

was her fourth offence.] Certainly, each student displayed a pattern of failing to learn

16

from her previons offences - rmd each student had committed a variation on her previous
offence. Each offence committed differs from the other. And, it is trne that there is little
symmetry between the offonces. Altering a flight itinerary is different from copying from
rmother student in n 2% quiz. So is the offence of letting one's boyfriend use <1 term
paper done by a friend. And, so is permitting a friend to copy from yo\ir 1nicl-term
exmnination. 1t might well be argued that in the case of giving one's boyfriend a copy of
a term paper, or allowing a friend to copy from your mid-term (ns was the case with Ms.
C

and Ms. K

respectively) that these are acts of misguided collegiaHty nncl reully,

the conunission of nn offence by the boyfriend ,md friend of Ms. CJ

and Ms. K

upon them, It might well be argued that these misguided attempts to be magnanimmis
only exacerbated the stress upon these two students, and impelled them towrml greater
and more excruciating loneliness and isolation, which then led to the commission of the
ultimate offences in this case, ~1ls. H

's first offence involved alteration of a document

(a flight itinerary) and although this wr1s not the sm:ne <1s allowing a friend or boyfriend to

1.1se one's resources (or a friend's resources), it might well be argued that Ms. H

. was

candid to the Dean nbout why she was trying to avoid taking her test - she was not
prepared to write the test, and she did an act out of desperation to avoid confronting hex
lack of preparedness. Viewed on its own, it is a b<1d beginning to an academic career, but

it is so entirely different from the subsequent offences that there is a risk to seeing it as
pa1t of a real continuum of planned and deliberate dishonesty.
54.

It was also our view that the litany of offences being cited in support of the expulsion
penalty, must be viewed in the context of what was at stake, especially in respect of the
offence related to the 2% quiz. It is clear, and the sn.1dents admitted, that they all copied
from a friend during the term test that was worth 2%. But, the point was that the test WEIS
only worth 2%. In this regard, we do not accept the argument put forth that if the
students were wi1Hng to cheat when the stakes were so low, then this augured badly fol'
what they would be willing to do when the stakes were high. Rather, we are of the view
that a more contextual analysis should apply to the discrete offence related to cheating on

a 2% quiz. The foct that the quiz was only worth 2% is an indication of the seriousness
of the quiz, not the seriol1Sness of the offence. Of course, this does not condone the act of
cheating on any quiz. But, it was important to recognize that the students, subjectively,

17

mnde a determination that what they were doing nt the time was not as grave precisely
beccn1se the test was only wmih 2% of the final grndc. Thal they were wrong in th.is
estimation wtis admitted by each of them - to the Dem1, and to the pnnel at this hearing.

It was our viewthat the students' understanding of the gravity of what they were doing and that it evolved aftei· meeting with the Dean, is fin impo1innt consideration in the

continuum of their expressio11 of remorse.
55.

This leads to the frnal consideration of the panel related to the pernilty - that of remorse,
nnd that of the prospect of repetition, and the deterrence effect on the communil)' of the
penal!}' imposed.

56.

It is arguable that from rt deterrence perspective, a five year suspension will bave the
same effect as an expulsion. Both penalties remove the student from the community.
Expulsion is a permanent removal; suspension is not. A five year snspension, though,
coming as it does at a time in a student's life when those five yenrs make all the
difforence, devastc1tes a student's future plans .ind aspirations, since it pushes out the time
within which a st11dent may embmk on a university backed employment pursuit. It has
the chilling effect of compromising study habits, of undem1ining momentum in the
routine of classes, paper writing, and exam writing, and it threatens to dampen the
enthusiasm, the resources for, and the general taste for ramping up that pmsuit again. It
has, in effect, the same dark consequences as the finality of expulsion, and, it might be
argued, if the student retmns to pursue studies after the suspension, she is doing so with
the doud on her background together with the requirement that she "re-learn" how to
lealll in a nniversity environment.

5 7,

As fol' the objective deterrence assocfated with a five year suspension, within the
university community, it was our view that such a severe lengthy suspension, with its
attendant notatio1i on the transcript, would folfill the need for deterrence, for the
"chilliilg" of the desire to purchase essays, as much as ru1 expulsion would. For us,
expulsion should be reserved for those cases where there is a repetition in kind of
offences, and not for a sel'ies of unrelated, different offences, except in cases where the

18

kind of offences, albeit different, are so egregio-us as a whole, tlrnt the community cannot
tolcrnte retention of 8 student even nfter a long suspension.
58.

There are a number of cases that suggest that expulsion is warranted where a series of
offences is greater in number and more serious in kind than the pnttern evinced by these
three students. A review of the decisions contained in the authorities presented show that
suspensions (of varying lengths) were imposed in situations where there were a series of
offences, and where, in one case, the accused student did not appear.

We were

persuaded, though, that there is no easy calculus from which to derive a penalty. There
ought not to be n formulaic npproach to the penalty in any case. Instead, the panel is to
look to the previous authorities fm guidance, and not mechanically Rpply principles that
have evolved in one case to another, because each case admits of its own collection of
facts, circumstances, and mitigating factors. In the end, the four factors that are to be
considered in the imposition of a penalty, together with the considerntion of character and
exten\iating circumstances, nrnke it necessary to cnreful1y examine each factual matrix
with the help and guidance of previous authorities, and not with the weight of a derived
formula attending upon the pmiel 's consideration.
59.

That a five year suspension is warranted in this case derives not only from the
considerations above, but also from the elem and nmvavedng expression of remorse by
each of the students in this case.

We '\,Vel'c mindful of how devastated each of the

students appeared at the hearing. TI1eir inability to maintain their composme without
breaking into tears, together with their expression of extreme regret, suggested to us that
in each case, the monumental significonce of their dishonesty had been brought home to
them as a Jesult of the proceedings. Each of the students were well and trnly afraid,
indeec!J panicked, by the thought of being expelled. They were afraid for the reactions of
their parents, and they were appalled by their own actions and by their fundamental
failure to heed the priol' warnings of the Dean when they were caught cheating on two
previous occasions. 1t appeared to us that these sh1dents were deeply shamed, and
profoundly ashamed; of what they had done.

No penalty could have inflicted the

suffering and remorse that these students were feeling; rather, the process of being
accountable to the panel, and being held pubJicly accmmtable to a tribunal of their peers,
19

hnd inflicted the deepest .~Imme nnd misery of 11Jl. Thnl each of the st11dents were

lnuni!in(ed by what thc:,1 hnd done goes without sa)'ing, And, it ls worth observing that
the very process of the trial, nnd nil the nttend11n1 requirements Ilia! the students be
publicly confronted with their misdeeds, is ot1e11 the only thing llwt brings home the need
for clrnnge to each of Ms. C

i

tvls. H

, and Ms. K

- for thnt is wlmt mis made

evklent as we observed the conduct of the hearing, From the time thnl !he clrnrges were
read, to the conclusion of the submissions, each of these students were galvanized lt1 turn
by terror, remorse, sndness1 sclfpily, nnd profound feat',
The final Order of the Panel is:

60,

i.

S .

C

,N

iH

lllld ]V1

K

shall receive !1 final grncle of zero

(0) in the course EAS333H1: "Modernism nnd Colonial Koren)\;

s

ii.

C'

,N

H

. n11d lv[

.K

shall be ~uspended for a period of

5 yenrs from the University from fone 14, 20 l O until June 13, 2015;

iiL

The sanctions sbnll be recorded Oil S

C

's, N

H

'sand M

's academic record um\ trnnscript until the St\1dents grnd@le from the

K

University; nnd
That this case shnll be repol'(ed to the Provost for publication of rt notice of the

iv,

decision of the Tribunal and the sanction or sanction imposed in the University
newspapersi with the name of the student withheld.
Dated nt Toronto> this /(,, day of November, 2010

(

~\,-.

(

(,,.,

j

(...

L,, l"-··

C-~~

Prnfossol' Andrea Litvack
Dated l1t Tornnto> this

l{ dny of Novembet\ 20 I0

20

DISSENT (AS TO PENALTY ONLY)

1.

This case r,1iscs fundmnent<1l questions about the pennltics that flov,i from findings of

ac('ldemic misconduct. In particulnr, thJs case provides an opport\mity to explore the
distinction between suspension aud expulsion. Is there ci bright line between a long
suspension and expulsion? If there is, where and when is that bl'ight line made manifest?
How does the policy of deterrence interplay with the consideration of mitigating nnd
extenuating circumstance, and the convicted student's expression of remorse? fs there a
relationship between the intensity of regret/remorse and the severity of the pennlty? Does
the expression of regret, the appemc1nce of remorse, and the promise to refotrn militate
agninst the imposition of that most final sanction of expt1lsion? How much can a plea,
with all of its attendant costs savings and proccdunil efficiencies, affoct the nature of the

penalty? Finally, how does the nat11rc of the offence committed nffect penalty
considerations?
2.

These are the questions that lie at the heart of the decision about penalty in this case. f
have considered aB the reasoning that went into the determination of the panel that
resulted in the decision that the appropriate sanction for Ms. C
K

. Ms. H

, and l'vis.

was to levy a five year suspension, \Vhile 1 c1gree with many of the considerations

that formed the foundation of the decision, I do not agree with the result. A11d, I believe
thnt there is a different approach that ought to bear upon these difficult penalty decisions,
especially in the circumstances of this case.
3,

While I do not wish to restate or argue with the findings of the facts that came mit during
the review of the Agreed Statement oJ Facts in respect of the offences and the penalty, I
review the salient facts below to provide a bnckdrop to my reasoning about the penalty to
be imposed,

4.

Ms. C

, Ms, H

;, and Ms. K . enrolled in u course, caI!ed "Appioaches to East Asia"

in the fall term of 2009. Each of these students were majoring in East Asian Studies.
Ms. C

, Ms. H

. ;, and Ms, K

came to that course with a history of academic

dishonesty. Thefr transcript reflects this fact.

21

5.

In the \\linter term of 2009, 1v1s. C

had (knowingly) given her boyfriend a copy of

,mother student's essay. Her boyfriend submitted this essay for academic credit. In n
meeting \Vith the Dean, Ms. C

was penalized, m1d given ri wr1rning about further

ncndcmic dishonesty. She apologized, expressed regret, and promised not to be dishonest

in the future.
6.

In the Summer term of 2008, Ms. 1-1

had falsified a flight itinen1ry to obtain a forth er

deferral of a term test in an economics course.

In a meeting with the Dean, Ms. 1--:l

was penalized, and given a warning about further academic dishonesty, She apologized,
expressed regret, and promised not to be dishonest in the future,
7.

In the Fall of 2005, Ms. K

permitted n friend to copy from her work on a mid term

examination. In a meeting with the Dean, lvls. H

was penalized, and given a warning

about further academic dishonesty. She apologized, expressed regret, and promised not
to be dishonest in the future.
8.

And so it wc1s that Ms. C

, ~,fo. H

) and Ms, K

with their respective backgrot111ds

of meetings with lhc Denn, their promises to refrain from c1cademic misconduct, cind their
apologies for their misconduct, found tbemsel ves, together, in October, 2009, in a class
test in their "Approaches to East Asia" course. This ten11 test was wmth only 2% of the
final grade in the course.
9.

Ms. C

, Ms. H

, and Ms, K

all copied from each other, m1d from another student,

in this test. TI1ey all submitted answers that were virtually identical. They admit that
they collaborated with each other, m1d copied each other's test answers. They admit that
they did so knowing that this was wrong,
10.

In the very same montli (October, 2009), and in the very same course ("Approaches to
East Asia"), Ms. H

_submitted an essay for credit in the eomse, Ms. H _. purchased

that essay, from The Essay Place. This was not discovered until much later, but Ms,
H

admits that she knew when she purchased her essay and submitted it in satisfaction

of course requirements in this course~ that what she was doing was wrong.

22

11.

It was with the background of their prior offences, and their collaboration 011 the 2% te111~
test, that lvls. C

, Ms. H

., and Ms. K

individually met with the Denn on December

2, 2009, Each of them received the same stern lecture. Each of them admitted their

misdoing. And, ench of them pledged (lllcgiance to the principle of academic integrity.
They promised to en· no fmiher, and did so knowing that subsequent infractions of the

Code would be trented most severely. Of course, these warnings were not new to these
three students. Each of them had previously received the same lecture from the Dean,
prior to December 2, 2009, and each of them had previously promised fidelity to the code
of Rcademic conduct. Ms. H

attended at lhe Dean's meeting to be censured for

having cheated on the terlll test in October 2009, knowing that she had in the same month
submitted an essay for credit that she had purchased from "The Essay Place", The Dean
was, at the time, unaware of this purcln1se; obviously, Ms. H
12.

Ms. C

, Ms. H

., and Ms. K

was not so unaware.

found themselves together emolle<l in another East

Asim1 Studies course in the term that immediately followed their meeting ·with the Dean

in Decembel' 2009. This course was called "Ivlodernism and Colonial Korea", taught by
Professor Jane! Poole. This course required the students to submit an essay that was lo be
worth 30% of the final grndc. In setting this req\1irement, Professor Poole gave Ms. C .. ,

1vfs. H

,, and Ms. K . a written wamiug about plagiarism. This warning was in the

syllabus. In addition to extracting the relevant section of the Code 11bout what constitutes

an academic oftense, Professor Poole stated that "I consider plagiarism to be a serious
breach of trnst between instructor an student and ,vill refer all cases to the appropriate
authority, .. ".
13.

And so it was, with this written warning adumbrating the individual pcrsonai meetings
with the Dem1 that had occun-ed in December 2009, tbat Ms. C
K

, 1Vls. H

and Ms.

approached the impending deadHne for submission of this te11n paper worth 30%.

Ms. C

, Ms. H

, and _Ms. K

did not address how to deal with this required term

paper in isolation. Rather, they collaborated, They hnd a discussion. They talked nbout
how they each had a history of academic dishonesty, and a lJistory of being censured by
the University. They talked about how they knew that cheating was wrong. They knew
they had met with the Dean (or Dean's designate) - since it was only three montbs

23

--------------------~

-

~~

earlier, they could hmdly forget

They discussed the idea of purchasing an essay to

submit for credit in the course, According to the evidence that tumbled out during the
cross exrimination of Ms. K

, the discussion did not devolve into a debate about the

vicissitudes o-f this form of cheating - in fact, "no one tried to dissuade the others" from
going out and buying an essay.
14.

After their discussion, each of Ms. C

, Ms. H

, and Ms. K . repaired to The Essay

Pk1ce (eh her virtually or in person) and ordered their c\1stom essay. Each of Ms, C
1vls. H

and Ms. K

.,

submitted the essay they purchased to Professor Poo1e on the due

daie.
15.

Ms. C

was the first to meet with the Dean's Designate after discovery of the purchased

essays. In her meeting, she initially denied that she had purchased the essay, saying she
had received editorial and grammatical assistance from n friend, 1t was when she was
confronted with the document propeiiies found on the essay thut she admitted to having
purchased the essay from The Essay Place.
16.

lvfs. H

and Ms. K

met with the Dean's Designate after Ms, C

. It is not known

whether they were made aware of the forensic content of the meeting between the Dean's
Designate and Ms. C

, but in any event, they offered up no explanations of any kind,

They admitted that they had purchased their essays from The Essay P!ace.
17.

All three of the students were very very sorry for what they had clone when it crune time
for the hearing into the charges of academic misconduct against them on June 14, 20 l 0.
Each tn their own way made manifest how they deeply regretted their misdeeds. For Ms.
C

, this was the biggest mistake of her life; Ms. H

words to express her remorse; and Ms. K

was speechless - unable to find

asked for a second chance, promising to use

her new chance wisely this time, Each of the students explained the adversity they were
facing, in bei11g students fat· from home, with family settings that were far from ideal.

They were all sincerely moved and ,1pset at being in the situation in ·which they found
themselves, Their demeanour throughout was very emotional. There is uo doubt about
tlie genuineness of their remorse, and of the real personal cost to each of them of the
hearing and the charges, and it was no doubt painful for each of them to admit their guilt

24

and hove their misdeeds laid bare before them in the Agreed Statement of Facts pul
before the panel.
18.

ln my view, expressions of remorse or regret, no matter how heartfelt or sincere, are not

enough to mitigate the penalty that flows from this soLt of academic dishonesty. Nor do

the family adversities exJ)criencecl by each one of the students amount to a sufikient
explanation for the commission of the offence in the manner in which the offences were
comm_itted. It cannot be tlwt the severity of an offence such as this can be leavened by
pleas of adversity, or expressions of sorrow or remorse. If that were the case, then the
penalty plrnse of the hearing would of necessity call for an analysis of the exhortations of
sorrow and a weighing of the catalogue of oil the negative events that beset the student

who bas committed the wrong. To do thus would turn the exploration of extenmiting
circumstance into the primary focus of the deliberations around penalty. "Extenuating
circumstance" is but one of the considerntions brought to bear upon the penalty in each
student's case. Extenuating circumstance ought not to displace the equally important
concerns of the p,mel when it approaches penalty.
19.

What should remain at the forefront of penalty considerations, standing equally with the
consideration of "extenuating circumstance'\ are the factors enunciated in the C
decision: the na!nre of the offence, the detriment of the offence to the University, the
deterrence of others, and the likelihood of repetition, are ail objective factors, having little

to do with emotional proteslntions and promises of what wiJl happen in the fnture. The
effects on the individual of the heming process, their an..'{iety, their stress, and their
feelings of remorse and sonow, ore important, and to be sure, if there were an absence of
such feeling, the p<1neI wott!d be entitled to infer that there is little left except to impose
the most severe penalty possjble. But that is not to say that the intense expression of

sotrow and remorse is both necessary and sufficient to reduee the penalty levied in any
instance,
20.

Even if it were trne that the outpouring of grief and l'emorse over their misdeeds ought to
militate against expulsion in this case, it ls my view that the obligation of a Tribunal is
more than to receive hea1ifeJt statements of sorrow 1 or to accept the maelstrom of

25

emotion without analysis. ·while it is not possible to gainsay the extent of the sorrow and
remorse, the outpouring of tears, and the self criticism that emanated from each of the
students, I observe that in each case, the explanation for their isolation, their sense of
loss, and their feeling of alienation, did not cohere with the events that each descrjbed as
the backdrop to this profound loss of perspective and principle as students Rt the
University.
21.

Ms. C

reported being distressed about her mother's illness - an illness that appenred

to come on in April 2009, and which culminated in her mother having smgery in October
of 2009, all occtming against financial troubles in the family. While this might explain
why Ms. C

cheated on her term test in October 2009, it \Vas clear that her real

adversity that she was facing in Febniary/March of 2010 ,vas the fact that she did not
want to be in school, and her parents wanted her to stay. I do not regard thfa lack of
desire to be at the University as grot1nding for a decision to purchase ftl1 essay, in
collaboration with her friends, in the relevant time pel'iod.
22.

Ms.H

committed her third offence apparently because she had doubts about her own

abilities, and, her parents had expectations that she would achieve a University education.
Her self doubt, combined with her parent's expectations, and her father's faltering
business, led to the third instance of cheating. Self doubt is the hallmmk of almost any
conscientious student in n university setting. It is a healthy fear of failure that motivates
prodigious study. Family finances can cettainly combine to deter a student from focusing
on their studies, and it is easily imaginable that over arching self doubt combined with a
disastrous fomily financial picture can lead to many forms of thoughtless cheating. There
1ivas, bowever, in Ms. H

's case, not the slightest evidence that either her self doubt

had become pathological or harmful, or that her family's situation financially placed her
thought processes in peril. Her stHtements about her own adversity wel'e simply those of
"self doubtH and "faltering business 1\
23.

Ms. K

explained that her parents divorced, and, in the resl1lt, her father did not provide

finmicia1 assistance, presumably to her or the rest of hel' family. Divorce produces many
casualties, not the least of which are the children; who even in their lnte teens and early

26

\wenties, are caught in the cross fire of the continually debilitating bnttle over finances
and affection.

To her family's crecHt, though, M;:;. K

ended up attending at the

University of Toronto - and she did so after !he divorce occurred. Ms. K

's story

would be heart rending, except for the fact that her parents divoi:ced in 2005 1 and not in
2009 or 2010, which is when her last tvvo offences were committed. While there is no
doubt that the effects of divorce persist long after the initial event, and while it mny be
that Ms. K

was still caught in the emotional nftei: effects of n dissolved family unit, it is

h,wd to imagine why these sad events did not feature nt all in het discussions with the
Dean's Designate when she was caught cheating- in 2005 and in 2009. We caiu1ot know
whether Ms. K

was too reticent or embarrassed to offer tlp this explanation to the Denn

in 2005 or 2009, but one would lrnve expected this to be explained in some way - after
all, this last offence which is the subject matter of this inquiry ·was committed five years
after her parents divorced,

24.

Parsing through tbe various explanations of extenuating drcumstance is the obligation of
the panel that hems any evidence of extenuating circumslanee, No expression of sorrow,
no n:iatter how dramatic or over arching it may be, should immunize a panel from doing
so, There are many sihiations that might well give rise to the commission of an academic
offense. And, it is easy to imagine how some circumstances could provide good rN1son
to excuse the commission of the offence. Shock, trauma, depression, loss, sudden illness,
separately or together- can cause a student to lose perspective, to forget integrity, and to
wander away from principle, or even honesty. GcneraHy, though, what is needed is a
connection between the causative symptom or illness or event, and the academic offense.
In each case, it is the duty of the sh1dent to show the pane! how their extenuating

circt1mstmlce is so closely connected to the commissio11 of the offense as to suggest that
their otherwise gooct judgment was in-etrievably clouded, and that the offence occul1'ed
during that dark time, and specifically because of it.
25.

By contrast, what was explained by all three students in this case ~ free floating anxiety
about family finances> general sadness about a family asunder, or plain unhappiness and
self doubt - simply prov1ded colour to the mwratives of their various misdeeds. The
students' emotional distress provided an overlay to the events, and not what was needed

27

to provide a causal connectio!l between their individual adversity and

tbe offence in

question.
26.

There ls no question but that these three students present a likelihood of repeating an
offence of academic dishonesty. Two of the sh1dents (Ms. C
committed three offences. :tv1s. H

and Ms, K

) have now

has committed four -·· she purclrnsecl not one, but

two essa)'S, 1n this regard, their promise to not re offend makes little difference. Of all
the factors, the likelihood of repetition of an offence must be evahioted in this case
without regard for the statements of the stt1dent. Exnmining nll the evidence, including
the counseling reports (rnore of which will be discussed later), cannot but lead to tbis
conclusion.
27.

There is no question bnt that the offence committed in this case constitutes a detriment to
the University. As has been observed on many occasions, the industry of custom essay
writing appem's to be expanding, not contnicting. As stated earlier, its 1·oots are elusive,
and, as teclrnology improves, the ghost written essay will no doubt be all but impossible
to detect.

28.

The evidence in this case showed that the University was able to detect that the essays
were written by a custom essa~' service because certain properties were left imbedded in
the metadata in the _papers submitted. This metadata showed that the author of the paper
was a rvHchael Thompson, the owner of The Essay Place. Onee confronted with this
evidence, the students were obliged to admit they had ptirchased their essays, Obviously,
the papers submitted had not been "cleaned" of metadata. Until fairly recently, th.is
"cleaning" was not always possible or available. Much depends upon the softw<1re being
used in each case,

29.

The very disturbing feature of this case is that but for the removal of the "prope1iies"
feature on each paper, these offences might never have been detected. One can imagine
how the erasure of metadata, and the general 11 cleaning up" of documents, once
implemented as "state of the a1i, anti-detection" steps, will leave professors with no
option but to either require submission of essays with all metadnta intact (and thereby
usher h1 a most wasteful forensic exercise to ensme original authorship), or, alternatively,
28

to eschew essay writing as a mc<1ns of evaluating a student's progress altogether, lest they
be confounded by the plethora of services that offer a means of avoiding the thought and
hard work behind essay writing for those who have sufficient funds, and insufficient
scruples,
30,

Essay writing lies at the core of an education in the University,

The student writing an

essay labours to marry ldeRs to expression, and in so doing acquires skills of thought mtd
analysis that few other acadernic endeavours can produce.

If the attempt to stop the

expansion of plagiarism through custom essay writing foils, there is little left for
principled professors but to fmd anothet means to evaluate and teach sh1dents how to
think and write, For this reason, and because the purchased essay supports c1n industry
founded on cheating, offences related to the purchc1se of essays must be treated as being
at the pinnacle of dishonesty, and therefore calling for the most severe penalty. The

detriment to the University is plain and obvious.
31.

The last two factors thnt benr consideration are the nature of the offence and general
deterrence occasioned by the penalty. They relate to the question of detriment to the
Unive1·sity, discussed nbovc,

32.

In my view, the gravamen of the offonces committed by these students lies not only in the
feeding of an industry that enables cheating, but also in the planning, deliberation and
most importantly, tbe collaborntion, that went into these offences, Purchasing an essay
from a custom essay writer, for money, is in and of itself 11n offense to the University.
Planning to do so nwkes it more offensive. Delibernting about it in a group dedic:ated to
that end makes the act more susceptible to censure. This is what happened amongst Ms.
C

33.

, Ms. H

, and Ms. K

But, not only did they deliberate about purchasing the essay, and not only dld they plan to
purchase the essay, but they discussed how they planned to do so in the face of each
having been cangh! cheating on two earlier, separate oceasions.

And in the foce of

acknowledging these events, and in the face of the warnings they received, rmd in the
face of having promised 11ot to re-offend, they each drove forward, and did whM they

knew was wrong.
29,

34.

These students each plnccd their orders for (heir essays. They then pnid money for their
orders. They waited for their essays to be custom written. And then, having received
their essays, they submitted them, c1ll the while knowing that they had each twice been
caught cheating, that they each twice had abjectly apologized, and that they each !\vice
had promised the Dean (or Dean's Designate) that they would never do so again, These
transactions took time~ more than 24 hours, and likely more than 48 hours. And in the
space of the time it took them to place their orders for a custom essay, and make the
pnyment, and wait for delivery, nnd then submit thei1· essay, they had time to reflect on
their discussion with ench other - about how it wris wrong, about how they had twice
been sanctioned, and about how they had each twice promised to never re-offend, The
nature of the offence is not only that it consists of feeding an industry that capjtalizes on
cheating. The nature of the offence is that it is a transaction that takes time, not one that
occurs in the blink of an eye,

35.

And, the nature of these particular offences stems from the time taken with each student twice - by the Dean or Dean's Designate, follO\,Ving on their two prior offences. Each
student had the be11efit of an explanation of academic dishonesty and the penalties. And
each had the benefit of the Dean's (or Dean's Designate) agreeing to take their word that
they would not re-offend.

36.

Eacl1 of Ms. C

, Ms. H

, and Ms, K

let down the Dean (or Dean's Designate).

They did not keep their word that they would not re-offend, Indeed, as they discussed
their plan to purchase their essays, the students were reminded of their previous smlctions
and, presumably, of their promises.
37,

The University's principles of academic conduct are founded on the principle of integrity;
the University's approach to ·events of dishonesty is one of democracy, fairness, and
forgiveness.

That is the only way to explain why the students each received an

opportunity to reform when they committed offences, not once, but twice before, Each
time, they received a stern waming from the Dean or the Dean's Designate,

They

received an oral and a written admonition about cheating. And, their promises about how
they learned and would not re-offend were recorded and recognized. Each time, the

JO

students were uccorded respect and deference with regard to their acknowledgements of
wrongdoing nnd promises for a better path in the future.
38.

By discussing thefr plan to purcJrnse thefr essays together, and by their adve1tcnce to their
previous sanctions for academic dishonesty, Ms. C

, Ms. H . ,, and Ms. K

made a

mockery of the decanal process for dealing with academic offenses in the first (and
second) instance. It is trite to say that the time expended in investigating and discussing
the earlier offences of each student, and recording the discussion and promises made, wns
significant. Clearly, in each case, the Dean (or Dean's Designate) sincerely believed that
the students would reform, and this hope animated each letter to each student. The
students were given a "second chance".
39.

When these sh1dents discussed their prior offences, and when tllese students effectively
supported each other in their pursuit of a custom \.Vdtten essay, they defaced the practices
and procedures put in place at the decmrnl level to address academic dishonesty.

Their

discussion nnd planning and deliberation in the purchase of their essays transforms the
letters from the Dean, and the meetings with the Dean into what must have been for them
the risible pro fonna speeches of an Rvuncular presence - an event to be lived tlu·ough
rathe1· than the sincerely well meant discussion that \Vas meant.
40.

There can be no better reason than to penalize these students with expulsion. 1n their
planning and deliberation, they made a mockery of the processes of tile University, ln
their defence, they mobilized the resources of the University - the counseling service.
They did so not to show how their actions were affected by the trauma of their lives, but
rather to show how the meting out of Justice (in the form of a hearing) was an assault
upon their sensitivities. And, they mobilized what the University had offered to them
(counseling) to show that the stress of being brought to justice justifies their entitlement
to suspension, and not expulsion.

41.

No student should be entitled to prey \Jpon the resources o.f the University, either for
counseling, or for procedurtil fairness in being given a second, or third chance, to mend
their ways. Ms, C , , Ms. H

} and Ms. K

each asked the panel to do just that - to

ignore that they planned and deliberated together to buy an essay; to ignore that they had
31

collaborated and cheated together on an earlier test, and lrnd promised never to cheat
<1gain, rmd to ignore that they mobilized the counseling resomces of the University to
show that their anxiety about being held to account for their collaborntion should
exonerate them from the most severe pc1rnlty.
42.

l npproach the issue of general deterrence differently from the majority of the panel.
While it may be quite true from a practical perspective tJrnt n long suspension will have
the same deterrence effect <1s an expulsion, that does not address the issue of hmv to
structme a penalty analysis in general. The idea of "detenence" is a key foctor in the
penalty process. The decision in C

makes that clear. In my respectful view, it is not

for the panel to determine whether one penalty or the other will actually have a deterrent
effect. This can never be known precisely. It is therefore the duty of the pm1el to address
deterrence within the context of n fair and fairly calibrated penalty system. The majority
of the panel was disposed to impose a suspension rather than an expulsion for two main
reasons - fust, that the remorse expressed by the students was sufficient to consider a
penalty sh01i of expulsion, and secondly, lhat the deterrence effect of a long suspension
was functionally no different from that which would occm· if expulsion was imposed.
The problem with imposing a penalty other than expulsion, in the face of the pre existing
reasoning about these kinds of offences> is that it imposes a subjective analysis upon wlrnt
should be a purely objective analysis. The pre existing decisions about penalties where
essays were purchased militate in favour of imposing the most severe of penalties. It is
not necessary to revie'rv those decisions in these reasons. At the heart of the reasoning in
the previous decisions was the proposition that both the infraction (the essay purchase)
and the industry that makes such cheating possible, can only attract the most severe
penalty - not because it would actually deter, but because it expressed the disapproval of
the University of such behaviour, and because only the meting out of the most severe
penalty possible (expulsion) would have !he chance of reducing demand for the services
that make this type of cheating possible. It ,vould be folly for a panel to either invite
submissions about or enter into deliberations about whether one penalty or another would
incite or depress recidivism. Rather) in my view> a panel ought to receive and recognize
the scale of penalties, and weigh the factors associated ·with penalty before coming to a
decision about penalty. The consideration of achrnl deterrence is, in my view) irrelevant

32

lo the ultimate decision on penalty - in this case, there wns 110 evidence led as to actual

deterrence, and lhet'cfore no bnsis for the panel to ernbnrk on such nn analysis. 1v!oreovcr,
requiring such evidence would be counterproductive In the proper cnnsidera(ions for
penalty.

43.

In nil these circumstnnces, nnd for nil these rensons, T differ from the penalty imposed by
the panel, and I would impose a sanction of zero in the course, an immediate suspension,
together with n request thn! the President recommend to the Governing Council !hat the
students each be expelled, rmd that the n;nsons therefore be pnblished, in respect of each
student, with their names withheld,

Dated at Toronto, this

_a~/'Yiny of November, 2010

(}ft(iv;inf1if~--Ms. Julie Hannaford, Co-Chair

33

