Cases 596, 597 & 598

   [1]Cases 596, 597, 598 - Appeal

DATE:

   November 10, 2010

PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v. C.H.K.

Hearing Date(s):

   June 14, 2010

Panel Members:

   Julie Hannaford, Chair
   Professor Andrea Litvack, Faculty Member
   Sybil Derrible, Student Member

Appearances:

   Robert Centa, Assistant Discipline Counsel for the University
   Camille Labchuk, DLS
   Joshua Chan, DLS
   Alyssa Manji, DLS

In Attendance:

   Tamara Jones, Academic Integrity Officer (formerly)
   John Browne, Dean's Designate
   Rebecca Smith, Coordinator, Student Crisis Response Program
   Natalie Ramtahal, Coordinator, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty
   Grievances

   Note: Overturned on [2]appeal .

   Students charged under s. B.i.1(d) and s. B.i.3(b) of the Code . The
   charges related to allegations that the Students each purchased an
   essay from a commercial provider of essays. The parties submitted an
   Agreed Statement of Facts, and each Student pleaded guilty to the
   charges. The Panel found the Student guilty under s. B.i.1(d) and s.
   B.i.3(b) . Each Student had at least two previous academic offences. C
   had been convicted of knowingly providing unauthorized assistance for
   giving her boyfriend a file stored on her computer. H had been
   convicted for altering the time of her flight ticket to escape from
   writing her test. K had been convicted of providing unauthorized
   assistance for letting her friend copy her answer to a question during
   an exam. Their second offence was committed together: they were
   convicted of knowingly receiving unauthorized assistance for copying
   each otherâs answers during a term test worth 2% of the course grade. H
   had also previously purchased an essay, which was submitted in the same
   month as she collaborated on the test. The majority of the Panel
   imposed a five-year suspension while the dissent would have imposed a
   recommendation that the Students be expelled.

   Reasons for the Penalty Imposed (Majority):The Panel stated that as
   much as the University was the victim of places like The Essay Place,
   so were the three students, who lived far away from home, isolated and
   coping with financial and medical pressures. Although each Student
   displayed a pattern of failing to learn from previous mistakes, the
   previous offences did not indicate a continuum of planned and
   deliberate dishonesty: C and K âs offences were misguided attempts to
   be magnanimous, and H âs offence was an act out of desperation to avoid
   confronting her lack of preparedness. The Panel also stated that, in
   regards to the 2% quiz, the Studentsâ realization of the gravity of
   committing an academic offence was an important consideration in the
   continuum of their expression of remorse. As for deterrence, the Panel
   stated that a five-year suspension was a severe lengthy suspension and
   would arguably have the same deterrent effect as an expulsion. The
   Panel was of a view that expulsion should be reserved for cases where
   there is a repetition in kind of offences, and not a series of
   unrelated offences except when the offences are most egregious. As for
   considering precedents, the Panel stated that it was to look to them
   for guidance and not for a formulaic approach because each case had its
   own collection of facts, circumstances, and mitigating factors. The
   Panel also stated that a five-year suspension was warranted in this
   case because of the Studentsâ clear and unwavering expression of
   remorse. The Panel imposed a grade assignment of zero in the course; a
   five-year suspension; a notation on the Studentsâ transcripts until
   their graduation; and a report be issued to the Provost.

   Dissent (As to Penalty Only): The Dissent stated that extenuating
   circumstances was only one of the considerations, and expressions of
   remorse or regret were not enough to mitigate the penalty that followed
   from this type of academic dishonesty. For extenuating circumstances to
   play a role, there has to be a connection between the causative symptom
   and the academic offence; the onus is on the student to show that their
   extenuating circumstance was so closely connected to the commission of
   the offence as to suggest that their otherwise good judgment was
   irretrievably clouded, and that the offence occurred during that dark
   time, and specifically because of it. The Dissent stated that there was
   no such connection in this case. For C , the real adversity was that
   she did not want to be in school, and this was unrelated to a decision
   to purchase an essay. For H , her self-doubt did not rise to the level
   of being pathological. For K , her parentsâ divorce happened five years
   ago so the timing did not coincide. As such, the Students did not prove
   the causative relationship. The Dissent also stated that there was a
   likelihood of repetition, considering that the Students failed to learn
   from their previous mistakes. The Dissent considered the detriment to
   the University to be plain and obvious: the industry of custom essay
   writing services had been expanding and it would become harder to
   detect once they start cleansing metadata. The planning, deliberation
   and collaboration as well as the fact that the Students had many
   opportunities to reconsider were aggravating factors. As to the
   argument that a long suspension would have the same deterrent effect as
   an expulsion, the Dissent stated that the consideration of actual
   deterrence was irrelevant to the ultimate decision on penalty since
   there was no evidence as to actual deterrence. The Dissent would have
   imposed a grade assignment of zero in the course; an immediate
   suspension; a recommendation that each Student be expelled; and that a
   report be issued to the Provost.
   [3]View Case

References

   1. https://live-the-office-of-the-governing-council.pantheonsite.io/media/13026
   2. https://governingcouncil.utoronto.ca/system/files/import-files/Case__596__597___598_-_Appeal35409.pdf
   3. file:///media/12919
