Case 835

DATE:

   October 12, 2016

PARTIES:

   University of Toronto MississaugaÂ  v. A.S. (âthe Studentâ)

Hearing Date(s):

   September 30, 2016

Panel Members:

   Mr. Christopher Wirth, Chair
   Professor Michael Evans, Department of Statistical Sciences, Faculty
   Member
   Ms. Ashley Barnes, Student Member

Appearances:

   Ms. Tina Lie, Assistant Discipline Counsel for the University, Palaire
   Roland Barristers
   Mr. Michael Cockburn, Law Student for the Student, Downtown Legal
   Services

In Attendance:

   Ms. A.S., the Student
   Ms. Lucy Gaspini, Academic Integrity and Affairs for the Office of the
   Dean
   Mr. Christopher Lang, Director, Office of Appeals, Discipline and
   Faculty Grievances
   Ms. Sara Zborovski (Observer, New University Tribunal Chair)

   Student charged with two offences under the Code . The charges related
   to the Studentâs failure to attribute sources in an essay that she had
   submitted in partial completion of her course requirements.Â  The essay
   contained ideas and verbatim, or nearly verbatim, text from
   unattributed sources. The matter proceeded on an Agreed Statement of
   Facts.Â  The Student pleaded guilty to the plagiarism charge. The
   University then withdrew the alternative charge of academic dishonesty
   not otherwise described. In determining the penalty to be imposed, the
   Panel took into account that the Student had been found guilty of
   academic dishonesty on two prior occasions- one which involved
   plagiarism, the other involved unauthorized assistance from personal
   notes during a final exam. In both cases, the Student pleaded guilty to
   the offence, was sanctioned, and warned against committing future
   offences.Â  The Panel also took into account the mitigating
   circumstances of the Studentâs guilty plea and cooperation in the
   proceedings. Though they found it to be lenient in the circumstances,
   the Panel accepted the partiesâ joint submission of penalty and imposed
   a grade assignment of zero in the course; a 2-year, 11-month
   suspension; a notation on the Studentâs academic record and transcript
   for three years; and that the case be reported to the Provost for
   publication.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/13033
