Case 941

DATE:

   February 16, 2018

PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v. H.E. (âthe Studentâ)

Hearing Date(s):

   November 22, 2017

Panel Members:

   Ms. Michelle S. Henry, Lawyer, Borden Ladner Gervais LLP, Chair
   Professor Michael Saini, Faculty Panel Member
   Mr. Andrey Lapin, Student Panel Member

Appearances:

   Mr. Pouya Makki, Legal Case Worker for the Student, Downtown Legal
   Services
   Ms. Tina Lie, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg
   Rothstein LLP

In Attendance:

   The Student
   Dr. Kristi Gourlay, Manager & Academic Integrity Officer, Faculty of
   Arts and Science
   Mr. Benny Chan, Student at Law, Borden Ladner Gervais LLP
   Mr. Christopher Lang, Director, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty
   Grievances
   Ms. Joan Griffin, Assistant Secretary, Office of the Governing Council
   (Observer)
   Mr. Sean Lourim, Technology Assistant, Office of the Governing Council

   The Student was charged with two charges of plagiarism contrary to s.
   B.i.1(d) of the Code , with alternative charges of unauthorized
   assistance contrary to s. B.i.1(b) of the Code ; or in the further
   alternative, charges of academic misconduct not otherwise described
   contrary to s.B.i.3(b) of the Code . In addition, the Student was
   charged with one charge of academic conduct not otherwise described
   contrary to s.B.i.3(b) of the Code . The charges were made in
   connection to three separate incidents in three different courses.Â
   The first set of plagiarism charges related to an assignment that the
   Student had submitted for course credit that contained passages that
   were pulled verbatim from an assignment that had been submitted by
   another student in the class.Â  The second set of plagiarism charges
   related to an essay that had been submitted for course credit that
   contained passages that were pulled verbatim from an essay that was
   found online.Â  The third incident, which is connected to the charge of
   academic dishonesty not otherwise described, was based in the Studentâs
   assertions to an instructor that he had submitted an assignment when he
   had not, in fact, done so. The matter proceeded by way of an agreed
   statement of facts and a joint book of documents. The Student pled
   guilty to the two charges of plagiarism contrary to s. B.i.1(d) of the
   Code and the charge of academic dishonesty not otherwise described
   contrary to s.B.i.3(b) of the Code . Upon the Panel accepting the
   Studentâs guilty plea to these charges, the University withdrew the
   alternative charges.

   The parties submitted a Joint Submission on Penalty (JSP) requesting:
   (a) final grade of zero in the affected courses; (b) a four-year
   suspension; (c) the sanction be recorded on academic record and
   transcript from the date of its decision until December 31, 2023; and
   (d) that the decision be reported to the Provost for publication with
   the Student's name withheld. The JSP was accompanied by an undertaking
   that the Student complete at least six writing workshops offered by the
   University within the first two terms in which he is next registered
   for a course at the University. In deciding whether to accept the JSP,
   the Panel was referred to the narrow circumstances that would allow for
   them to depart from a JSP ( University of Toronto v. S.F . [DAB Case
   No. 690; October 20, 2014]) as well as the factors that are to be
   considered in determining the appropriateness of a penalty contained in
   the Mr. C. case [Case No. 1976/77-3; Nov. 5, 1976]. The Panel found
   that the offences were deliberate and serious. Though the Student did
   not entirely take responsibility for the first and third offences and
   his explanation concerning the commission of the second offence was not
   entirely credible, the Student ultimately admitted to guilt at the
   hearing and cooperated with the University throughout the discipline
   process â which showed that he took responsibility for his actions. The
   Panel accepted the partiesâ JSP and ordered:(a) final grade of zero in
   the affected courses; (b) a four-year suspension; (c) the sanction be
   recorded on academic record and transcript from the date of the order
   until December 31, 2023; and (d) that the decision be reported to the
   Provost for publication with the Student's name withheld.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12964
