Case 495

DATE:

   information not available

PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v. Mr. T-F. O. K.

Hearing Date(s):

   May 26 and November 26, 2008

Panel Members:

   Bernard Fishbein, Chair
   Professor Kristina Dahlin, Faculty Member
   Dr. Joan Saary, Student Panel Member

Appearances:

   Ms. Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel for the University
   Mr. Max Shapiro, DLS Representative for Mr. K., the Student

   The Student was charged with two offences under s. B.i.1(a) and,
   alternatively, two offences under s. B.i.3(b) of the Code. The charges
   related to alleged acts of plagiarism with regard to two assignments,
   submitted in two courses, both of which contained unacknowledged
   verbatim or nearly verbatim text from another studentâs paper. The
   Student pleaded guilty to the first allegation of plagiarism but
   disputed the charges with respect to the second assignment. The matter
   proceeded as an Agreed Statement of Facts. With respect to the first
   assignment, the Student admitted that he had copied passages from
   another student's paper which was posted on the course website. With
   respect to the charges in the second assignment, the Student submitted
   an essay which was virtually identical to an essay submitted by another
   student in the course. Upon investigation it was discovered that the
   other student in the course had resubmitted, with corrections, an essay
   which she had previously submitted in a summer course. The Student was
   also in the summer course with the other student. The other student
   confessed to altering her essay for the summer course and re-submitting
   it with the alterations in the course in question. The essay submitted
   by the Student contained the same errors as the original essay
   submitted by the other student in the summer course. The other student
   could not explain how the Student obtained a copy of her essay. The
   Student claimed that he had written the essay for the summer course
   initially but that his USB had gone missing from the computer lab and
   that it was irretrievable without the USB key. The Student claimed that
   he later discovered his draft of the essay on his sisterâs laptop and
   he submitted it to fulfill the essay requirement in the course in
   question. The Manager of the UTM police testified that no report was
   filed regarding the purported missing USB key. Participants in the
   investigation process asserted that the Studentâs previous explanation
   of events ran contrary to the Studentâs evidence in chief. The
   reference material footnoted in the essay was not available from the
   Library where the Student asserted he had done the research nor did
   documents that the Student provided during the investigation match the
   footnotes or quotes contained in the essay. The library records at the
   University showed that the other student had borrowed the relevant
   books footnoted in the essay at the relevant time. The Panel found that
   the Studentâs explanation was not credible. The Panel found that there
   was no evidence to support the Studentâs claim that the other student
   had obtained a copy of his essay and submitted it as her work in both
   the summer course and later in the second course with some alterations.
   The Panel found that, even in absence of any direct evidence of how the
   Student had obtained the other Studentâs essay, on the balance of
   probabilities, the University had established that contrary to s.
   B.i.1(d) of the Code, the Student had knowingly represented as his own
   the work of another. Although the parties made a Joint Submission on
   Penalty, the effective date of the proposed three-year suspension was
   disputed. The University proposed that the date of suspension commence
   at the beginning of the next term. The Student opposed that proposal
   since it would have turned the three year suspension into a de facto
   greater suspension as he would have lost the work already completed in
   his full year courses. The Student claimed that if the Tribunal
   deliberations had concluded earlier he would not have enrolled in the
   full year courses and that the delay in the tribunal process made the
   impact of the penalty more severe. The Panel stated that but for the
   agreement of the parties, it would have imposed a longer suspension. It
   was not the Studentâs first offence with respect to similar misconduct,
   he displayed little remorse or contrition over his academic misconduct
   and he resisted any admission of his academic misconduct until the
   sentencing portion. The Panel observed that, having accepted the agreed
   upon suspension, the actual impact of the suspension would work to an
   even greater effect because of the delay in the Tribunal process. The
   delay in the Tribunal process could not be attributed to the Student.Â
   The Panel accepted the Studentâs position and ordered that the
   suspension not commence until the end of the second term. The Panel
   imposed a grade of zero for the two courses; a three-year suspension; a
   four-year notation on the Studentâs academic record and transcript; and
   that a report be issued to the Provost.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12986
