Case 655

DATE:

   October 24, 2012

PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v. P.T.

Hearing Date(s):

   September 26, 2012

Panel Members:

   Ms. Wendy Matheson, Chair
   Prof. Louis Florence, Faculty Member
   Ms. Eleni Patsakos, Student Member

Appearances:

   Mr. Robert Centa, Assistant Discipline Counsel for the University
   Mr. Jeremy Burgess, DLS for the Student

In Attendance:

   P.T., the Student
   Ms. Lucy Gaspini, Manager Academic Affairs, UTM
   Ms. Natalie Ramtahal, Coordinator, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty
   Grievances

   Student charged under s. B.i.1(b) and (d) of the Code . The charges
   related to allegations that the Student altered the date on an
   assignment to mislead the instructor (Course 1), had an iPhone in
   possession during an exam (Course 2), and submitted an essay containing
   passages taken verbatim from secondary sources (Course 3). The Parties
   submitted an Agreed Statement of Facts, and the Student pleaded guilty
   to the charges. The Panel found the Student guilty under s. B.i.3(b),
   s. B.i.1(b), and s. B.i.1(d) of the Code . The Parties submitted a
   Joint Submission on Penalty proposing a three-year suspension and a
   grade assignment of zero in Courses 1 and 3 and a grade assignment of
   50% in Course 2. Regarding Course 2, the University noted that the
   phone had not actually been used and the Student had admitted
   misconduct at an early stage. The University submitted that in those
   circumstances, the grade of 50, rather than zero, was appropriate. With
   a passing grade in Course 2, the Student would have enough credits to
   graduate. The Panel stated that absent the Joint Submission, it would
   have considered a more serious penalty although it recognized the
   mitigating factors that the Student did not actually use the phone
   during the exam, had made an early admission of misconduct, cooperated
   with the University, and had no prior discipline history. Because the
   Student would be given a passing grade, the effect of the penalty would
   be to delay graduation only without the Student having to do further
   coursework and demonstrate that he had learned from the experience.
   However, the Panel noted that there was a high threshold for rejecting
   a Joint Submission and this was not such a case that met the threshold.
   The Panel accepted the Joint Submission and imposed a grade assignment
   of zero in Courses 1 and 3; a grade assignment of 50% in Course 2; a
   three-year suspension; a three-year notation on the Studentâs
   transcript; and a report be issued to the Provost.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12793
