Case #562

   DATE: January 20, 2010
   PARTIES: University of Toronto v. I.M.
   Hearing Date(s): October 27, 2009
   Panel Members:
   Lisa Brownstone, Chair
   Bruno Magliocchetti, Faculty Member
   Jamon Camisso, Student Member
   Appearances:
   Robert Centa, Assistant Discipline Counsel for the University
   Lucy Gaspini, University of Toronto Mississauga
   Jordan Giurlanda, Downtown Legal Services
   The Student

   Trial Division â s.B.i.1(a) of Code â forged documents â forged medical
   notes submitted in support of petitions for deferred examinations in
   five courses â agreed statement of facts â guilty plea â finding of
   guilt â joint submission on penalty â aggravating factor of length of
   time over which offences occurred â mitigating factors of statement of
   remorse (submitted and read by Student at hearing), guilty plea, and
   engagement and cooperation in the process â while not bound by a joint
   submission on penalty, a joint submission on penalty should not be
   rejected unless it would be contrary to the public interest or it would
   bring the administration of justice into disrepute â high threshold for
   rejecting joint submissions on penalty â joint submission on the high
   end of the appropriate range, but still appropriate â joint submission
   accepted â Panel imposed: 1) a final grade of zero in each of the five
   courses; 2) a five year suspension; 3) a transcript notation until one
   year after the Student graduates from the University; and 4) a report
   to the Provost.

   The Student faced 8 charges of forging documents and 8 alternative
   charges of academic dishonesty. The charges stemmed from allegations
   that between May 7, 2008 and March 7, 2009 the Student forged medical
   notes and submitting them to support petitions in 5 courses for
   deferral of unwritten final examinations. An Agreed Statement of Facts
   was submitted in which the Student admitted that he knowingly submitted
   forged medical notes in support of these petitions. The Student was
   found guilty of 8 charges of forgery, and the remaining 8 alternative
   charges of academic dishonesty were withdrawn. A joint submission in
   penalty was made. The Panel considered the aggravating factor of the
   length of time over which the offences occurred, and the mitigating
   factors of the studentâs statement of remorse, guilty plea, and
   engagement and cooperation in the process. The panel noted that, âwhile
   not obliged to accept a joint submission on penalty, the joint
   submission should not be rejected unless to accept it would be contrary
   to the public interest or bring the administration of justice into
   disrepute.â The joint submission on penalty was found to be at the high
   end of the appropriate range, but was still found to be appropriate and
   therefore accepted. The Panel imposed: 1) a final grade of zero in each
   of the five courses; 2) a five year suspension; 3) a transcript
   notation until one year after the Student graduates from the
   University; and 4) a report to the Provost.

   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12739
