Case 1260

   DATE: December 21, 2021
   PARTIES: University of Toronto v. F.S. ("the Student")

   HEARING DATE: November 8, 2021, via Zoom

   Panel Members:
   Mr. Bernard Fishbein, Chair
   Professor Georges Farhat, Faculty Panel Member
   Mr. Karim Wanes, Student Panel Member

   Appearances:
   Mr. Robert Centa, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland
   Rosenberg Rothstein LLP
   Mr. William Webb, Co-Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg Rothstein LLP

   Not in Attendance:
   The Student

   Hearing Secretary:
   Ms. Krista Kennedy, Administrative Clerk & Hearing Secretary, Office of
   Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances

   The Student was charged under s. B.i.3(a) of theâ¯Code
   ofÂ BehaviourÂ on Academic Matters,Â 1995â¯(theÂ âCodeâ) on the basis
   that the Student knowinglyÂ forged or in any other way altered or
   falsified an academic record, and/or uttered, circulated or made use of
   such forged, altered or falsified record, namely, a document which
   purported to be a transcript and academic history from the
   University.Â The Student was also charged under s.Â B.i.3(a)Â of the
   Code on the basis that the StudentÂ falsified an academic record, and
   and/or uttered, circulated or made use of such a falsified record by
   claiming to have graduated from the University.

   The Student did not attend the hearing and counsel for the University
   providedÂ the PanelÂ with an email chainÂ whichÂ confirmed
   thatÂ theÂ StudentÂ was aware of the hearing but chose not to attend.
   The Panel was satisfied that the hearing could proceed in the absence
   of the Student in theseÂ circumstances.

   The Panel received an Agreed StatementÂ of Facts (âASFâ)Â which
   outlinedÂ that theÂ Student admitted that, as part of an application
   for employment, he represented that he had graduated from the
   University of Toronto with a Bachelor of Business AdministrationÂ with
   a major in marketing.Â TheÂ ASFÂ further outlined that theÂ Student had
   onlyÂ earnedÂ 18 credits and had never graduated from the
   University.Â Furthermore, theÂ ASFÂ outlined that the Student knowingly
   misrepresented his academic record by stating that he had graduated
   from the University when he knew that statement was false.Â The Student
   also admitted that he knowingly misrepresented his academic record in
   his application for employmentÂ by altering and falsifying an
   unofficial copy of his transcript and by circulating it as part of his
   application for employment.Â TheÂ Panel noted that theÂ ASFÂ outlined
   that the Student acknowledged that he signedÂ theÂ ASFÂ freely and
   voluntarily, knowing the potential consequences he faces, and did so
   having had the opportunity to seek advice of counsel.Â TheÂ Panel
   notedÂ that theÂ ASFÂ outlined thatÂ the Office of
   ConvocationÂ received an email from an education verification service
   in QuebecÂ seeking confirmation that the Student had graduated from the
   UniversityÂ with a Bachelor of Business Administration.Â Shortly
   thereafter, theÂ education verification service sent a subsequent email
   attaching an unofficialÂ transcript provided by the Student as part of
   his application for employment.Â TheÂ ASFÂ furthered to outline that
   the unofficial transcript misrepresented the Studentâs academic record
   and indicated that heÂ hadÂ passed three courses,Â which he had
   actually failed.Â The University advised the education verification
   service that no degree had been granted by the University to the
   Student.Â Based on the contents of theÂ ASF,Â in particular, the
   admissions of the Student contained therein, theÂ Panel noted that the
   University had satisfied the onus on it to establish the violation of
   the Code by the Student. Therefore, the Panel found the Student
   guiltyÂ of the first charge. The University withdrew the second charge.

   Prior to the hearing, the University and the Student entered into a
   Joint Submission on Penalty (âJSPâ).Â The Panel noted thatÂ it ought
   not to depart from a penalty agreed upon by the parties unless it was
   âunhinged from the circumstancesâ or unreasonable.Â Counsel for the
   UniversityÂ submitted variousÂ cases that were previously decided by
   the TribunalÂ that involved this type of offence. In all of the
   cases,Â a recommendation for expulsion had been imposedÂ regardless of
   whetherÂ it was a studentâs first offence, regardless of whether a
   student participated and signed anÂ ASFÂ orÂ JSP.Â The
   PanelÂ imposedÂ the following sanctions:Â immediate suspension from the
   University forâ¯up toâ¯fiveÂ years;Â aÂ recommendation that the Student
   be expelled, as per s.Â C.ii.(b)(i) of Code;Â andÂ aÂ report to the
   Provost for publication.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/30164
