Case No.: 1356
THE UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
IN THE MATTER OF charges of academic dishonesty filed on March 28, 2022,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic
Matters, 1995,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Act, 1971, S.O. 1971, c. 56 as am. S.O.
1978, c. 88
B E T W E E N:
UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
- and H

M

REASONS FOR DECISION
Date of Hearing: June 2, 2022, via Zoom
Members of the Panel:
Ms. Karen Symes, Chair
Professor Joseph Clarke, Faculty Panel Member
Mr. Dylan Dingwell, Student Panel Member
Appearances:
Ms. Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg Rothstein LLP
Mr. William Webb, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg Rothstein LLP
Mr. H
M
Hearing Secretary:
Ms. Krista Kennedy, Administrative Clerk and Hearing Secretary, Office of Appeals, Discipline
and Faculty Grievances

-2-

Charges and Hearing
1.

This Panel of the University Tribunal held a hearing, by Zoom, on June 2, 2022, to consider
the charges brought by the University of Toronto (the “University”) against H
M
(the “Student”) under the Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters, 1995 (the “Code”).

2.

The charges against the Student are as follows:
Charges relating to Introduction to Financial Accounting:
i.

On or about March 24, 2021you knowingly had someone personate you during an on-line
test in MGT120HS5 ("Introduction to Financial Accounting"), contrary to section B.I.1(c)
of the Code.

ii.

In the alternative, on or about March 24, 2021, you knowingly obtained unauthorized
assistance during an on-line test in Introduction to Financial Accounting, contrary to
section B.I.1(b) of the Code.

iii.

In the alternative to each of the charges above you knowingly engaged in a form of
cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or misrepresentation not otherwise
described in the Code in order to obtain academic credit or other academic advantage of
any kind during an on-line test in Introduction to Financial Accounting, contrary to section
B.I.3(b) of the Code

Charges relating to The Environment:
iv.

On or about April 17, 2021, you knowingly obtained unauthorized assistance in
connection with the final examination in the course ENV100Y5Y (20211) — ("The
Environment"), contrary to section B.I.1(b) of the Code.

v.

In the alternative to each of charge 4, you knowingly did or omitted to do something for
the purpose of engaging in a form of cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud
or misrepresentation in order to obtain academic credit or other academic advantage in the
Environment, contrary to section B.I.3(b) of the Code.

The particulars for charges 1 to 3 are as follows:
vi.

At all material times, you were registered at the University of Toronto Mississauga and
enrolled in the course Introduction to Financial Accounting, which was taught by Prof.
Catherine Seguin.

vii.

Students in the Introduction to Financial Accounting were required to complete an online
term test, which was worth 20% of the final grade in that course.

viii.

You knew that you were required to complete the term test yourself and that you were not
permitted to obtain the assistance of anyone else during the term test.

ix.

You provided your Quercus login information to someone with the username Josep Gatue
and the email address gatue63@vahoo.com.

-3-

x.

You paid this person around $60 to complete the term test on your behalf and this person
did so.

xi.

You knowingly had this person complete and submit the term test in your name. You did
so in order to obtain academic credit and an academic advantage you did not earn.

The particulars for charges 4 and 5 are as follows:
xii.

At all material times, you were registered as a student at the University of Toronto
Mississauga.

xiii.

In Winter 2021, you enrolled in The Environment, which was taught by Prof. Monika
Havelka and Prof. Barbara Murck.

xiv.

The Environment had a final examination worth 40% of the final grade in that course.

xv.

You knew that you were required to complete the final examination yourself and that you
were not permitted to obtain the assistance of anyone else during the final exam.

xvi.

During the final examination, you took pictures of the examination questions and
forwarded them to a third party who provided answers to you. You knowingly received
unauthorized assistance from this person to complete the final examination.

xvii.

You paid $400 for tutorial services, including receiving answers to the examination
questions from a user identified on WeChat as a220fg.

xviii.

You used dishonest means to obtain an unfair academic advantage. You knowingly
received unauthorized assistance to complete the final examination.

3.

The Student and Assistant Discipline Counsel, on behalf of the University, were able to
reach an agreement and the hearing proceeded on the basis of an Agreed Statement of Facts
(“ASF”). The Student provided further evidence on the issue of the appropriate penalty
through viva voce testimony.

4.

The Panel reviewed the ASF and the documents filed confirming the facts set out in the
ASF before and during the course of the hearing. A summary of the agreed facts follows.

Evidence and Findings
4.

The Student first registered as a student at the University of Toronto Mississauga in Fall
2020. As of March 15, 2022, he had earned 4.0 credits.

Introduction to Financial Accounting
5.

In Winter 2021, the Student enrolled in MGT120H5S – Introduction to Financial
Accounting, which was taught by Professor Catherine Seguin. The course was an
introduction to the theory and concepts of financial accounting and students were
expected to learn how to construct and interpret financial statements. Topics included an
introductory understanding of accounting and the context within which accounting

-4-

occurs. A copy of syllabus for Introduction to Financial Accounting was attached to the
ASF at Tab 4.
6.

The second quiz in the Introduction to Financial Accounting was a 90-minute, on-line test
conducted on Qurecus on March 24, 2021. Professor Seguin made an announcement on
Quercus reminding students what they were permitted to do and what they were
prohibited from doing during the quiz. A copy of this announcement was attached to the
ASF at Tab 5. It warned students that they must work individually:
It is expected that students will write in a private location with no other
person present, and may not contact anyone during the test. No
unauthorized aids may be present during any test or examination - this
means no textbooks, cell phones, pagers, PDAs, audio players, discussion
boards, messengers or other such items. Students may also not have other
online resources open for the duration of the exam (this includes the
etext, MyAccountingLab, and any discussion board or messenger). This
is a university policy, and any violation may constitute an Academic
Offence.

7.

The Student submitted answers to the second quiz on March 24, 2021, using his
UTORid <
>.

8.

On April 5, 2022, someone using the user name “Josep Gatue” and the email address
gatue63@yahoo.com sent a series of email messages to Professor Seguin. A copy of
these messages was attached to the ASF at Tab 6. In the messages, Josep Gatue advised
Professor Seguin that a student with the UTORid <
> had “relied on services of
a third party in accounting exam recently concluded.” One of the messages, which the
Student admits that he sent, stated:
The exam will be held online on Wednesday March 24, 2021,
beginning at 8:10 p, EDT. It will be 1.5 hours in length. it will cover
material from Chapters 1 to 8. Also has 30 minutes to digitalizing and
upload the work, so I assume we have 2H to do the exam.
There will be 16 multiple choice questions and 4 problems.
I need at least 80+ to achieve my goal, so please make sure you have the
ability to do that. Also, the test must be submitted in handwritten with my
ID on it. So, please give me some time to copy it down.

9.

On March 21, 2021, the Student admits that he sent an email that to Josep Gatue that read
“I also need some time to copy your work down with my handwriting. OK, I trust you.
But please spend some more time on my exam so, I felt safer.”

10.

On March 30, 2021, the Student admits that he wrote an email to Josep Gatue that said
“Man, the final is just being so important to me since you only got me a 62% this time,
and I need an 85+ on the final for real, if you can't do it. It's OK, just tell me. Because
otherwise, I can't even get into my major next year.”

-5-

11.

Professor Seguin attempted to contact the Student to discuss the matter, but he did not
respond to her. The Student subsequently sent Professor Seguin a letter on April 12,
2021, which was attached to the ASF at Tab 7. The letter read, in part:
I completed this test on March 24 with limited preparation, as I didn’t do
enough practice questions given that many other exams were going on in
the meantime. My time management was poor. I’m so afraid the grade in
MGT120 may drop. Then, I found one friend who also studies in this type
of course and i gave him my Quercus username and password, and after
he got into the exam, he told me what the question came out and we
discussed about the exam questions together. After the exam was done,
we double checked the answer and my friend helped me submit the exam
and I uploaded all of my draft papers with my ID on it to the quercus.

12.

The letter also included the Student’s expression of remorse and understanding of the
serious nature of the academic misconduct. The Student stated:
In the end, I would like to apologize again to the school and the professor. This is
the first time that I have been reported for violating the rules. I deeply regret my
dishonest behaviors. I also realize the seriousness of violating the school's
regulations. I hope the school can let me stay and continue my studying without
being suspended. If I received suspension, this would be a huge strike to me and
my family. Since I’ve always been a good student historically, It would be so
frustrated and I don’t know how should I communicate with my family members
in the future. But I know wrong is wrong, you had to pay for the mistakes that
you made, so I am willing to take integrity workshop or community service or
probation as a mark to warn me. As long as I can stay, I will also work hard to
avoid the same thing. I am proud that I can go to U of T campus last fall, and
have been always dreaming about making more friends in that campus. I am fine
with punishment of failing this course or retaking this course in summer, but
please give me a chance to remedy my mistake and grow positively.

The Environment
13.

In Winter 2021, the Student also enrolled in ENV100Y5Y - The Environment, which was
taught by Professor Barbara Murck. This introductory environmental science course
examines large-scale features of Earth, natural hazards, Earth's climate and weather
systems, energy and mineral resources, human population growth, extinction and
biodiversity, environmental toxins, vanishing soils and expanding deserts, forests, urban
environmental management, and food resources. A copy of syllabus for The Environment
was attached to the ASF at Tab 8.

14.

The final examination in The Environment, which was worth 40% of the final grade, was
held on-line via Quercus on April 17, 2021.

15.

Professor Murck provided students with the examination cover sheet for the final
examination three weeks prior to the date of the examination. It was also available
throughout the final examination. It specifically warned students that they were not
permitted to communicate with anyone during the final examination and that they were

-6-

not permitted to access any external apps or websites during the examination. The
Student agrees that he received and read the examination cover sheet.
16.

Because of concerns about academic misconduct during a term test held in December
2020, Professor Murck modified the design of the final examination. She used brand-new
questions and constructed different versions of the final examination, so that students
received equivalent but slightly different versions of the questions. There was, therefore,
no way that a student writing the final examination could know about a question that was
on a different version of the final examination, unless they had communicated with
someone who had seen that different version of the final examination.

17.

The Student submitted answers to the final examination on April 17, 2021. A copy of his
final examination was attached to the ASF at Tab 9.

18.

When the teaching assistant reviewed the Student’s final examination answers, she
recognized that he had answered questions from versions of the final examination that he
did not receive and that his answers were identical to those of other students. The
problems on the Student’s examination included, but were not limited, to his answers to
questions #3, 4, 6, and 8. In some of the Student’s answers, he responded to a question
that was not on the version of the examination he received. For example, on the Student's
version of the examination question 4 read as follows:
SCENARIO:
For science fiction fans! Let's imagine that it's the future, and some amazing new
technologies are making lots of things possible...
Questions about this scenario:
1) Let's say that seafloor mining is now possible, potentially adding to
our reserves of metals. What kinds of challenges had to be overcome to
develop this technology? What might be some of the benefits or
drawbacks of mining on the bottom of the ocean? (3 marks)
2) It's the future, and - following the trend towards urbanization of the
population - almost 90% of the world's people are now living in urban
centres. What factors caused all those people to move from rural to urban
environments? What are some of thepotential impacts of this? (There
could be both positive and negative impacts.) (4 marks)
3) In this future world, population growth has declined and the overall
number of people has started to decline. However, people are using more
resources than ever. What are some possible impacts of this, in the global
context? What would Malthus have to say about this? (3 marks)

19.

The Student submitted the following answer, which was to a completely different version
of the question:

-7-

1) The Haber-Brosch process is a chemical process that can makes ammonia
from nitrogen in the atmosphere. On the other hand, more chemical fertilizer
will lead to less production. Nitrogen fertilizer will lead to environmental
pressue. Only reasonable production and application of nitrogen fertilizer
can improve crop yield
2) Once the gene is modified, on the on hand, it may causes a series of
unknown stuctural and functional changes in the organism. On the other
hand, the effects of the ransgenic operation of the organism can be passed on
genetically. Safeft issues 1 food safety; lag effect, allergens, change in
nutritional compostion. 2 Biosafety: the impact on biodiversity. 3
Environmental security: the impact on the stability of the ecosystem.
Genetically modified Organisms(GMOS) may overreproduce because of one
advantage of their genes, causing stress to the environment.
3) Green plants use the sun's light energy, assimiliate carbon dioxide(CO2)
and water (H20) to produce organic matter and release oxygen process,
called photosynthesis. Water in the body ecaporates through the stomata.
SInce phoyosynthesis also consumes water, we need to drink at least 20 liters
of water a day to stay healthy. If humans can photosynthesize the first thing
that will happen is that the water cycle on Earth will intensify, competing
with plants for sunlight Meeting with the Dean’s Designate.
20.

In addition, some of the Student's answers were identical to answers provided by four
other students.

Meeting with the Dean’s Designate
21.

On June 30, 2021, the Student met with Professor Charles Elkabas, the Dean’s Designate
for Academic Integrity. The Student admits that Professor Elkabas read the required
warnings from the Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters to him and that he knew and
accepted that anything that he said during that meeting could be introduced into evidence
against him at the Tribunal.

22.

With respect to Introduction to Financial Accounting, the Student admitted that he had
provided his Quercus login credentials to his friend, “Truman,” a student at Western
University. When confronted by the email messages that “Josep Gatue” had provided to
Professor Seguin, the Student admitted that, in fact, he had written the messages and
provided his login information to a “tutor” from a website called “Study pool.” The
Student admitted that he had paid $50 to 60 for the service.

23.

Professor Elkabas reminded the Student that he had provided a different version of events
in his letter to Professor Seguin. The Student stated that the letter was accurate, except
that he had paid the “tutor” from Study Pool to write the term test for him and had not
received assistance from a friend.

24.

The Student admitted to Professor Elkabas that he paid for the tutor from Study Pool
personate him during the second term test in Introduction to Financial Accounting.

-8-

25.

With respect to The Environment, the Student admitted that he paid about $400 to a
person to help him write the final examination. He communicated with this person during
the final examination through the person’s WeChat userid <a220fg>. The Student denied
communicating with other students during the final examination. He said that he would
message <a220fg> that he needed an answer to a question number, he would receive an
answer, and he would copy and paste the answer into his examination answers. The
Student stated that he did not read carefully either the questions on the examination or the
answers provided to him as he was running out of time.

26.

The Student admitted that he had paid to received unauthorized assistance during the
final examination in The Environment.

27.

The Student confirms that the statements and admissions he made about both courses to
the Dean’s Designate were true and accurate.

28.

With respect to the course Introduction to Financial Accounting, the Student admits that:

29.

5.

(a)

he knew that he was not permitted to have anyone assist him during the term test
on March 24, 2021;

(b)

he knowingly paid $50 to $60 and provided his Quercus credentials to someone
from the Study Pool to personate him and to provide him with all of the answers
to the Introduction to Financial Accounting term test held on March 24, 2021;

(c)

he is guilty of having paid another person personate him during the Introduction
to Financial Accounting term test held on March 24, 2021; and

(d)

he is guilty of knowingly receiving unauthorized assistance during the
Introduction to Financial Accounting term test held on March 24, 2021.

With respect to The Environment, the Student admits that:
i.

he knew that he was not permitted to have anyone assist him during the final
examination;

ii.

he knowingly paid $400 to someone to provide him with unauthorized assistance
during the final examination; and

iii.

he is guilty of knowingly receiving unauthorized assistance during the final
examination.

The Student provided further evidence through oral testimony. The Student testified that
he committed these academic offences in his freshman year, which was a difficult time for
him. He was attending school remotely from China where he was in quarantine for most
of the year. He testified that this was a struggle for him as he was isolated from the
academic community and he had no friends to study with. He also testified that he was
experiencing some family struggles resulting from the divorce of his parents a few years
earlier. The Student testified that, in his freshman year, he was overwhelmed by the
unfamiliar environment and did not understand how important academic integrity was. The

-9-

Student explained that since coming to Toronto in his second year, he has worked very
hard to do better academically and to improve himself. He has achieved higher grades in
his second year and has become part of the university community by making friends and
participating in activities. The Student testified that this community is very important to
him and he really did not want to leave the community or his friends. It was important to
the Student that he be able to graduate with his friends. The Student told the panel that he
does not want his freshman mistakes to cause irreversible errors for his whole life.
6.

Following deliberations and based on the admissions made by the Student, the ASF and
the supporting materials, the Panel concluded that charges #1 and #4 had been proven with
clear and convincing evidence on a balance of probabilities, and accepted the guilty plea
of the Student in respect of those charges. The Panel was advised that if the Tribunal
convicted the Student on those charges, the University would withdraw Charges #2, #3 and
#5 and those charges was so withdrawn.

Penalty
7.

The University submitted that the following penalty is appropriate in the circumstances:
a. a final grade of zero in each of MGT120HS5 and ENV100Y5Y (2021);
b. a suspension from the University for five years commencing on June 2, 2022;
and
c. a notation of the offence on his academic record and transcript for six years
commencing on June 2, 2022.

8.

The University also submitted that this case should be reported to the Provost for
publication of a notice of the decision of the Tribunal and the sanction imposed, with the
name of the Student withheld.

9.

The Student submitted that a lesser penalty was appropriate in the circumstances. The
Student asked the Panel to consider a suspension of two to three years. The Student also
asked that the offence not be noted of his transcript for six years (or a year longer than the
period of suspension). The Student was concerned that the length of the suspension and
notation on his transcript would unduly delay his ability to complete a degree and then
pursue further education.

10.

After reviewing the evidence, hearing submissions from both parties and deliberations, the
panel concluded that the penalty recommended by the University was appropriate in the
circumstances. The Panel determined that the penalty recommended by the Student was
insufficient to address the conduct and resulting harm to the University in this case. In
arriving at this decision, the Panel took into consideration the nature of the offence, the
detriment to the University occasioned by the offence, the need to deter other students from
acting in a similar manner, the character of the Student, and the circumstances surrounding
the commission of the offence (University of Toronto v. Mr. C. Case No. 1976/77-3,
November 5, 1976 at p. 15).

- 10 -

11.

The Student committed very serious offences. Preventing this type of offence from
occurring is critical to ensuring that a University of Toronto degree is earned and cannot
be bought. As set out in the Discipline Appeals Board decision in The University of Toronto
and S.C., N.R.H. and M.K.K. (“S.C.”) (Case Nos. 596, 597 and 598, November 23, 2011),
“purchased essay offences are about as serious as can be committed in a University
setting,” (para 136). The Appeals Board explained the reasons for this at paras 104-105:
[104] We begin our analysis by explaining our views about the nature of
the offence in this case. As previous decisions of this Board make clear,
purchasing academic work for a fee and then submitting that work with a
view to securing academic credit, has always been considered among the
very most, to use the majority’s description, “egregious” offences a
student can commit in the University environment. There are a number of
reasons for this. First, in taking these steps, there is clear evidence of
intention, deliberation and knowing deception, both in the planning,
managing and completion of the offence, all of which occurs over a period
of time, as in this case. As well, the act of paying for the services of another
in this context, introduces a commercial element into the relationship of a
student with the University, a factor very distant from the core values of
an academic institution, where individual effort, intellectual thought and
hard work are the hallmarks.
[105] Moreover, this particular variety of plagiarism is quite different and
more severe than the usual appropriation of the work of another through
internet sources or the many ways that existing work can be
commandeered. With purchased work, as the advertising of The Essay
Place makes clear, the student buys an original work, tailored to the
specific subject and which will not be found through the increasing
sophisticated antennae of professors and their electronic helpers.

12.

The Appeals Board explained that, for this type of offence, the Tribunal should approach
sentencing “with the working assumption that expulsion from the institution is the sanction
that is best commensurate with the gravity of the offence,” (at para 136). That said, whether
or not expulsion is appropriate will depend on a number of factors and the particular facts
of the case. The University provided the panel with authorities on cases of purchased
essays:
i. The University of Toronto and S.C., N.R.H. and M.K.K. (Case Nos. 596, 597
and 598, November 23, 2011);
ii. The University of Toronto and Y.S. (Case No. 1035, October 30, 2019);
iii. The University of Toronto and J.W. (Case No. 1082, August 23, 2019);
iv. The University of Toronto and P.H.Q. (Case No. 982, May 8, 2019);
v. The University of Toronto and Y.W. (Case. No. 990, September 12, 2019);

- 11 -

vi. The University of Toronto and N.H. (Case No. 996, May 7, 2019);
vii. The University of Toronto and A.D. (Case No. 972, September 26, 2018);
viii. The University of Toronto and Z.Z. (Case No. 918, March 28, 2017);
ix. The University of Toronto and Z.Z. (Case No. 862, August 23, 2016); and
x. The University of Toronto and Y(A).T. (Case No. 783, July 21, 2015)
13.

The Panel considered the character of the Student. The Student admitted to the offences –
this demonstrates insight and remorse into the misconduct. These were the Student’s first
academic offences, however the conduct involved multiple offences in different courses.
The University submitted that the Student’s admission of guilt is tempered by the fact that
he initially lied and minimized the misconduct by saying that a friend had assisted him and
that he only admitted to the misconduct when confronted with the evidence provided by
the tutor who had turned him in. The Panel agrees with the University that this factual
history is an aggravating factor that weighs in favour of a serious penalty.

14.

The parties agree that there are mitigating factors present in this case. First, the Student has
admitted to the offences. Second, the offences were committed in the Student’s first year
at the University when he was struggling to adapt to a new environment. Third, the Student
was experiencing family difficulties around the time of the offences. Finally, and most
significantly in the opinion of the Panel, the offences were committed during the global
Covid-19 pandemic. The Student was attending school remotely from China where he
spent most of his freshman year in quarantine. The Student described how difficult it was
to be completely isolated from the academic community and how much he struggled to
study on his own. The Panel finds that Covid-19 has created exceptional circumstances and
challenges for students and that the conduct of this Student cannot be examined without
placing it in the context of the impact of Covid-19. Assistant Discipline Counsel agreed
that the impact of Covid-19 was a mitigating factor in this case. Assistant Discipline
Counsel submitted that, but-for the mitigating factors outlined above, the appropriate
penalty would have been expulsion.

15.

The Panel considered the likelihood of repetition of the offences. While these are the
Student’s first academic offences, he committed multiple offences over a period of time in
more than one course. The Student testified that he has learned from this experience and
has worked hard to improve himself since these events. The Student also testified that, at
the time the offences were committed, he did not have a clear understanding of the
importance of academic integrity but he has since come to understand its importance. This
self-reflection and statement of personal growth would normally assuage concerns about
the Student engaging in similar conduct in the future. However, in the present case the
Student’s testimony at the hearing must be considered in the context of the letter that he
sent to Professor Seguin on April 12, 2021, following the first offence. The Student wrote
that he felt deep regret for his behaviour and that he “realize[s] the seriousness of violating
the school’s regulations.” The Student asked for a second chance, said he knew that “wrong

- 12 -

is wrong” and assured her that “as long as I can stay, I will also work hard to avoid the
same thing.” Five days later, on April 17, 2021, the Student paid $400 for unauthorized
assistance on an exam. The Panel must weigh the sincerity of the Student’s expression of
remorse and personal growth against this factual history. The Panel believes that there is a
real risk of a repetition of similar offences in this case and that a significant penalty is
required to address this concern.
16.

During the hearing, the Panel asked about the rationale behind having a notation of the
offence on the Student’s transcript for one year longer than the suspension itself (as the
Student asked that this not be imposed). The rationale given was that the notation for an
additional year once the Student returns to the University is a type of probation to ensure
that the conduct is not repeated. As the notation is not permanent, once the Student has
proven themselves for that year, their record is cleared of the offence. This rationale makes
sense and is particularly appropriate in the present case given the facts outlined above.

17.

In all of the circumstances, and having reviewed the cases provided by the parties, at the
conclusion of the hearing, the Panel issued the following Order, which is hereby confirmed:
i.

The Student is guilty of one count of the academic offence of personation, contrary
to section B.I.1(c) of the Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters;

ii.

The Student is guilty of one count of the academic offence of obtaining
unauthorized assistance, contrary to section B.I.1(b) of the Code of Behaviour on
Academic Matters;

iii.

The following sanctions shall be imposed:

iv.

(i)

a final grade of zero in each of MGT120HS5 and ENV100Y5Y (2021);

(ii)

a suspension from the University for five years commencing June 2, 2022;
and

(iii)

a notation of the offence on his academic record and transcript for six
years commencing June 2, 2022.

This case shall be reported to the Provost for publication of a notice of the
Tribunal’s decision and the sanction imposed, with the student’s name withheld.

Dated at Toronto this 31st day of August, 2022.

Original signed by:
_____________________________
Ms. Karen Symes, Chair
On behalf of the Panel

