Case 1356

DATE:

   August 31, 2022

PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v. H.M. ("the Student")

HEARING DATE:

   June 2, 2022, via Zoom

PANEL MEMBERS:

   Ms. Karen Symes, Chair
   Professor Joseph Clarke, Faculty Panel Member
   Mr. Dylan Dingwell, Student Panel Member

APPEARANCES:

   Ms. Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg
   Rothstein LLP
   Mr. William Webb, Co-Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg Rothstein LLP
   The Student

HEARING SECRETARY:

   Ms. Krista Kennedy, Administrative Clerk and Hearing Secretary, Office
   of Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances

   The charges against the Student arose out of academic misconduct in two
   courses. On one occasion, the Student was charged under s. B.i.1(c)
   Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters , 1995 (the â Codeâ) on the basis
   that they knowingly had someone personate them during an on-line test.
   In the alternative, the Student was charged under s.B.i.1(b) of the on
   the basis that they knowingly obtained unauthorized assistance during
   an online test. In the alternative to both charges, the Student was
   charged with knowingly engaging in a form of cheating, academic
   dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or misrepresentation not otherwise
   described in the Code in order to obtain academic credit or other
   academic advantage in connection with an on-line test, contrary to s.
   B.i.3(b) of the Code. On a second occasion, the Student was charged
   under s.B.i.1(b) of the Code on the basis that they knowingly obtained
   unauthorized assistance in connection with a final exam. In the
   alternative, the Student was charged with knowingly doing or omitting
   to do something for the purpose of engaging in a form of cheating,
   academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or misrepresentation in order
   to obtain academic credit or other academic advantage in connection
   with a final exam.

   The hearing proceeded on the basis of an Agreed Statement of Fact
   (âASFâ). The ASF outlined that the Student admitted that they sent
   various emails to an individual to complete an online test and an exam.
   The Panel noted that the ASF also outlined that the Student wrote a
   letter to the Professor in one of the courses outlining that they
   provided their Quercus username and password to a friend who discussed
   the exam questions with them. The same letter expressed remorse for
   their actions and an understanding of the serious nature of the
   academic misconduct. The Student attended a meeting with the Deanâs
   Designate at which time they were confronted with an email message
   received by an individual claiming that the Student had relied on
   services of a third party to complete an exam. Once confronted, the
   Student admitted that they provided their Quercus username and password
   to a tutor from a website called Study Poo l and paid $50 to $60 for
   the service. The Student also admitted that a friend did not help with
   the online test as initially outlined in the Studentâs email to the
   Professor. During this meeting, the Student also admitted to paying
   $400 to an individual to assist the Student in writing their final exam
   in the other course. The Panel noted that the ASF outlined that Student
   confirmed that the statements and admissions made with respect to both
   courses to the Deanâs Designate were true and accurate. Upon review of
   the admissions made by the Student, the ASF, and the supporting
   materials, the Panel concluded that the charges under s.B.i.1(b) and
   s.B.i.1(c) of the Code had been proven with clear and convincing
   evidence on a balance of probabilities. The Panel accepted the guilty
   plea of the Student in respect to those charges. The University
   withdrew the remaining charges made in the alternative.

   The Student and the University requested different penalties. The
   Student asked the Panel to consider a suspension of two to three years
   and asked the offence not to be noted on their transcript for six
   years. The Student was concerned that the length of the suspension and
   notation would unduly delay their ability to complete a degree and then
   pursue further education. The Panel also received oral testimony from
   the Student. The Student testified that they committed these offences
   in their freshman year which was a difficult time for
   them.Â Furthermore, the Student was attending school remotely from
   China where they were in quarantine for most of the year which caused
   them to be isolated from the academic community. The Student also
   testified that they have worked hard to bring their grades up and they
   value their academic community. The Student told the Panel that they do
   not want their freshman mistakes to cause irreversible errors for their
   entire life.

   Upon review of the evidence, hearing submissions from both parties, and
   deliberations, the Panel concluded that the penalty requested by the
   University was appropriate in the circumstances. The Panel determined
   that the penalty requested by the Student was insufficient to address
   the conduct and resulting harm to the University in this case. In
   making this determination, the Panel noted that the Student committed
   very serious offences and that preventing this type of offence from
   occurring is critical to ensuring that a University of Toronto degree
   is earned and cannot be bought. The Panel further noted that the
   Student admitted to the offences which demonstrates insight and remorse
   into the misconduct. These were the Studentâs first academic offences
   but the conduct involved multiple offences in different courses. The
   Panel agreed with the Universityâs submission that the Studentâs
   admission of guilt was tempered by the fact that they initially lied
   and minimized the misconduct by saying that a friend had assisted them
   but only after being confronted with the evidence did they admit to
   hiring third party services; the Panel indicated that this factual
   history was an aggravating factor that weighed in favour of a serious
   penalty. The Panel noted that the parties agreed that there were many
   mitigating factors in this case, and that Assistant Discipline Counsel
   agreed that but-for the mitigating factors, the appropriate penalty
   would have been expulsion. The Panel believed that there was a real
   risk of repetition of similar offences in this case and that a
   significant penalty was required to address this concern. Upon review
   of the cases provided by the parties and having regard for all the
   circumstances, the Panel imposed the following sanctions: a grade of
   zero in the courses; a five-year suspension; a six-year notation on the
   Studentâs transcript; and a report to the Provost for publication.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/30641
