Case 1327

DATE:

   January 25, 2023

PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v. S.K. ("the Student")

HEARING DATE:

   October 26, 2022, via Zoom

PANEL MEMBERS:

   Christopher Wirth, Chair
   Professor Michael Saini, Faculty Panel Member
   Ben Kitching, Student Panel Member

APPEARANCES:

   Tina Lie, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg
   Rothstein LLP

HEARING SECRETARY:

   Nadia Bruno, Special Projects Officer, Office of Appeals, Discipline
   and Faculty Grievances

   The Student was charged with two counts of knowingly representing as
   their own an idea or expression of an idea or work of another in a
   topic proposal submitted in one course and an assignment submitted in
   another course, contrary to section B.i.1(d) of the Code. In the
   alternative, they were also charged with two counts of knowingly
   obtaining unauthorized assistance in connection with the topic proposal
   and assignment, contrary to section B.i.1(b) of the Code. In the
   further alternative, they were charged with two counts of knowingly
   engaging in a form of cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct,
   fraud or misrepresentation not otherwise described in the Code in order
   to obtain academic credit or other academic advantage of any kind in
   connection with the topic proposal and assignment, contrary to section
   B.i.3(b) of the Code.

   Neither the Student, nor anyone on the Student‚s behalf, attended the
   hearing. The University provided affidavit evidence regarding service,
   including evidence that the Student had a conversation with counsel for
   the University after being sent the charges. The Panel held that the
   University had done everything it could reasonably have done to contact
   the Student and had taken the steps required under the University
   Tribunal‚s Rules of Practice and Procedure (‚Rules‚). The Panel was
   satisfied it was more likely than not that the Student had made a
   deliberate choice to avoid and turn their back on any official
   communications from the University . According to the Panel, the
   Student had been given reasonable notice of the hearing in compliance
   with the notice requirements set out in sections 6 and 7 of the
   Statutory Powers Procedure Act and rules 9 and e16 of the Rules. The
   Panel decided to hear the case on its merits in the absence of the
   Student.

   In making its finding of guilt, the Panel noted that the language used
   by the Student for their proposal was unusually sophisticated for an
   undergraduate student and concluded with wording that was odd and
   clearly suspicious that it came from another source. In their meeting
   with a professor, the Student was unable to explain concepts and was
   unfamiliar with some of their proposal‚s content. The Panel also noted
   evidence of the Student‚s admission that their proposal contained
   information they had found online and for which they had not provided
   the source in their references. Based on the University‚s evidence and
   submissions, the Panel found the Student guilty of one count of
   knowingly representing as their own an idea or expression of an idea or
   work of another in relation to the topic proposal, contrary to section
   B.i.1(d) of the Code. The University withdrew the remaining five
   charges.

   In determining sanction, the Panel noted that the Student did not have
   any prior academic misconduct. Further, it observed that the fact that
   the Student‚s conduct had occurred during the early days of the
   pandemic could have been a mitigating factor; however, plagiarism is a
   serious matter and requires that a strong message be sent for general
   deterrence. Moreover, the Panel commented that the Student undermined
   the grades-based system of evaluation and broke the honour code that is
   essential to modern learning. According to the Panel, the Student had
   committed a serious form of academic misconduct.

   The Panel imposed the following sanctions: a grade of zero in the
   course; a two-year suspension; a three-year notation on the Student's
   transcript; and a report to the Provost for publication .
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/30886
