Case No: 1327
THE UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
IN THE MATTER OF charges of academic dishonesty filed on January 19, 2022,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic
Matters, 2019,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Act, 1971, S.O. 1971, c. 56 as amended
S.O. 1978, c. 88
B E T W E E N:
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
- AND S

K

REASONS FOR DECISION

Hearing Date: October 26, 2022, via Zoom
Panel Members:
Mr. Christopher Wirth, Chair
Professor Michael Saini, Faculty Panel Member
Mr. Ben Kitching, Student Panel Member
Appearances:
Ms. Tina Lie, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg Rothstein LLP
Hearing Secretary:
Ms. Nadia Bruno, Special Projects Officer & Hearing Secretary, Office of Appeals, Discipline
and Faulty Grievances
Not in Attendance:

A Panel of the Trial Division of the University Tribunal was convened on October 26,
2022, by videoconference to consider charges brought by the University of Toronto (the
“University”) against S

K

(the “Student”) under the University’s Code of

Behaviour on Academic Matters, 2019 (the “Code”).
Preliminary Issue: Proceeding in the Absence of the Student
The hearing was scheduled to begin at 9:45 a.m. At that time, neither the Student, nor
anyone on the Student’s behalf, were logged onto the Zoom link. The Panel adjourned the
hearing until 10:02 a.m. to allow time for the Student to attend it. At that time, the Student
was still not present and the University then requested that the Panel proceed with the
hearing in the Student’s absence.
Pursuant to Rule 16 of the University Tribunal’s Rules of Practice and Procedure
(“Rules”), a notice of an electronic hearing must include the date, time, place and purpose
of the hearing; a reference to the statutory authority under which the hearing will be held;
information about the manner in which the hearing will be held; and a statement that if a
person does not attend the hearing, the Panel may proceed in the person’s absence. Rule
17 provides that where notice of an electronic hearing has been given to a person and that
person does not attend the hearing, the Panel may proceed with the hearing in the party’s
absence. The Rules conform to sections 6 and 7 of the Statutory Powers Procedure Act
(the “SPPA”), which set out the notice requirements.
Pursuant to Rule 9, a notice of hearing may be served on a student by various means,
including by emailing a copy of the document to the student’s email address contained in
the University’s Repository of Student Information (“ROSI”).
The University’s Policy on Official Correspondence with Students dated September 1,
2006, expressly states that students are responsible for maintaining on ROSI a current and
valid mailing address and University-issued email account, and that “[f]ailure to do so may
result in a student missing important information and will not be considered an acceptable
rationale for failing to receive official correspondence from the University.” Students are
expected to monitor and retrieve their email on a frequent and consistent basis. Students

2

have the right to forward their University issued email account to another email account,
but remain responsible for ensuring that all University email communications are received
and read.
The onus of proof is on the University to establish that it provided the Student with
reasonable notice of the hearing in accordance with these Rules.
In this case, the University provided evidence relevant to service by way of the evidence
of two witnesses: Andrew Wagg (“Mr. Wagg”), a Manager, Incident Response at
Information Security, Information Technology Services at the University and Kimberly
Blake (“Ms. Blake”), a Legal Assistant at the law firm of Paliare Roland Rosenberg
Rothstein LLP. These two witnesses provided their evidence by affidavit, which were
accepted by the Panel pursuant to rule 61 of the Rules.
The contents of the affidavits (without Exhibits) of these two witnesses are set out below:
a) Evidence of Mr. Wagg
Mr. Wagg’s affidavit provides as follows:
1.

I am a Manager, Incident Response at Information Security, Information
Technology Services at the University of Toronto. As such, I have knowledge of
the matters contained in this affidavit. Where I do not have direct knowledge of a
matter contained in this affidavit, I state the source of my knowledge and I believe
it to be true.

2.

Information Technology Services provides many services to the University of
Toronto, including management of the email accounts used by students. To access
an email account one needs to input both the user’s login id and the password for
that account. The Microsoft 365 Exchange portal automatically records the last time
someone accessed a particular university-issued email account.

3.

On October 12, 2022, at the request of Tina Lie, the Assistant Discipline Counsel
for the University of Toronto, I checked the portal records to determine the last time
someone accessed the email account

3

@mail.utoronto.ca. I determined

that the last time someone accessed this e-mail account was on October 6, 2022 at
2:10 am, local Toronto time.
b) Evidence of Ms. Blake
Ms. Blake’s affidavit provides as follows:
1.

I am a legal assistant at the law firm Paliare Roland Rosenberg Rothstein LLP. I
work with Tina Lie, a partner at Paliare Roland, who acts as Assistant Discipline
Counsel to the University of Toronto. As such, I have knowledge of the matters
contained in this affidavit. Where I do not have direct knowledge of a matter
contained in this affidavit, I state the source of my knowledge and I believe it to be
true.

A.

Contact Information

2.

On October 13, 2022, the Academic Integrity Unit (“AIU”), Office of the Dean at
the University of Toronto Mississauga (“UTM”) provided my office with a copy of
the current contact information for S

K

(the “Student”) in the University’s

Repository of Student Information (“ROSI”). The Student’s contact information in
ROSI record is as follows:

3.

(a)

Email address:

@mail.utoronto.ca

(b)

Mailing address:

(c)

Permanent address:

(d)

Phone number:

(e)

International phone number:

I have attached a copy of the Student’s contact information to my affidavit as
Exhibit A.

4

4.

I have attached a copy of the Student’s academic record, as of October 12, 2022 to
my affidavit as Exhibit B.

B.

University of Toronto’s correspondence with the student

5.

The file that my office received from UTM indicates that the AIU contacted the
Student by email at

@mail.utoronto.ca in February 2021 regarding the

allegations of academic misconduct in issue in this case and that the Student met
with the Dean’s Designate for Academic Integrity on March 17, 2021. I have
attached a copy of the emails that were exchanged with the Student in February and
March 2021 to my affidavit as Exhibit C.
6.

The file also indicates that after the March 17, 2021 meeting, the AIU contacted the
Student by email to arrange another meeting with the Dean’s Designate which
occurred on March 24, 2021. I have attached a copy of the emails that were
exchanged with the Student in March 2021 to my affidavit as Exhibit D.

7.

The file further indicates that the AIU again contacted the Student by email on June
10, 2021 asking if she wished to change her plea.

responded by email

stating that she wished to maintain her plea of not guilty and asking about retaining
legal counsel. A copy of this email thread is attached to my affidavit as Exhibit E.
C.

Charges and disclosure

1.

On January 19, 2022, the Office of the Vice-Provost, Faculty and Academic Life
served

the

charges

in

this

matter

on

the

Student

by

email

to

@mail.utoronto.ca. I have attached a copy of the email and charges
(on which I was copied) to my affidavit as Exhibit F.
2.

Also on January 19, 2022, the Office of Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances
(the “ADFG Office”) sent a letter to the Student at

@mail.utoronto.ca,

in respect of the Charges. The letter explained the Tribunal process and encouraged
to speak to a legal representative and provided contact information for
Downtown Legal Services (“DLS”). Attached with this letter was a copy of the

5

Charges, the Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters, the University Tribunal
Rules of Practice and Procedure, and a pamphlet for DLS. A copy of the email and
letter from the ADFG Office is attached to my affidavit as Exhibit G.
3.

On February 7, 2022, Ms. Lie sent the Student an email to introduce herself. Ms.
Lie advised that important documents and correspondence would be sent to the
Student’s mail.utoronto.ca email address. I have attached a copy of Ms. Lie’s email
(on which I was copied) to my affidavit as Exhibit H.

4.

Ms. Lie has advised me that on March 2, 2022, she had a call with the Student. As
a result, she emailed the Student that same day with the name of a few lawyers with
experience representing students in academic discipline matters. I have attached a
copy of Ms. Lie’s email (on which I was copied) to my affidavit as Exhibit I.

5.

On April 4, 2022, Ms. Lie emailed the Student a disclosure letter, a disclosure brief,
and a copy of the University’s Policy on Official Correspondence with Students. I
have attached a copy of the email (on which I was copied) and the disclosure letter
to my affidavit as Exhibit J.

D.

Hearing

6.

On August 3, 2022, Ms. Lie emailed the Student about scheduling a hearing date.
Ms. Lie advised that if she did not hear back by August 10, 2022 she would request
that a hearing date be scheduled. I have attached a copy of this email (on which I
was copied) to my affidavit as Exhibit K.

7.

did not respond. On August 16, 2022, Ms. Lie emailed the Student
advising that she would request a hearing be scheduled for October 26, 2022 at 9:45
am. A copy of this email is included in the email thread at Exhibit K.

8.

On August 16, 2022, Ms. Lie emailed the ADFG Office to request that a hearing
be scheduled for October 26, 2022 at 9:45 am. The Student was copied on this
email. I have attached a copy of this email (on which I was copied) to my affidavit
as Exhibit L.

6

9.

On August 17, 2022, the ADFG Office issued a Notice of Electronic Hearing to
take place via zoom on October 26, 2022. The ADFG Office sent the notice to the
Student at

@mail.utoronto.ca. A copy of this email is included in the

email thread at Exhibit L.
10.

On September 27, 2022, the ADFG Office issued a Revised Notice of Electronic
Hearing and sent a copy to the Student at

@mail.utoronto.ca. A copy

of this email is included in the email thread at Exhibit L. A copy of the Revised
Notice of Electronic Hearing is also included at Exhibit L.
11.

On October 15, 2022, Ms. Lie sent the Student several emails attaching additional
disclosure. I have attached a copy of these emails (on which I was copied) to my
affidavit as Exhibit M.

12.

On October 18, 2022, Ms. Lie emailed the Student copies of the affidavits of the
Provost’s witnesses. Ms. Lie stated that the Provost would rely on the affidavits at
the hearing, and asked the Student to let our office know whether she intended to
cross-examine any of the affiants. Ms. Lie also informed

that the Provost

had decided to withdraw charges #4, #5 and #6 of the charges filed on January 19,
2022. I have attached a copy of this email (on which I was copied) to my affidavit
as Exhibit N.
E.

Further attempts to contact the Student

13.

On October 13, 2022, I called the Student at

(this is a

) which is the number that the Student had
provided in ROSI as her phone number. After the first ring, an auto-recording came
on saying that “the customer you are trying to call is not available and to try again
at a later time”.
14.

On October 14, 2022, I called the Student at

(using a

country and area code), which is the number that the Student had provided in
ROSI as her International Telephone Number. The phone rang several times before
going to voicemail. The voicemail message was not in English and I was therefore

7

unable to identify if the recording identified the Student’s voicemail. I left a
message advising her of the upcoming hearing, to check her University of Toronto
email address and to contact Ms. Lie to discuss. I provided Ms. Lie’s office phone
number as 416-646-4332.
15.

On October 14, 2022, I again called the Student at

and received

the same auto-recorded message as before.
16.

To the best of my knowledge, the Student has not contacted our office since her
call with Ms. Lie of March 2, 2022. Our office has not received any correspondence
from the Student to indicate that she is not able to attend the hearing scheduled for
October 26, 2022 at 9:45 am.

The evidence is that the Student, after being sent the Charges, had a conversation with
Assistant Discipline Counsel on March 2, 2022, but is uncertain as to whether the Student
reviewed the Charges, the disclosure or the Notice of Electronic Hearing. However, the
Rules do not require actual notice. The University can serve the Student, but cannot make
the Student actually read what is served.
The University did everything it could reasonably have done to contact the Student and did
take the steps it was required to under the Rules. The Student had a telephone conversation
with Assistant Discipline Counsel on March 2, 2022, after being sent the Charges and the
Student’s University of Toronto email account was accessed as late as October 6, 2022,
well after service of the Notice of Electronic Hearing and the revised Notice of Electronic
Hearing. Accordingly, the Panel was satisfied it was more likely than not that the Student
had made a deliberate choice some time ago to avoid and turn her back on any official
communications from the University. That choice has consequences.
Therefore, in light of the evidence and the submissions of Assistant Discipline Counsel,
the Panel was satisfied that the Student had been given reasonable notice of the hearing in
compliance with the notice requirements of the SPPA and the Rules. The Panel decided to
hear the case on its merits in the absence of the Student.

8

Charges and Particulars
The charges alleged against the Student as filed by the Provost on January 19, 2022, are as
follows:
1.

On or about October 16, 2020, you knowingly represented as your own an idea or
expression of an idea or work of another in topic proposal you submitted in
VCC306H5 (“VCC306”), contrary to section B.I.1(d) of the Code.

2.

In the alternative, on or about October 16, 2020, you knowingly obtained
unauthorized assistance in connection with a topic proposal you submitted in
VCC306, contrary to section B.I.1(b) of the Code.

3.

In the further alternative, on or about October 16, 2020, you knowingly engaged in
a form of cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or misrepresentation
not otherwise described in the Code in order to obtain academic credit or other
academic advantage of any kind in connection with a topic proposal you submitted
in VCC306, contrary to section B.I.3(b) of the Code.

4.

On or about November 7, 2020, you knowingly represented as your own an idea or
expression of an idea or work of another in an assignment (Assignment 2) you
submitted in VCC290H5 (“VCC290”), contrary to section B.I.1(d) of the Code.

5.

In the alternative, on or about November 7, 2020, you knowingly obtained
unauthorized assistance in connection with an assignment (Assignment 2) you
submitted in VCC290, contrary to section B.I.1(b) of the Code.

6.

In the further alternative, on or about November 7, 2020, you knowingly engaged
in a form of cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or
misrepresentation not otherwise described in the Code in order to obtain academic
credit or other academic advantage of any kind in connection with an assignment
(Assignment 2) you submitted in VCC290, contrary to section B.I.3(b) of the Code.

The particulars related to charges 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 and 6 are as follows:

9

1.

At all material times you were a student enrolled at the University of Toronto
Mississauga.
VCC306

2.

In Fall 2020, you enrolled in VCC306H5 (Visual Culture and Colonialism).

3.

Students in VCC306 were required to submit a final project. They were required to
come up with a topic on their own and to consult with the instructor by October 16,
2020, before going on to the next stage of submitting a topic proposal and annotated
bibliography (worth 10% and due November 6, 2020) and ultimately the final essay
(worth 20% and due December 11, 2020).

4.

You did not consult with the instructor about your topic.

5.

On or about October 16, 2020, you submitted your topic proposal and annotated
bibliography (the “Topic Proposal”).

6.

You submitted the Topic Proposal:
(a)

to obtain academic credit;

(b)

knowing that it contained ideas, expressions of ideas or work which were
not your own, but were the ideas, expressions of ideas or work of others;
and

(c)

knowing that you did not properly reference the ideas, expressions of ideas
or work that you drew from the author of the Topic Proposal.

7.

You did not write all or part of the Topic Proposal. You knowingly obtained
unauthorized assistance from another individual (or individuals) in the Topic
Proposal.

8.

You knowingly submitted the Topic Proposal with the intention that the University
of Toronto Mississauga rely on it as containing your own ideas or work in
considering the appropriate academic credit to be assigned to your work.

10

VCC290
9.

In Fall 2020, you enrolled in VCC290H5 (Topics in Visual Culture and
Communication).

10.

Students in VCC290 were required to submit, among other things, two assignments,
worth 10% each.

11.

On November 7, 2020, you submitted Assignment 2 in VCC290 (the
“Assignment”).

12.

You submitted the Assignment:
(a)

to obtain academic credit;

(b)

knowing that it contained ideas, expressions of ideas or work which were
not your own, but were the ideas, expressions of ideas or work of others;
and

(c)

knowing that you did not properly reference the ideas, expressions of ideas
or work that you drew from the author of the Assignment.

13.

You did not write all or part of the Assignment. You knowingly obtained
unauthorized assistance from another individual (or individuals) in the Assignment.

14.

You knowingly submitted the Assignment with the intention that the University of
Toronto Mississauga rely on it as containing your own ideas or work in considering
the appropriate academic credit to be assigned to your work.

Assistant Discipline Counsel advised the Panel that the Provost was withdrawing Charges
4-6 and was only proceeding with Charges 1-3. In addition, Assistant Discipline Counsel
advised the Panel that if a finding was made for Charge 1, the Provost would then withdraw
Charges 2 and 3.
The Student’s Position

11

Given that the Student was not present nor represented, she was deemed to have denied the
remaining charges. As a result, the hearing proceeded on the basis that the University bore
the burden of proving the charges on the balance of probabilities.
Overview
In addition to the previously identified affidavits, the University tendered the evidence of
two witnesses, Professor Kajri Jain (“Professor Jain”), a Professor in the Department of
Art History at the University and Professor Charles Elkabas (“Professor Elkabas”), a
Professor of French Studies, Language Teaching and Learning in the Department of
Language Studies and he was the Dean’s Designate for Academic Integrity with the Office
of the Dean until July 1, 2021 at the University who provided their evidence by affidavit,
which was accepted by the Panel pursuant to Rule 61 of the Rules.
After careful deliberation, and having considered all the evidence, the Panel found that on
the balance of probabilities the evidence was sufficiently clear, cogent and convincing to
discharge the burden of proof on the University and found that the Student had committed
academic misconduct.
The Evidence
The contents of the affidavits (without Exhibits) of these two witnesses are set out below:
a) Evidence of Professor Jain
Professor Jain’s affidavit provides as follows:
1.

I am a Professor in the Department of Art History at the University of Toronto
Mississauga (“UTM”). As such, I have personal knowledge of the matters set out
in this affidavit. Where I do not have personal knowledge of a matter, I state the
source of my information and I believe it to be true.

A.

The VCC306 Course

12

2.

I have been an instructor at UTM for 15 years. During this time, I have taught 38
undergraduate courses, and have had experience with grading hundreds of
undergraduate student papers and assignments.

3.

In Fall 2020, I was the instructor for VCC306H5 (Visual Culture and Colonialism)
(“VCC306”). VCC306 examines visual forms, such as photography, colour
printing and films, from the second half of the 19th century and the early 20th
century through the lens of colonialism. The overall goal of the course is to
understand the ways in which many of our image practices today perpetuate the
imperialist uses of visual culture and their attendant injustices.

4.

I have attached a copy of the course outline to my affidavit as Exhibit “A”.

5.

There were 27 students in VCC306 in Fall 2020. The course was administered
remotely, via Zoom.

6.
7.

was a student in VCC306.
Students in VCC306 were told about the University’s expectations for academic
integrity. The course outline, under the heading “University Statement on
Academic Integrity for In-Person and Online Learning” (on pages 22-23), provided
as follows:
University Statement on Academic Integrity for In-Person and Online
Learning
Academic integrity is essential to the pursuit of learning and scholarship
in a university, and to ensuring that a degree from the University of
Toronto Mississauga is a strong signal of each student’s individual
academic achievement. As a result, UTM treats cases of cheating and
plagiarism very seriously.
The University of Toronto’s Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters
outlines behaviours that constitute academic dishonesty and the process for
addressing academic offences.
Potential offences include, but are not limited to:
In papers and assignments:

13

1. Using someone else’s ideas or words without appropriate
acknowledgement, including notes or answer guides provided by tutoring
companies or shadow courses.
2. Submitting your own work in more than one course without the
permission of the instructor.
3. Cutting and pasting text from lecture voice-overs, course readings, or
video transcripts.
4. Collaborating with others in the course, unless this is part of the
assignment.
5. Making up sources or facts.
6. Obtaining or providing unauthorized assistance on any assignment.
…
All suspected cases of academic dishonesty will be investigated
following procedures outlined in the Code of Behaviour on Academic
Matters. If you have questions or concerns about what constitutes
appropriate academic behaviour or appropriate research and citation
methods, you are expected to seek out additional information on academic
integrity from your instructor or from other institutional resources.
B.

’s Topic Proposal and Annotated Bibliography

8.

Students in VCC306 were graded on the basis of the following:
Participation (this included active engagement in class
discussions)

20%

Class discussion (students were required to choose a
particular week when they would have primary
responsibility for contributing to class discussions)

5%

Weekly image based responses (students were required to
submit a very short response to the readings each week)

35%

Group project (Orientalism Today)

10%

Final project (described in more detail below)

30%

14

Total

9.

100%

Students in VCC306 were required to submit a final project worth a combined 30%.
The final project was comprised of three stages. Each stage was required to be
completed independently.
(a)

Topic approval: First, students were required to independently come up
with a topic and to consult with me to get their topic approved. I
made clear to students that their topic needed to be approved by me,
prior to moving on to the second stage of writing the proposal. After
consultation with me, students were required to submit a couple lines on
Quercus (the online learning platform that was used to administer the
course) describing the approved topic by October 16, 2020 at 5 pm.
The course outline provided as follows (on pages 18-19) with respect to
the topic that students were required to submit for approval:
The topic
Usually your final project will be an 8-10 page paper that examines
an image (advertisement, photograph, film, artwork, music video,
etc.) or display (exhibition, museum, theme park etc.) in relation to
the visual culture of colonialism, using at least two of the relevant
concepts/keywords covered in class. The image could be from the
colonial period or an instance from later visual culture that you are
able to relate to the history of colonialism or decolonizing struggles.
Try and choose a topic that speaks to you and that you are invested
in. You are expected to go beyond the readings assigned in class;
your image analysis will also require substantial independent
research, so for both you should budget adequate time.
While final submissions normally take the form of an essay, there is
also scope, only with Prof. Jain’s approval, for a video submission
or an artistic or media-based project, but this must be accompanied
by a rigorous written explanation of how it relates to topics or
concepts from the course. All projects must go through a written
proposal process with an annotated bibliography of the sources you
will use. [More below…]

15

Your project topic must be formulated in consultation with Prof.
Jain. You are required to submit a couple of lines describing your
approved topic to Quercus (see Assignments) by 5pm Friday
October 16 at the very latest otherwise you will have insufficient
time to put together a proposal. Be warned: it almost always takes
several tries before a topic is approved, so please start the process
early! You may not proceed with your project proposal until
your topic has been approved.
Please note that developing a project topic is an important part of
the learning process, providing an irreplaceable opportunity for oneon-one mentoring. As part of this process, therefore, it is essential
to attend individual student hours, at least once but ideally 2-3 times
over the course of the term: at least once to discuss your essay topic,
once to discuss the feedback on your proposal, and if required once
to discuss your progress on the essay. [Emphasis in original]
(b)

Proposal: The second stage was the proposal, which was a 1-page
description of the topic. The purpose was to set out what the student
proposes to do in their final project. It was required to include, among
other things, an annotated bibliography. The proposal was worth 10% and
due November 6, 2020 at 5 pm. The course outline provided as follows
(on page 19) with respect to the proposal:
The proposal
The proposal is a 1-page description of your topic, with the image
or link attached (not included in the page length). You do NOT
need a fully developed argument or “thesis” – this will evolve
from your image analysis. A proposal is exactly what it suggests: a
description of what you propose to do.
The proposal should include:
-

a description of the image (including its medium and genre,
where/when it was produced, how it circulated, anything you
know about how it was received, whether there is already
scholarship or critical writing on it, etc.);

-

your motivation in choosing it;

-

how it fits with the course themes and aims;

16

-

which concepts/keywords from the course you will use to
analyze it and why they are relevant (though this could change
as we go, in consultation with Prof. Jain);

-

if there is existing scholarship or critical writing on this topic,
how you will not be simply repeating or summarizing it but
building on, adding to, and/or challenging it; and

-

a list of at least 3-4 annotated academic sources beyond the
weekly course readings that speak to your image or topic (these
could provide background information on the context of the
image, and/or elaborate further on the concepts you are using).
Please use scholarly references primarily from relevant
humanities disciplines (i.e., not psychology, economics,
marketing, etc.). Of course you may also include other types
of sources in addition to these academic works.

-

Remember to annotate your bibliographic entries: a few lines
for each source describing what it is about, what approach it
takes to your topic, and why it is useful for your project.

The proposal is due at 5pm on Fri. Nov. 6, via Quercus. Online
submission via Quercus is required as a .doc file, NOT .pdf.
You will be unable to write a successful paper without getting
feedback on your proposal. Your paper grade will reflect your
ability to address this feedback. [Emphasis in original]
(c)

Final paper: Finally, the student was to write a final paper, which was to
be 8-10 pages in length. It was worth 20% and due December 11, 2020.
Details for the final paper are contained in the course outline (on pages 1920).

10.

I also discussed academic integrity during the lectures, including in the context of
the final project. I have attached a copy of my PowerPoint slides from my week 5
lecture, held on October 19, 2020, which includes references to the importance of
academic integrity, to my affidavit as Exhibit “B” (see slides 1-3, 7 and 37). I recall
that I raised the importance of academic integrity in lectures before week 5 as well.

11.

did not complete the first stage of the final project. She did not consult
with me or get her topic approved. However, on October 15, 2020, the day before
the deadline to submit the topic approval, she submitted what appeared to be

17

her entire proposal and annotated bibliography (i.e., the second stage of the
project) on Quercus (the “Proposal”). I have attached a copy of

’s Proposal

to my affidavit as Exhibit “C”. The Proposal was not submitted as a Word
document, but instead was submitted through the text box on Quercus (for the topic
approval, I was only expecting students to submit a couple lines, so did not request
1

that the students submit a Word document). A screenshot of the Proposal, as it
appears on Quercus, is attached to my affidavit as Exhibit “D”.
12.

The Proposal approached the topic in a way that I had warned students against. The
topic was The New World, which is a film written and directed by Terrence Malick,
inspired by the historical figures Captain John Smith and Pocahontas. In class, I
had made clear to students that they should not select an image that merely
illustrates or depicts colonialism. Instead, students were required to consider their
selected topic from the perspective of how it represents an ideological vehicle for
colonial power.

’s Proposal focussed on the former, an approach I had

warned students against. While other students had made a similar mistake in their
initial approach to the topic, they had consulted with me (as was required for the
topic approval) and through our discussions and with my feedback, were able to
formulate a topic more in line with what the assignment was asking for. However,
did not talk to me about her topic, so I did not have the opportunity to
provide her with feedback on her proposed topic before she submitted the Proposal.
13.

Upon review, I was suspicious that the Proposal may not have been written by
for several reasons:
(a)

I considered the writing style to be technical and professional-sounding.
The language seemed to be consistent with a more advanced researcher in
some other type of academic environment. For example, I found the use of

1

Because the Proposal was submitted in this manner, it also was not submitted to Turnitin.com, which is
the software used in the course to detect potential plagiarism (see course outline at pp. 23-24).

18

the following language and concepts to be unusual coming from a thirdyear undergraduate student in the context of this course:
(i)

The concept of image as “a self-sufficient unit of information” (p.
1);

(ii)

The term “triumvirate” to refer to mother, lover and son (p. 2);

(iii)

The term “line of human becoming”, in relation to Malick’s
references to Martin Heidegger and Immanuel Kant (p. 2); and

(iv)

The following phrases seemed to use strangely formal and technical
language:
1)

“The world is not given to people directly but is mediated by
a cognitive act. Cognition and its results are always
structured by a system of concepts and relations
characteristic of a particular culture in which the cognizing
subject is located” (p. 1)

2)

“Considering the above ideas, it is valid to state that the
impressive visual elements of The New World movie
perfectly reflect the genuine cultural-emotional perspectives
and worldviews of the heroes framed into historical specifics
of the colonial period” (p. 2)

3)

“Malick reaches the highest point of mastery in The New
World (2005), creating a real symphony of the human body
and nature with flash frames and second flashbacks” (p. 2).

(b)

The Proposal included very sophisticated references that were too advanced
for what I would expect from a third-year undergraduate student: for
example, the references to the philosophical works of Heidegger and Kant,
and the works of film-makers Claire Denis, Jean-Luc Godard and Alain

19

Resnais (none of whom, except Heidegger, were referred to in the course at
all).
(c)

The Proposal ended with the sentence, “The work is planned to be
completed within the framework of deadlines given by the scientific
supervisor”. There is no “scientific supervisor” in the course and never any
discussion about a “scientific supervisor”. I found the use of this language
to be very odd and suspicious.

14.

The annotated bibliography in the Proposal includes three sources (in addition to
the film, The New World):
(a)

Bell, B.L. (1994). Pocahontas: “Little mischief” and the “Dirty men”.
Studies in American Indian Literatures, 63-70, a copy of which is attached
to my affidavit as Exhibit “E”;

(b)

Griffin, M. (2001). Camera as witness, image as sign: The study of visual
communication in communication research. Annals of the International
Communication Association, 24(1), 433-463, a copy of which is attached to
my affidavit as Exhibit “F”; and

(c)

Kelly, C. (2012). Neocolonialism and the global prison in National
Geographic’s locked up abroad. Critical Studies in Media Communication,
29(4), 331-347, a copy of which is attached to my affidavit as Exhibit “G”.

15.

None of these sources refer to the works of Heidegger, Kant, Denis, Godard or
Resnais.

16.

I also had doubts that

even attended my class. She joined the virtual class

without video and often late. She also never participated in class discussions.
Sometimes, there were in-class assignments that were to be submitted to Quercus.
For those, she received a zero, which suggests that she was not participating even
though she was logged into the Zoom lecture. In addition, a couple of times she
remained logged into the lecture after class ended. My virtual office hours were

20

held immediately following the class. On the occasions that

remained

logged on I assumed she wanted to speak with me during my virtual office hour.
However, when I messaged her in the chat to ask if she wanted to speak, I received
no response. This suggested to me that she was not actually in front of her computer,
despite having logged into the Zoom lecture.
C.

Contact with the Student

17.

In light of my suspicions, on October 23, 2020, I met with

to discuss the

Proposal.
18.

The matter was subsequently forwarded to the Academic Integrity Unit at UTM.

D.

Weekly Responses

19.

Students were required to submit 10 weekly responses. As noted above, the weekly
responses were worth a total of 35% of students’ final grades (a student’s best seven
weekly responses were worth 5% each). For the weekly responses, students were
usually required to answer 1-2 questions, find an image that illustrates certain key
ideas in the reading or viewing for the week, and explain how it does so. Students
were not required to do any outside research and were instead supposed to focus
their responses on ideas contained in that week’s readings.

20.

My records indicate that

submitted 8 weekly responses in total:

(a)

Week 2, submitted on September 17, 2020;

(b)

Week 3, submitted on September 24, 2020;

(c)

Week 4 submitted on October 1, 2020;

(d)

Week 5, submitted on October 8, 2020;

(e)

Week 7, submitted on October 30, 2020;

(f)

Week 8, submitted on November 6, 2020;

21

21.

(g)

Week 9, submitted on November 12, 2020; and

(h)

Week 11, submitted on November 26, 2020,

I reviewed and marked some of

’s responses. The remaining responses

were graded by my teaching assistant Ms. Sanniah Jabeen. I have attached copies
of the weekly responses, together with my comments or my teaching assistant’s
comments, to my affidavit as Exhibit “H”
22.

Overall,

’s weekly responses indicated that while she could formulate a

response, they were often not responsive to the questions asked.
sometimes failed to answer part of the question (weeks 3, 9 and 11), misunderstood
the arguments in the readings (weeks 3 and 5), did not reference the readings (week
4 and 8) or failed to provide citations (weeks 5, 7 and 8). With respect to her week
7 response

was advised that she was both supposed to find her own image

to analyze, and could not use an existing one from the readings, and that she was
not expected or encouraged to use any other sources to analyse the image.
Nevertheless, her Week 9 and 11 responses continued to include a “bibliography”,
which included references to sources from outside the course materials.
23.

Some of the weekly responses that

submitted contained some of the

features (in terms of unusual references and technical-sounding language) that I
noted in the Proposal, as well as references in the “bibliography” to unusual
sources. However, I did not raise any issue with the weekly responses with
(in terms of academic integrity) because my concerns with the weekly responses
did not rise to the level that I had with the Proposal.
E.

Revised Proposal

24.

On October 27, 2020, after I had met with
World,

about the Proposal on The New

submitted another proposal for her final project. I have attached to

my affidavit a copy of this proposal (the “First Revised Proposal”) as Exhibit “I”.
’s new proposal topic was an advertisement campaign for Land Rover, and
her proposal included an image of the advertisement.

22

25.

On October 28, 2020, I sent

an email asking for clarification on the new

proposal, in particular “how the image… [she] ha[d] sent of elephants and a car
constitute[d] a ‘problematic portrayal of sexism and irresponsible racial
stereotyping’?”.

responded stating that she was referencing a video

advertisement. I asked for a link to the video and she responded on November 2,
2020 by saying that the video had been taken down so she made “small changes”
to her proposal.

also attached a whole new proposal to this email, this time

about the film, A Passage to India. A copy of this email thread is attached to my
affidavit as Exhibit “J”. A copy of

’s November 2, 2020 proposal (the

“Second Revised Proposal”) with my comments is attached to my affidavit as
Exhibit “K”.
26.

I made a number of comments to her Second Revised Proposal (see Exhibit “G”).
On December 11, 2020,

submitted her final project.

have incorporated my feedback into her final paper. A copy of

.

appears to
’s graded

final paper (the “Final Project”) with my comments is attached to my affidavit as
Exhibit “L”.
27.

I found that the style and language used in the First Revised Proposal, the Second
Revised Proposal and the Final Project to be consistent with what I would expect
from a third-year undergraduate student. The assignments did not contain the use
of professional and technical language that was contained in the Proposal. The First
Revised Proposal and the Second Revised Proposal also did not contain the
sophisticated ideas that I had found were present in the Proposal, such as references
to Heidegger and Kant. The Final Project contained some surprisingly advanced
concepts, but these were accompanied by citations in footnotes.

28.

Ultimately, the ideas and language used in the Proposal seemed to be different from
’s work on the First Revised Proposal, the Second Revised Proposal and
the Final Project, and were unusual for a third-year undergraduate student, in my
experience. It also failed to cite to any sources that linked together the sophisticated
ideas (as described above, the sources listed in the annotated bibliography of the

23

Proposal did not refer to those ideas). As a result, I remain suspicious that either
the Proposal was not written entirely by

or

had failed to reference

the sources that she used to complete the Proposal.
29.

A copy of the grades that

received for the assignments she submitted in

the course are attached to my affidavit as Exhibit “M”.
30.

I make this affidavit in connection with the charges that were filed against
by the University of Toronto under its Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters and
for no other purpose.

In addition to Professor Jain’s affidavit, the Panel questioned her as to whether in addition
to attempting to speak to the Student while still logged in on Zoom following the class, did
she speak to or attempt to speak with the Student during the classes. Professor Jain could
not recall any participation by the Student during the classes or her attempting to speak
with the Student. Professor Jain also confirmed that the Student’s first submission was not
submitted to Turnitin.com and also advised that the concern was not so much that the
Student was copying and pasting, rather, that she was taking ideas from another source and
not citing it. Lastly, Professor Jain confirmed that there was no grade for the Student’s first
submission.
b) Evidence of Professor Elkabas
Professor Elkabas’ affidavit provides as follows:
1.

I am a Professor of French Studies, Language Teaching and Learning in the
Department of Language Studies at the University of Toronto Mississauga
(“UTM”). Until July 1, 2021, I also served as a Dean’s Designate for Academic
Integrity with the Office of the Dean at UTM. As such, I have personal knowledge
of the matters set out in this affidavit. Where I do not have personal knowledge of
a matter, I state the source of my information and I believe it to be true.

2.

The Academic Integrity Unit (“AIU”) in the Office of the Dean is the office at UTM
that is responsible for investigating allegations of academic misconduct and

24

arranging for students who are facing such allegations to meet with the Dean or
Dean’s Designate in accordance with the process set out in the Code of Behaviour
on Academic Matters (the “Code”).
A.

Allegation against

3.

The AIU received an allegation from Professor Kajri Jain regarding an assignment
that

had submitted in VCC306H5 (Visual Culture and Colonialism)

(“VCC306”) in Fall 2020.1 In particular,

was alleged to have obtained

unauthorized assistance in a topic proposal and annotated bibliography (the
“Proposal”) in VCC306, worth 10%, which she submitted on October 15, 2020. A
copy of the Proposal is attached to my affidavit as Exhibit “A”.
4.

On February 24, 2021, the AIU sent

an invitation to meet with me on

March 10, 2021 regarding the allegation of academic misconduct. On February 24,
2021,

responded, stating that she would attend the meeting, but asking to

meet at a different time. The AIU sent her the meeting details that day, for a meeting
on March 17, 2021. A copy of this email thread is attached to my affidavit as
Exhibit “B”.
B.

Meeting on March 17, 2021

5.

On March 17, 2021, I met with

via videoconference (Zoom). Jade Hazell,

Academic Integrity Assistant, also attended the meeting and took notes. A copy of
the notes that Ms. Hazell took during the meeting is attached to my affidavit as
Exhibit “C”.
6.

The meeting was recorded on Zoom. However, I understand from Ms. Hazell and
believe that the recording has since been deleted. Pursuant to AIU policy, Zoom
meeting recordings are typically deleted after they are reviewed by a member of the
AIU to ensure the overall accuracy of the meeting notes. The University policy is

1

The AIU also received an allegation that
had committed an academic offence in an assignment
submitted in VCC290H5 (“VCC290”) in Fall 2020. However, I understand that the Provost is not proceeding
with this allegation. As a result, I have not referred to the VCC290 allegations in this affidavit.

25

also to delete Zoom recordings after 365 days. I understand from Ms. Hazell and
believe that the notes that she took were not meant to be a verbatim transcript of
the meeting and it is possible that some parts were missed.
7.

I recall meeting with

over Zoom, but do not have a specific recollection

of everything we discussed in the meeting. I made my own notes in preparation for
the meeting, which included questions I wanted to discuss with

. A copy

of these notes is attached to my affidavit as Exhibit “D”.
8.

On April 1, 2021, I summarized my meeting with

on March 17, 2021 (as

well as a subsequent meeting on March 24, 2021, described below) in a letter to
Michael Lettieri, Vice-Dean of Academic Experience at UTM. A copy of my letter
is attached to my affidavit as Exhibit “E”.
9.

I have relied on the documents at Exhibits “C”, “D” and “E” to refresh my memory
about my meeting with

on March 17, 2021. My recollection of the meeting

is provided below.
10.

At the outset of the meeting, I gave

the caution that I am required to

provide under the Code.
11.

During this meeting, I explained to

that she was alleged to have obtained

unauthorized assistance in the Proposal she submitted in in VCC306.
denied the allegation.
12.

In our discussion about the Proposal in VCC306, I told her that the instructor had
noted that

had not submitted a topic proposal, as requested in class, before

submitting her assignment. When I asked

why she did not do this,

expressed surprise by this news. I explained that the instructions for the
assignment were to submit a topic proposal and wait for approval from the
instructor before commencing the project, but the instructor had only received what
appeared to be the completed project with the annotated bibliography.
expressed confusion about what the problem was, saying that she had handed in her
final project, regardless of the one-page proposal. I explained that the project that

26

had submitted did not deal with the topic assigned, but that her failure to
submit a topic proposal was not the issue at hand.2
13.

I told

that the allegation was that she had obtained unauthorized assistance

in completing the Proposal. When I asked who wrote the paper,

said that

she had written it.
14.

The Proposal was about the film The New World written and directed by Terrence
Malick. I have some experience and knowledge of the topics raised in the Proposal.
In particular, I obtained my Ph.D. from the University of Illinois, with a specialist
in French literature and a minor in cinema and comparative literature. During my
graduate studies at the University of Illinois, I was also the assistant to the Director
of the Unit for Cinema Studies. I have published and read several papers on French
films at international conferences. I also served as a refereeing member for the
Journal of African Cinemas. I had not seen The New World, but had one other film
by Terrence Malick (Badlands), as well as most films by Jean-Luc Godard and
Alain Resnais (who are referred to in the Proposal). I also have some knowledge of
the works of the philosophers, Immanuel Kant and Martin Heidegger (who are also
referred to in the Proposal). I am not a philosopher but I used their concepts of
morality (Kant) and existentialism and perception (Heidegger) when I taught
French novels by Marcel Camus and Jean-Paul Sartre.

15.

Before the meeting I had highlighted the Proposal to mark the parts I intended to
question

about. A copy of this highlighted version is attached to my

affidavit as Exhibit “F”. During the meeting, I screenshared the highlighted
version and asked her about some of the words, phrases and concepts that I had
identified.

2

My understanding at the time was that
was required to submit a proposal and final project, and
that
had not, in fact, submitted her proposal, but rather had submitted her final project instead. I
now understand that
was required to first submit a few sentences describing the topic after
consultation with the instructor, but
had not done this, and had instead submitted her proposal and
annotated bibliography instead (rather than her final project).

27

16.

I found that

was unable to provide satisfactory responses when I asked her

to explain a number of concepts discussed in the Proposal. Her responses did not
reflect the sophisticated nature of the Proposal, and did not seem consistent with an
author who demonstrated a thorough understanding of the film The New World.
17.

was unable to answer basic questions about the film, philosophers and
film directors referenced in the Proposal. In particular:
(a)

was unable to identify the main female character of the movie,
Pochantas, despite her name appearing five times in the Proposal and four
times in the bibliography;

(b)

said she did not know who the following individuals referenced in
her paper were:
(i)

John Rolfe (p. 2)

(ii)

Emmanuel Lubezki (p. 2)

(iii)

Jean-Luc Godard (p. 2) and Alain Resnais (p. 2)

(c)

could not explain how the philosophers, Immanuel Kant and
Martin Heidegger, which were referenced in the Proposal (p. 2), related to
the topic or what their philosophies were. When asked who they were,
stated she must have discovered Kant and Heidegger while researching
the director, Terrence Malick.

stated she must have found the

information online but probably did not put the source in her references.
later said she discovered Kant through a reading she did in the
course;
(d)

When asked,

stated that she had not seen the other two movies by

Terrence Malick mentioned in the Proposal: “Days of Heaven” and “The
Thin Red Line” (p. 2).

stated she got this information from the

internet but could not provide the source.

28

18.

later stated that she learned about most of the people referenced in the
Proposal in high school so she did not remember them.

19.

to explain a number of words and phrases in her paper:3

I asked
(a)

“visual image plays a critical role, being a self-sufficient unit of
information, which in its functioning is opposite to the work of the text and
the sign as the unit of information that the image has replaced” (p. 1).
said that this was exploring the role that visual images play in the
context.

(b)

“pre-modern culture” (p. 1).

said that it meant before modern

times.
(c)

“Considering the above ideas, it is valid to state that the impressive visual
elements of The New World movie perfectly reflect the genuine culturalemotional perspectives and world views of the heroes framed into historical
specifics of the colonial period” (p. 2).

said that the film’s visuals,

including the shot angle, camera movement, context, and background, gave
her information about colonization and culture. So, that was how she
explained how she felt watching it for the first time.
20.

also seemed confused when I asked if the Proposal was the final project
because it contemplated further work under “Research Question, Methodology, and
Plan of Work”.4 When asked to explain why she referenced a “scientific supervisor”
in the sentence: “The work is planned to be completed within the framework of
deadlines given by the scientific supervisor” (pp. 2-3),

stated it was her

habit to write in this format and that she wrote it without realizing. She stated it was

My letter to Vice-Dean Lettieri on April 1, 2021 (at Exhibit “F”) also indicated that
was unable to
explain the meaning of the following terms: “the sign as the unit of information” (p. 1); “is mediated by a
cognitive act” (p. 1); “visually translate the cultural driver” (p. 2); and “the key is that Jamestown” (p. 3). I do
not have a specific recollection of asking
about these terms and there is nothing in Ms. Hazell’s
notes regarding these terms. However, I believe my letter to Vice-Dean Lettieri accurately reflects what I
asked
during the meeting and what we discussed.
4
As noted above, I may have misunderstood whether the Proposal was intended to be the final project.
3

29

how she wrote for work and the scientific supervisor reference was probably
because of a part-time job she had. (

had stated earlier that she writes a lot

(10 papers a day) for a job that she has for W Hotel Mary International’s marketing
team.)
21.

When I indicated that I was concerned that

could not provide information

on or had failed to provide proper citations for key people and specific terms in her
paper, she reiterated that this was information she had learned from high school, so
could not remember.
22.

During this meeting,

raised that she suffers from anxiety, depression,

PTSD and many other mental issues.
23.

later became upset and I adjourned the meeting. I advised I would set a
follow-up meeting with

, at a later date.

C.

Meeting on March 24, 2021

24.

On March 24, 2021, I again met with

over Zoom. In preparation for the

meeting, I made notes of further questions I wanted to ask

, a copy of which

is attached to my affidavit as Exhibit “G”.
25.

Ms. Hazell also attended the meeting on March 24, 2021 and took notes. A copy of
the notes from the meeting is attached to my affidavit as Exhibit “H”.

26.

My April 1, 2021 letter to Vice-Dean Lettieri (at Exhibit “E”) also includes a
summary of the meeting (together with my earlier meeting).

27.

I relied on the documents at Exhibits “E”, “G” and “H” to refresh my memory about
my meeting with

28.

on March 24, 2021.

During this meeting, I asked
However, this time,

a number of questions about the Proposal.
refused to answer any of my questions, replying with

a simple “no comment” throughout. When I asked

30

if anyone helped her to

write the Proposal or if she consulted with anyone, she said no. She pleaded not
guilty to the allegation of unauthorized assistance for the Proposal.
29.

I advised

that I would be forwarding the matter to the Tribunal and

adjourned the meeting.
30.

On March 24, 2021, following the meeting, Ms. Hazell sent

an email to

provide her with some resources. A copy of Ms. Hazell’s email is attached to my
affidavit as Exhibit “I”.
D.

Referral to Provost

31.

As set out above, on April 1, 2021, I wrote to Vice-Dean Lettieri, summarizing the
allegations against

and my meetings with her. A copy of my letter is

attached as Exhibit “E”. My letter reflects my recollection of and impressions from
the meeting. As set out in the letter, following my two meetings with

,I

had concerns about whether she was the author of the Proposal. Her responses to
my questions did not lead me to believe that she had a solid grasp on the topics and
language used in the paper.
32.

On June 10, 2021, Ms. Hazell wrote to

, providing notice that the case was

moving forward to the Trial Division of the University’s Tribunal and asking
whether

wished to change her plea.

of not guilty. A copy of Ms. Hazell’s email and

replied maintaining her plea
’s response is attached to

my affidavit as Exhibit “J”.
33.

The matter was subsequently forwarded to the Vice-Provost’s Office.

34.

I make this affidavit in connection with the charges that were filed against
by the University of Toronto under its Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters and
for no other purpose.

The Panel questioned Professor Elkabas as to whether he had any concerns that mental
health issues may have affected the Student’s answers. He advised the Panel that given the
Student’s answers, she demonstrated having a good long-term memory and given that she

31

told him that she was writing 10 papers a day for her employer, he did not have any such
concerns.
This concluded the University’s evidence.
University’s Submissions
Assistant Discipline Counsel submitted that the evidence of Professor Jain and Professor
Elkabas, supports a finding on the balance of probabilities that the Student committed the
academic offences as alleged.
In that regard, it was submitted that the evidence in its totality demonstrated either that the
Student did not write the proposal or relied upon sources for it which were not identified
or cited.
Standard of Proof
The onus is on the University to establish, based upon clear and convincing evidence on
a balance of probabilities, that the academic offences charged have been committed.
Decision of the Tribunal
Based on the evidence and the submissions by counsel for the University, the Student was
found guilty of one count of knowingly representing as her own an idea or expression of
an idea or work of another, contrary to section B.I.1(d) of the Code as alleged in Charge 1
filed by the Provost on January 19, 2022.
Given these findings, the University also withdrew Charges 2 and 3 in addition to already
having withdrawn Charges 4, 5 and 6.
Reasons for Decision
The evidence of Professor Jain clearly demonstrated that the Student was made aware by
the course outline and by Professor Jain during lectures that when writing the topic
proposal for VCC306H5, she was not permitted to use someone else’s ideas or words
without appropriate acknowledgement, to commit to academic integrity and to be familiar
with the Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters.

32

Despite this, the evidence established that the Student knowingly represented as her own
an idea or expression of an idea or work of another in her topic proposal.
In this regard, the language used by the Student for her proposal was unusually
sophisticated for an undergraduate student and concluded with a reference to “the scientific
supervisor” which was odd and clearly suspicious that it came from another source. She
also referenced several movies she later admitted to not having seen. In her meeting with
Professor Elkabas, she was unable to explain the concepts and was unfamiliar with some
of her proposal’s content. However, most significantly to the Panel, she admitted to him
that her proposal contained information that she had found online for which she did not
provide the source in her references.
As such, the Panel was satisfied on the balance of probabilities that the Student did not
write at least part of the topic proposal and relied upon the ideas and expression of ideas
by others which she did not reference or cite and as such, the Student committed the
academic offence of knowingly representing as her own an idea or expression of an idea
or work of another in the topic proposal she submitted in VCC306H5, contrary to section
B.I.1(d) of the Code as alleged in Charge 1 filed by the Provost on January 19, 2022.
Sanction
The University’s Evidence
The University provided the Panel with a Book of Authorities containing a number of prior
decisions of this Tribunal and a chart summarizing them.
The University’s Submissions
Counsel for the University submitted that the proper sanctions to be imposed on the Student
should be:
(a)

a final grade of zero in the course VCC306H5 in Fall 2020;

(b)

a suspension from the University of Toronto from the date of this order for a period
of 2 years;

33

(c)

a notation of the sanction on their academic record and transcript from the date of
this order for a period of 3 years; and

(d)

that the Tribunal further order that this case be reported to the Provost for
publication of a notice of the decision of the Tribunal and the sanction imposed,
with the Student’s name withheld.

Assistant Discipline Counsel reviewed with the Panel the chart summarizing the sanctions
which have been given to students by this Tribunal in prior similar cases.
Assistant Discipline Counsel then reviewed with the Tribunal the principles relative to
sanction as set out in The University of Toronto and Mr. C. (Case No. 1976/77-3,
November 5, 1976) (“Mr. C.”), namely:
(a)

The character of the Student;

(b)

The likelihood of a repetition of the offence;

(c)

The nature of the offence committed;

(d)

Any extenuating circumstances;

(e)

The detriment to the University caused by the misconduct; and

(f)

The need for general deterrence.

In this regard, Assistant Discipline Counsel submitted that as the Student did not attend the
hearing and as such there is no evidence of remorse or insight or whether the Student has
taken responsibility and learned from her mistakes consequently, there is no evidence as to
her character or any extenuating circumstances and so that is a neutral factor.
The Student did not have any prior academic misconduct. Further, the fact that this conduct
occurred during the early days of the pandemic which was a difficult time for students
could be a mitigating factor, however, plagiarism is a serious matter and requires a strong
message to be sent for general deterrence.

34

Assistant Discipline Counsel also provided the Panel with a chart of prior decisions and
reviewed two prior decisions of the Tribunal to demonstrate that the proposed penalty was
consistent with decisions of this Tribunal in similar cases.
Sanction Decision
After deliberations, the Panel ordered that the following sanctions shall be imposed on the
Student:
(a)

a final grade of zero in the course VCC306H5 in Fall 2020;

(b)

a suspension from the University of Toronto from the date of this order for a period
of 2 years;

(c)

a notation of the sanction on their academic record and transcript from the date of
this order for a period of 3 years; and

(d)

that the Tribunal further order that this case be reported to the Provost for
publication of a notice of the decision of the Tribunal and the sanction imposed,
with the Student’s name withheld.

An Order was signed at the hearing by the Panel to this effect.
Reasons for Sanction
The Panel considered the submissions of Assistant Discipline Counsel and the factors and
principles relevant to sanction in Mr. C, supra, as set out above.
In addition to these factors, the Panel considered the other decisions of this Tribunal
involving similar misconduct as contained in the University’s Book of Authorities and the
sanctions imposed. However, the Panel remained cognizant of the fact that no two cases
are identical and that it is not bound by past decisions of this Tribunal. However, the
Tribunal does try to develop a consistent body of cases so that students are treated fairly
and consistently in similar circumstances.

35

By knowingly representing as her own an idea or expression of an idea or work of another
in her topic proposal for VCC306H5, the Student undermined the grades-based system of
evaluation and broke the honour code that is essential to modern learning.
Students must understand that this kind of misconduct will have serious repercussions so
that they will be dissuaded from the temptation to consider cheating.
The Panel accepted the University’s submission that by knowingly representing as her own
an idea or expression of an idea or work of another in her topic proposal, the Student
committed a serious form of academic misconduct, while considering the range of
sanctions provided by prior decisions of this Tribunal in similar circumstances, a period of
2 years suspension of the Student from the University was appropriate.
Dated at Toronto, this 25th day of January 2023

______________________________________
Mr. Christopher Wirth, Chair
On behalf of the Panel

36

