THE UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO

IN THE MATTER OF charges of academic dishonesty made on November 12, 2013,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic
Matters, 1995,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Act, 1971, S.O. 1971, c. 56 as
amended S.O. 1978, c. 88

BETWEEN:
TH E UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO

-AND -

~■ LI
REASONS FOR DECISION

Date of Hearing: Wednesday, August 27, 2014
Members of the Panel:
Mr. Clifford Lax, Lawyer, Chair
Dr. Maria Rozakis-Adcock, Faculty of Medicine, Faculty Panel Member
Ms. Susan Mazzatto, Student Panel Member
Appearances:
Ms. Tina Lie, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Barristers
Mr. Terry Johnston, Assistant Director, Office of Convocation, Governing Council
Ms. Catherine Seguin, Dean's Designate, University of Toronto Mississauga
Ms. Lucy Gaspini, Manager, Academic Integrity and Affairs, University of Toronto Mississauga
In Attendance:
Mr. Adam Wheeler, Observer
Ms. Natalie Ramtahal, Coordinator, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances

2

1.

Cheating and academic dishonestly usually take place surreptitiously and covertly.

2.

In this case,
brazenly impersonated another student at the
Convocation Ceremony of June 11 , 2012, in order to make it appear as though he was
graduating from the University.
obtained a presenter card from the Student Marshall
in the name of the real graduate and then mounted the convocation stage, accepted the
degree bearing the name of the other student, left the stage and gave the photographer
the name of the real graduate and had his photograph taken in place of the graduate,
and then signed the book that students are required to sign, in order to pick up their
diploma. (Charges attached as "Appendix A")

~ I LI ("LI")

LI

3.

LI

What
did was done deliberately, brazenly and without explanation. He was not
eligible to graduate on June 11, 2012, due to the fact that on two prior occasions he had
been caught plagiarizing; the result of which was to reduce his mark in those two
courses to "zero". Therefore, he was still some credits shy of graduating when he
decided to impersonate an actual graduate.

Ad mission of Guilt

4.

On October 3, 2013, at a meeting with the Dean's designate, when confronted with the
evidence which conclusively established that
had impersonated the real graduate,
admitted that he was guilty of both forgery (Section B.1.1 (a) of the Code of Behaviour on
Academic Matters as well as academic dishonesty and misconduct, fraud of
misrepresentation (Section B.l.3(b) of the Code).

LI

LI

Sanction

5.

The student did not appear at this hearing. He has not offered any explanation for his
conduct. His outlandish conduct defies comprehension.

6.

When coupled with the student's two prior acts of plagiarism, it is clear that the student
has no rightful place within the University community.

Decision of the Tribunal

7.

As a result, the Panel concludes:

LJ

a) That
be immediately suspended from the University of Toronto for a period of up
to five (5) years from the date of this Order or until Governing Council makes its
decision on expulsion, whichever comes first, and that a corresponding notation be
placed in his academic record and transcript;
b) The Tribunal recommends to the President of the University that he recommend to
the Governing Council that
be expelled from the University; and,

LI

3

Li's

c) That the case be reported to the Provost, with
name withheld, for publication of
a notice of the Decision of the Tribunal and the sanctions imposed.

All of which is ordered on August 27, 2014.

Dated at Toronto, this

1

«--

day of October, 2014.

APPENDIX A

OFFICE OF THE VICE - PROVOST, FACULTY & ACADEMIC LIFE

Via email
CONFIDENTIAL

November 12, 2013

Dear Mr.

rJ:

On the advice of the University Discipline Counsel, I am writing to inform you that you are
hereby charged with the offences as detailed in the document.
By copy of this letter I have informed Mi-. Christopher Lang, Director, Appeals, Discipline and
Faculty Grievances, of the Academic Tribunal, who will be in touch with you regarding the
Tribunal's proceedings.
Yours Sincerely,

Professor Edith Hillan
Vice-Provost, Faculty & Academic Life

EMH:dsh

Encl.
cc:

C. Lang
T. Lie

C. Sequin

McMurrich Building, 12 Queen's Park Crescent, Room 103,Toronto, ON MSS 1S8 Canada
Fax: +1416971-1380 • vp.acadenuc@utoronto.ca

UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO MISSISSAUGA

~LI

,

CHARGES

Note: Wherever in the Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters, 1995 ("Code") an offence is
described as depending on "knowing", the offence shall likewise be deemed to have been
committed if the person ought reasonably to have known.

1.

On or about June 11, 2012, you knowingly personated

contrary to section 8.1.1 .(c) of the Code.
2.

S-

LIii at convocation,

On or about June 11 , 2012, you knowingly forged or in any other way falsified a

document or evidence required by the University of Toronto, namely, the signature book that
students were required to sign in order to pick up their diploma, or uttered, circulated, or made
use of such forged, altered or falsified document, contrary to section 8 .1.1 .(a) of the Code.
3.

In the alternative, on or about June 11, 2012, you knowingly engaged in a form of

cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or misrepresentation not otherwise
described, in order to obtain academic credit or other academic advantage of any kind, contrary
to section 8 .1.3.(b) of the Code.
Particulars

4.

At all material times, you were a student at the University of Toronto Mississauga.

5.

At all material times, ~ L■ was also a student at the University of Toronto

Mississauga.
6.

By the end of the Winter 2012 terms, you were not eligible to graduate. Ms. LJllwas

eligible to graduate, and was scheduled to graduate at the University of Toronto convocation
ceremony on June 11, 2012, at 9:30 am (the "Convocation Ceremony").
7.

Ms. -

did not attend the Convocation Ceremony.

1

8.

On June 11, 2012, you attended the Convocation Ceremony and engaged in the

following conduct:
(a)

you obtained a presenter card from the Student Marshall that read "S-L■ .
You did not inform the Student Marshall that you had received the presenter card
in error;

as name was called, you crossed the convocation stage;

(b)

when Ms.

(c)

you informed the photographer at the Convocation Ceremony that you were
" S - and had your photograph taken in the place of Ms.

(d)

t.a

you identified yourself as Ms. ~to members of the University of Toronto's staff,
and signed the book that students were required to sign in order to pick up their
diploma (the "Signature Book") in the place reserved for Ms. ~ signature; and

(e)
9.

10.

you picked up Ms.

t.a diploma.

You knew or ought reasonably to have known that:
(a)

you were not eligible to graduate at the Convocation Ceremony; and

(b)

you were not Ms.

tllllat each of the stages of the process described above.

You engaged in the conduct described above in order to obtain academic credit or other

academic advantage, namely, to hold yourself out as having graduated from the University of
Toronto and/or to obtain a University of Toronto diploma.
11.

By engaging in the conduct described above, you knowingly:
(a)

personated Ms . •

(b)

forged or in any other way falsified the Signature Book by signing in the plac~
reserved for Ms.

(c)

t the Convocation Ceremony;

ta signature; and/or

engaged in a form of cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or
misrepresentation not otherwise described in the Code.

2

