Case #972

   DATE: September 26, 2018
   PARTIES: University of Toronto v. A.D. (âthe Studentâ)
   Hearing Date(s):Â  Â  September 18, 2018
   Panel Members:
   Mr. Paul Michell, Chair
   Dr. Chris Koenig-Woodyard, Faculty Panel Member Ms. Elizabeth Frangos,
   Student Panel Member
   Appearances:
   Ms. Tina Lie, Assistant Discipline Counsel for the University, Paliare
   Roland Barristers
   Mr. Denna Jalili, Downtown Legal Services, for the Student
   In Attendance:
   Mr. Christopher Lang, Director, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty
   Grievances
   Ms. Lucy Gaspini, Director, Academic Success and Integrity, Office of
   the Vice-Principal Academic and Dean, University of Toronto Mississauga
   Mr. Sean Lourim, Technology Assistant, Office of the Governing Council
   Mr. Hatim Kheir, Downtown Legal Services, Observer
   Ms. Jodi Zhang, Downtown Legal Services, Observer
   Mr. Gianluca De Gasperi Delpino, Downtown Legal Services, Observer
   The Student
   Trial Division - s. B.i.1(d) â plagiarism â purchased essay - agreed
   statement of facts â guilty plea â prior offence - joint submission on
   penalty â a final grade of zero in the course; five-year suspension;
   notation on the Studentâs transcript until graduation, report to the
   Provost with the studentâs name withheld
   The Student was charged with knowingly representing an idea or work of
   another in an assignment as her own contrary to s.B.i.1(d) of the Code
   ; or in the alternative, unauthorized assistance contrary to academic
   dishonesty not otherwise described contrary to s. B.i.1(b) of the Code
   ; or in the further alternative, unauthorized assistance not otherwise
   described contrary to, s.B.i.3(b) of the Code . The charges related to
   an essay that the Student had submitted in a course that had been
   purchased from a commercial provider of essays. The matter proceeded by
   way of an agreed statement of facts. The student pled guilty to the
   first charge, the University withdrew the alternative charge.
   The parties submitted a joint submission on penalty (JSP) requesting an
   order: (a) that the student receive a grade of zero in the affected
   course; (b) a five-year suspension; (c) a notation be placed on the
   Studentâs transcript until graduation; and (d) that the matter be
   reported to the Provost with the Studentâs name withheld. The Tribunal
   referred to DAB decisions University of Toronto v. M.A . [Case No. 837;
   December 22, 2016] and S.F . [Case No. 690; October 20, 2014] for the
   proposition that the Tribunal should accept joint submissions on
   penalty unless exceptional circumstances apply. The Tribunal applied
   the Mr. C. [Case No. 1976/77-3; November 5, 2976] factors to the
   Studentâs circumstances. In terms of the nature of the offence/general
   deterrence/harm to the University, the Tribunal found that purchasing
   an essay was a very serious academic offence. As well, the Student had
   been found guilty of plagiarism before.Â  While purchased essay
   plagiarism generally attracts a penalty of expulsion ( Z.Z. [Case No.
   918; August 23, 2017];Â  Appendix "C" to the Code ), the Tribunal noted
   that there were mitigating circumstances such as the Studentâs
   cooperation in the discipline process, promptly admitting guilt, and
   her trying medical and personal circumstances, and that without her
   confession, it would have been challenging for the Provost to prove
   anything other than plagiarism (see S.H. [Case No. 574; November 16,
   2010] at para. 7). The Tribunal accepted the partiesâ JSP and ordered:
   (a) that the student receive a grade of zero in the affected course;
   (b) a five-year suspension; (c) a notation be placed on the Studentâs
   transcript until graduation; and (d) that the matter be reported to the
   Provost with the Studentâs name withheld.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/13049
