Case 1505

   DATE:

   November 24, 2023

   PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v. Q.C. ("the Student")

   HEARING DATE:

   September 12, 2023, via Zoom

   PANEL MEMBERS:

   Douglas F. Harrison, Chair
   Dr. Vivienne Luk, Faculty Panel Member
   Matthaeus Ware, Student Panel Member

   APPEARANCES:
   William Webb, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg
   Rothstein LLP
   Marcy Segal, Counsel for the Student, Segal Law Professional
   Corporation

   IN ATTENDANCE:

   The Student

   HEARING SECRETARY:

   Samanthe Huang, Coordinator and Hearing Secretary, Office of Appeals,
   Discipline and Faculty Grievances

   The charges against the Student arose out of academic misconduct during
   two midterm tests. The Student was charged with two counts of knowingly
   using or possessing an unauthorized aid and/or obtaining and /or
   providing authorized assistance contrary to section B.i.1(b) of the
   Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters, 2019 (‚Code‚). The Student was
   also charged with two counts of knowingly representing as their own an
   idea or expression of an idea or work of another, contrary to section
   B.i.1(d) of the Code, and an additional two counts for knowingly
   engaging in a form of cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct,
   fraud or misrepresentation not otherwise described in the Code.

   The Student attended the hearing and was represented by counsel. The
   hearing proceeded on the basis of an Agreed Statement of Facts (‚ASF‚).
   The Student was required to write four-in person term tests for the
   course in which they were enrolled in Fall 2022. After grading the
   Student‚s first and second term tests, the Professor noticed an unusual
   improvement in the Student‚s grade and answer patterns and suspected
   that the Student may have used an authorized aid or received
   unauthorized assistance during the second term test. During the third
   term test, the Student was found to be wearing concealed earpieces and
   had their cell phone powered on in their backpack. The earpieces were
   confiscated by the Professor and photographed. An academic integrity
   report was subsequently prepared alleging that the Student committed
   academic offences on the second and third term tests. Subsequently, the
   Professor met with the Student to discuss the allegations in the
   academic integrity report. In a second meeting, the Professor and
   Dean‚s Designate met with the Student to further discuss the
   allegations. During this meeting the Student admitted to using an
   earpiece to obtain help from another individual on the second and third
   term test, and that they used a miniature camera to livestream video
   footage to a tutor who transmitted the answers back to the Student
   through the earpiece. The Student pled guilty to all of the charges
   laid by the University. The Student acknowledged that they had signed
   the ASF freely and voluntarily, and with the advice of counsel.

   After deliberation and based on the evidence and the submissions of
   counsel, the Panel accepted the Student‚s guilty plea with respect to
   the two charges pertaining to the use of unauthorized aid or assistance
   contrary to section B.i.1(b) of the Code. Upon this finding of guilt,
   the University withdrew the remaining four charges under ss. B.i.1(d)
   and B.i.3(b) of the Code.

   The University and the Student submitted a Joint Submission on Penalty
   (‚JSP‚). In determining the appropriate sanction, the Panel considered
   the factors and principles relevant to sanction set out in University
   of Toronto and Mr. C (Case No. 1976/77-3, November 5, 1976). The Panel
   noted that, with respect to the Student‚s character, the Student had
   demonstrated insight into her actions and concluded that there was
   little to no likelihood of a repetition of the offence. With respect to
   the nature of the offence, the Panel noted that the scheme undertaken
   by the Student was the product of deliberate planning and subterfuge,
   and had a commercial element. The Panel further noted that the scheme
   could be viewed as a attempt to defraud the University and deserving of
   a harsh sanction to serve as a general deterrent against such
   surreptitious behaviour. In view of the novelty of the particular
   scheme employed by the Student, involving a real-time camera and
   earpieces during a test or exam, the Panel considered the sanctions
   adopted by other panels in previous cases involving personation. The
   Panel found that the Student‚s lack of prior offences, their early
   admission of guilt and expressions of remorse, and their decision to
   obtain legal advice were mitigating factors that, it concluded, made a
   lesser penalty than expulsion appropriate in the circumstances.

   The Panel imposed the following sanctions: a final grade of zero in the
   course; a five-year suspension; a six-year notation on the Student‚s
   academic record and transcript, and a report to the Provost for
   publication.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/31394
