Case 628

DATE:

   May 23, 2012

PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v.Â Y.Z.

Hearing Date(s):

   March 28, 2012, April 5, 2012

Panel Members:

   Ms. Rodica David, Chair
   Prof. Graeme Hirst, Faculty Member
   Ms. Susan Mazzatto, Student Member

Appearances:

   Ms. Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel for the University
   Mr. Y.Z., the Student
   Mr. Michael Nicholson, Associate Registrar
   Dr. Kristi Gourlay, Office of Student Academic Integrity
   Prof. Don Dewees, Dean's Designate

In Attendance:

   Ms. Natalie Ramtahal, Coordinator, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty
   Grievances

   Student charged under s. B.i.1(a) of the Code . The charges related to
   allegations that the Student submitted a forged medical certificate and
   a physicianâs letter to defer an exam and aided or abetted another
   person in falsifying evidence. The Student attempted to give evidence
   in his closing argument, and the Panel allowed it. The Student argued
   that the charges relating to forging a medical certificate and a
   physicianâs letter should have been the subject matter of a single
   charge of forging the petition. The Student further argued that because
   it could not be proven that the petition itself was false as he was
   actually ill, he should not be found guilty. The Panel rejected this
   argument because âany documentâ in s.B.i.1(a) of the Code must be
   interpreted to mean that each document could be the subject of a
   separate charge. The Panel also noted that the Student pleaded guilty
   to the charges without objection until his closing argument. As to the
   charge relating to aiding and abetting, the Student pleaded not guilty.
   The Student had purchased the medical certificate and the letter from a
   commercial provider through internet. When the Student was under
   investigation, he contacted the service provider who assured him that
   âhe would take care of it.â The provider left a voicemail on the
   Associate Registrarâs phone purporting to be the doctorâs assistant.
   Although the Student claimed that he did not know that the provider
   would do such a thing and thus he did not knowingly aid and abet, the
   Panel stated that it was immaterial whether the Student knew the exact
   method by which the provider would âtake care of it.â The Panel found
   that the Student knew or ought to have known that the provider would
   take some actions to confirm the authenticity of the false evidence.
   The Panel found the Student guilty of all charges under s. B.i.1(a) .
   The Panel stated that the Studentâs conduct was premeditated and
   egregious and required the University to spend considerable resources
   on an investigation. Also, the Panel found that it was not a mitigating
   factor that the Student chose to purchase the certificate and the
   letter after speaking with his family physician, because he thought
   that he would not be able to get a medical certificate in time. The
   Panel stated that there could be no excuses for submitting false
   documents. The Panel expressed its concern about the availability of
   this type of commercial enterprise and emphasized the importance of
   deterrence. The Panel also stated that the Student, instead of
   expressing remorse, tried to excuse his misconduct. However, the Panel
   recognized that there were mitigating factors: (a) he pleaded guilty to
   two of the charges, (b) he had no previous convictions, (c) the
   University failed to establish that he was not actually ill, and (d)
   all three offences related to the one transaction. The Panel also noted
   that the Student had enough credits to graduate and his ability to
   graduate had been deferred by one and a half years as a result of the
   charges. The University was seeking a five-year suspension and a
   six-year notation. However, in consideration of these mitigating
   factors, the Panel imposed a grade assignment of zero in the course; a
   four-year suspension; a four-year notation on the Studentâs transcript;
   and a report be issued to the Provost.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12781
