Case #613

   DATE: April 5, 2011
   PARTIES: University of Toronto v. U.H.
   Hearing Date(s): December 1, 2010
   Panel Members:
   Ira Parghi, Chair
   Professor Charmaine Williams, Faculty Member
   Jack Brockman, Student Member
   Appearances:
   Robert Centa, Assistant Discipline Counsel for the University
   Mr. S.H., the Studentâs father
   In Attendance:
   Lucy Gaspini, Academic Affairs Officer, UTM
   Trial Division â s. B.I.3(a); s. B.I.3(b) of Code â falsified academic
   record â Agreed Statement of Facts â guilty plea â finding of guilt â
   Joint Submission on PenaltyÂ  â Joint Submission on Penalty accepted
   -Â  five-year suspension; recommendation to the President that the
   Student be expelled; and report to Provost
   Student charged with six offences under s. B.I.3(a) and s. B.I.3(b)Â
   of the Code. The charges related to the allegations that the Student
   misrepresented her academic record. The Student allegedly
   misrepresented her academic record in communications with professors,
   provided a falsified academic record, and requested letters in support
   of the misrepresented academic record. The Student could not attend the
   hearing and was represented by her father. The matter proceeded on an
   Agreed Statement of Facts. The Student pled guilty to all six charges.
   The Panel accepted the Studentâs guilty plea.Â  Three charges under s.
   B.I.3(b) were withdrawn by the University. The matter then proceeded on
   a Joint Submission on Penalty. Discipline Counsel reminded the Panel
   that there is a high threshold for refusing to accept a Joint
   Submission on Penalty, stating that the Panel would have to be of the
   view that in order to not accept the submission, the Panel would have
   to find that accepting the joint submission would bring the
   administration of justice into disrepute. The Panel concluded that this
   was not the case. The Panel agreed that based on the case law, the
   offences to which the Student had admitted very often lead to
   expulsion. The Panel accepted the Joint Submission on Penalty and held
   that it fell within the appropriate range of sanctions. The Panel
   imposed a five-year suspension, a recommendation to the President that
   the Student be expelled and that a report to the Provost be issued.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12776
