Case #627

   DATE: June 26, 2012
   PARTIES: University of Toronto v. L.Q.
   Hearing Date(s): January 19, 2012
   Panel Members:
   Mr. Michael Hines, Chair
   Prof. Richard B. Day, Faculty Member
   Mr. Albert So, Student Member
   Appearances:
   Ms. Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel for the University
   Ms. L.Q., the Student
   In Attendance:
   Prof. Eleanor Irwin, Dean's Designate
   Mr. Christopher Lang, Director, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty
   Grievances

   Trial Division â s. B.i.1(c) and s. B.i.1(a) of Code â impersonation
   and forged documents â submitted final exam in another studentâs name â
   Agreed Statement of Facts â guilty plea â finding of guilt â Joint
   Submission on Penalty â Panel found the sanctions to fall within a
   reasonable range â grade assignment of zero for course; five-year
   suspension; seven-year notation on transcript or until graduation;
   report to Provost

   Student charged under s. B.i.1(c) and S. B.i.1(a) of the Code . The
   charges related to allegations that the Student submitted her final
   exam in another studentâs name to help him obtain a better grade. The
   parties submitted an Agreed Statement of Facts, and the Student pleaded
   guilty to the charges. The Student admitted at the meeting with the
   Deanâs Designate that she knowingly personated the other student and
   that she knowingly forged, altered or falsified her exam answer during
   the exam by putting the other studentâs name and student number on the
   cover page to assist him to obtain an academic advantage. Accordingly,
   the Panel found the Student guilty under s. B.i.1(c) and s. B.i.1(a) .
   The parties also submitted a Joint Submission on Penalty. The Panel
   found that the sanctions proposed by the parties fell within a
   reasonable range of sanctions for the offences committed. The Panel
   imposed a grade assignment of zero in the course; a five-year
   suspension; a seven-year notation on the Studentâs transcript or until
   graduation, whichever was to occur first; and a report be issued to the
   Provost.

   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12807
