THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
TRIAL DIVISION
IN THE MATTER OF charges of academic dishonesty filed on February 14, 2011,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic
Matters, 1995,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Act, 1971, S.O. 1971, c. 56 as
amended S.O. 1978, c. 88
BETWEEN:
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO

-AND-

REASONS FOR DECISION

Hearing Date: January 19, 2012

Members of the Panel:
Mr. Michael Hines, Barrister and Solicitor, Chair
Professor Richard B. Day, Faculty Panel Member, Department of Political Science
Mr. Albert So, Student Panel Member
Appearances:
Ms. Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Barristers
Ms.
the Student

LI ca.

In Attendance:
Professor Eleanor Irwin, Dean's Designate, University of Toronto Scarborough
Mr. Christopher Lang, Director, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances

-2The Facts
1.

This hearing arose out of charges of academic misconduct dated February 14,

2011 ("Charges") filed by the Provost of the University of Toronto (the "Provost") under
the Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters ("Code"). For the purposes of this hearing
the Provost, and

LI ca ("Ms. ca") prepared an Agreed Statement of Facts ("ASF")

and a joint book of documents ("JBD"). The Provost and Ms. ~ agreed on the facts
set below and that:
(a)

each document contained In the JBD could be admitted into evidence
before the Tribunal for all purposes, including for the truth of the
document's contents, without further need to prove the document; and

(b)

if a document indicated that it was sent or received by someone, that was

prima facie proof that the document was sent and received as indicated.

2.

Ms.

ca also confirmed that she signed the ASF freely and voluntarily, knowing

of the potential consequences she faced.

3.

Ms.

ca also acknowledged that she had received reasonable notice of this

hearing. The Notice of Hearing for January 19, 2012 set out the Charges. They read
as follows:
1.
On or about August 13, 2010, you knowingly personated another
person, rvj
at a final examination in MATA33 (the "Exam" and the
"Course"), contrary to section B.1.1 (c) of the Code.

f9,

2.

On or about August 13, 2010, you knowingly forged, altered or
falsified a document or evidence required by the University, and did utter,
circulate or make use of any such forged, altered or falsified document,
namely the cover page of your examination booklet in the Exam, contrary
to section B.l.(a) of the Code.
3.
In the alternative, on or about August 13, 2010, you knowingly
engaged In a form of cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct,
fraud or misrepresentation not otherwise described in the Code in order
to obtain academic credit or other academ ic advantage of any kind in
connection with the Quiz in the Course, contrary to section B.l.3(b) of the
Code.

-3Particulars
You were registered at the University of Toronto and enrolled in the
Course at all material limes.
The Exam was scheduled lo be written on August 13, 2010.

l:9's

You attended and wrote the Exam, but put~
name and student
number on the cover of your exam answer booklet so that ii would
appear to be Mr.
exam answer booklet.

Bi's

Bi's

You wrote the Exam on Mr.
behalf so that he might receive an
academic advantage in the Course.
Your conduct violated the Code.

ca first registered as a student at the University of Toronto at Scarborough
in Fall 2009. At all material times, Ms. ca remained enrolled at the University. As at
4.

Ms.

the end of the Summer 2010 term she had earned 1.50 credits, with a cumulative grade
point average of 0.34. In Summer 2010 she was placed on academic probation.
5.

At all material times Ms.

ca was involved in a relationship with ~ E9 and they

lived together at the same address. Mr.

81 also first registered as a student at the

University of Toronto at Scarborough in Fall 2009.
6.

In Summer 2010, Ms.

ca enrolled in MATA33H3: Calculus for Management II,

which was taught by Professor S. Chopra ("MATA33H3"). Mr.

El was also enrolled in

MATA33H3 at the same time.
7.

The final exam in MATA33H3 was worth 50% of the overall course mark

{"Exam"). The Exam was scheduled to be written on August 13, 2010.
8.

Ms.

ca attended at the Exam with Mr. • . Mr. E3I sat immediately behind Ms.

ca in the exam room.

<a wrote Mr. Bi's name and student number on the front
cover of her exam paper, and showed it to Mr. E9 so that he would know what she had
done. She submitted this exam paper with Mr. Bi's name at the end of the Exam.
9.

During the Exam Ms.

-4-

10.

Ms.

ca

was motivated to do this in part because she had already decided to

811 had been involved in a car accident several months prior to
the Exam, and she wanted to help Mr. El to obtain a better mark than she thought he
could obtain on his own. She expected Mr. 81 to submit his exam paper with her name
leave the University. Mr.

and student number on the front cover.

11 .

Before students began to write the Exam they were required to fill in a one-page

Examination Candidate Form with the date, seat number, name, student number,
course, lecture number, instructor's name, and their signature. Ms.

ca

filled out this

form by providing the date, her name, student number, course number and her
signature.

12.

During or at the conclusion of the Exam the University also collected an

Examination Candidate Form filled out in the name of ~
number, the course number, and a signature from ~

13.

After the Exam, Mr.

811, with Mr. Bi's student

91.

811 told Ms. ca that he had crossed off his own name on

his exam cover page and substituted the fictional name Steven Xu , and that he had also
changed his student number.

14.

At the end of the Exam, when all of the Examination Candidate Forms and exam

papers had been collected by the University officials responsible for the Exam, they
observed the following:
(a)

There was no exam paper submitted with

LI Cllll's name or student

number on the cover page.
(b)

There was an exam paper with~

Bi's name and student number on the

cover page.

(c)

There was an exam paper with the name Steven Xu, with student number

997586688, on the cover page.

-5(d)

ctlll's name
and student number, and another one containing Mr. Bis name and
There was an Examination Candidate Form containing Ms.

student number.
(e)

There was no Examination Candidate Form containing the name Steven
Xu, or the student number 997586688.

(f)
15.

Ms.

There was no student named Steven Xu registered in MATA33H3.

ctlll attended at a meeting with the Dean's Designate on October 20, 201 O

pursuant to section C.1.(a) 5 and 6 of the Code ("Dean's Meeting"). She was informed of
the dean's warning as required by section C.l.(a) 6 of the Code.
admitted that she had put

At that time she

WI Bi's name and student number on her exam paper

during the Exam, and she had submitted this exam paper in Mr.

Bi's name to help him

get a better grade in MATA33H3.
16.

Ms.

ctlll admitted that she knowingly personated WI 81 at the Exam, contrary

to section B.1.1 (c) of the Code, as made out in Charge 1.
17.

Ms.

.s

ctlll further admitted that she knowingly forged, altered or falsified her exam

answer paper during the Exam by putting

WI

name and student number on the

cover page to make it appear to have been submitted by Mr.

81, to assist him to obtain

an academic advantage, contrary to section B.l.1(a) of the Code, as made out in
Charge 2.
Finding of Guilt

18.

Ms.

ca

waived the reading of the Charges and pied guilty to Charges 1 and 2.

The Tribunal accepted this plea and registered a finding of guilt on Charges 1 and 2.
On that basis, the Provost withdrew Charge 3.

-6Penalty

19.

The parties then made a joint submission on penalty. Specifically, the Provost

ca submitted that the appropriate penalty in all the circumstances of the case
was that the University Tribunal impose the following sanctions on Ms. ca:
and Ms.

(a)

a final grade of zero in the course MATA33H3;

(b)

a suspension from the University to commence January 1, 2012, and to
end December 31, 2016;
a notation of the sanction on her academic record and transcript from the

(c)

date of the Order until the earlier of her graduation from the University or
December 31, 2018.

20.

The Parties further submitted that it would be appropriate for the Tribunal to

report this case to the Provost for publication of a notice of the decision of the Tribunal
and the sanction or sanctions imposed in the University newspapers, with the name of

the student withheld.
21.

Based upon the foregoing, after receiving evidence and hearing submissions by

the parties, the Tribunal concluded that the sanction proposed by the parties fell within a
reasonable range of sanctions for the offences committed. Accordingly, the Tribunal
hereby orders:
1. THAT Ms.
(a)

ca is guilty of the academic offences of:

personation contrary to section B.1(1 )(c) of the Code of Behaviour on
Academic Matters; and

(b)

falsifying an exam paper contrary to section B.l.1(a) of the Code of
Behaviour on Academic Matters.

-72. THAT the following sanctions shall be imposed on Ms.

<=a:

(a)

she shall receive a final grade of zero in the course MATA33H3;

(b)

she shall be suspended from the University for five years, to commence
on January 1, 2012, and to end December 31, 2016; and

(c)

the sanction shall be recorded on her academic record and transcript from
the date of the Order until December 31 , 2018.

3. THAT this case shall be reported to the Provost for publication of a notice of the
decision of the Tribunal and the sanction or sanctions imposed in the University
newspapers, with the name of the student withheld.

Dated at Toronto, this~.dday of June, 2012.

Mr. Michael Hines, Co-Chair

