Case 1181

DATE:

   November 5, 2021

PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v. A.K. ("the Student")

HEARING DATE:

   July 26, 2021, via Zoom

Panel Members:

   Ms. Johanna Braden, Chair
   Professor Ernest Lam, Faculty Panel Member
   Ms. Parsa Mahmud, Student Panel Member

Appearances:

   Ms. Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg
   Rothstein LLP
   Ms. Erica Berry, Representative for the Student, Downtown Legal
   Services
   The Student

Hearing Secretary:

   Ms. Carmelle Salomon-Labbe, Associate Director, Office of Appeals,
   Discipline and Faculty Grievances

   Theâ¯Studentâ¯was chargedÂ with two counts underÂ s. B.i.1(b)Â
   andÂ one count under s.Â B.ii.1(a)(ii) of theÂ Code ofÂ BehaviourÂ and
   Academic Matters, 1995Â (the âCodeâ)Â forÂ knowingly usingÂ or
   possessingÂ an unauthorized aid or aids or obtainingÂ unauthorized
   assistance in a final exam,Â and knowingly aidingÂ and assistingÂ other
   studentsÂ inÂ a course to use or possess an unauthorized aid or aids or
   obtain unauthorized assistance. InÂ  addition and the alternative,
   theâ¯Studentâ¯was charged under s.â¯B.i.3(b) of
   theâ¯Codeâ¯forâ¯knowingly engagingÂ in a form of cheating, academic
   dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or misrepresentationâ¯in order
   toâ¯obtain academic credit or other academic advantageâ¯ in connection
   with a final exam.

   The Student attended the hearing with his representative. The Student
   and the University submitted an Agreed Statement of Fact (âASFâ). The
   Panel noted that the ASF outlined that the Student admitted to all the
   charges. At the hearing, the Student agreed that he understood the
   charges and the nature and effect of his plea. The evidence before the
   Panel was outlined in the ASF and the Joint Book of Documents (âJBDâ).
   The ASF outlined that the StudentÂ had writtenÂ  the final exam in the
   course and submitted it within the allotted time. Soon after
   submission, the Professor who taught the course for which the exam was
   submitted searched the text of the exam onlineÂ to ensure no students
   in theÂ course had posted it online. The Professor discovered that nine
   out of the eleven exam questions had been posted on Chegg.com
   (âCheggâ). The Panel noted that the ASF furthered to indicate that at a
   later date the Student Conduct & Academic Integrity Officer requested
   that Chegg provide the solutions posted to the website for the exam,
   and to identify the users that posted, answered, and accessed the
   questions. Upon receipt of the data from Chegg, the Academic Integrity
   Officer forwarded this to the Professor who taught the course. An
   analysis of this data indicated that three students (including the
   Student) posted multiple questions to Chegg seeking answers. The Panel
   noted that the ASFÂ indicated that in the Professorâs view, it was
   highly unlikely that the similarities in the answers occurred by
   coincidence, given the length, level of detail, and unusual phrasing of
   the exam answers as well as the fact that many of them were wrong in
   the same specific ways.Â In particular, in his view the answer given to
   question 2(a)Â was nonsensical in the same way as the answer given by
   another student. The Panel noted that the ASF furthered by outlining
   the Studentâs meeting with the Deanâs Designate. At the meeting the
   Student admittedÂ to obtainingÂ unauthorizedÂ assistance from
   Chegg,Â posting exam questions on Chegg, and that he gave his Chegg
   password to many of his friends.Â Subsequent to the meeting, the
   Student sent an emailÂ to the Deanâs DesignateÂ advising that
   althoughÂ the Student did not remember copying from Chegg for a
   particular answer, it would be difficult to make a case in his favour
   and because of this, he confessed to the offence.Â Â The Panel was
   satisfied that the Studentâs admissions were voluntary, informed and
   unequivocal. Upon review of the evidence contained in the ASF and JBD,
   the Panel found that the Student used an unauthorized aid and obtained
   unauthorized assistance when he turned to Chegg for assistance with his
   final exam. Further, the Panel noted thatÂ although the Student may not
   have necessarily intended to aid other students, it accepted that by
   posting exam questions and seeking input on how to answer them, the
   Student effectively aided and assisted other students in the course who
   subscribed to Chegg. Accordingly, the Panel returned a finding of guilt
   with respect to the charges under ss.B.i.1(b) and B.ii.1(a)(ii) of the
   Code. Given this finding, the University withdrew the alternative
   charge.

   In determining sanction, theâ¯Panel received, on consentÂ of the
   parties, further evidence that the Student had previously admitted to
   academic misconduct onÂ twoÂ prior occasions. The Student and the
   University submitted a Joint Submission on Penalty (âJSPâ). The Panel
   noted that it should only depart from a JSP where the proposed sanction
   is so far outside the range of appropriate outcomes that it would bring
   the administration of justice into disrepute. The Panel considered the
   factors and principles relevant to sanction set out inÂ University of
   Toronto and Mr. CÂ (Case No. 1976/77-3, November 5, 1976). The Panel
   noted that the Student attended the hearing and admitted to his
   wrongdoing which shows some insight and remorse. Further, the Student
   has earned all his credits to graduate and improved his grades as he
   progressed in his courses. Balanced against these mitigating factors
   was the StudentâsÂ twoÂ prior actsÂ of plagiarism.Â The
   PanelÂ furthered by considering the likelihood of repetitionÂ where it
   noted that one seriously aggravating factor is that this is the
   Studentâs thirdÂ offence,Â but the Panel is hopeful that this
   processÂ brought home the message that dishonesty and academic
   misconduct is not a path to success.Â The Panel further noted that by
   cheating on his exam, the Student undermined the grades-based system of
   evaluation and broke the honour code that is essential to online
   learning. Regarding the need to deter others from committing similar
   offences, the Panel noted that cheating on exams must always be
   denounced and deterred in order to protect the academic integrity of
   the University. It furthered by outlining that in todayâs online world,
   it is too easy for students to find new outlets for unauthorized
   assistance and students must understand that this kind of misconduct
   will have serious repercussions. In addition to the factors outlined
   inÂ University of Toronto and Mr. CÂ (Case No. 1976/77-3, November 5,
   1976) (âMr. C. factorsâ), the Panel reviewed and considered the other
   cases of the Tribunal in similar circumstances. Upon review of the
   additional cases and consideration for the Mr. C. factors, the Panel
   noted that theÂ Studentâs two prior acts of misconduct make it
   difficult to compare to those submitted by the University.
   Nevertheless, the Panel accepted theÂ JSPÂ asÂ it does not bring the
   administration of justice into disrepute and is not otherwise contrary
   to the public interest.Â Â The Panel imposed the following sanctions:
   final grade of zero in the course; three-year suspension; four-year
   notation on transcript; and a report to the Provost for publication.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/30090
