UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
GOVERNING COUNCIL
REPORT NUMBER 282 OF THE ACADEMIC APPEALS COMMITTEE
July 25, 2003
To the Academic Board,
University of Toronto.
Your Committee reports that it held a meeting on Friday, July 25, 2003, at which the
following were present:
Professor Emeritus R. Scane, Chair
Mr. M. Ahmad
Professor C. Beghtol
Ms K. Lewis
Professor J. Wedge
Secretary: Mr. Paul Holmes, Judicial Affairs Officer
Appearances:
For OISE/UT:
Ms S. Springer, Counsel
Professor D. Galbraith
Ms S. McKitrick
For the Student:
No appearances.
This is an appeal from the Divisional Appeals Committee of OISE/UT, dated January 25,
2000, which dismissed an appeal from the decision of the Appeals Committee of the Faculty
Council of OISE/UT, dated December 16, 1998. The latter decision dismissed an appeal
from a failure in the Practice Teaching component of the Diploma in Technical Education
Program during the 1997 - 98 academic year. The Practice Teaching component consists of
three separate teaching sessions, under the supervision and evaluation of associate teachers
approved by OISE/UT. A Student must receive a pass grade in all sessions to pass the
course. Here the Student failed one of the sessions, and under OISE/UT rules, was permitted
to take a make-up session. The Student also failed the make-up session, and accordingly
received no credit for Practice Teaching. As a consequence, he was not recommended for
the diploma.

Report 282 of the Academic Appeals Committee
The appeal was scheduled to start at 9:15 a.m. on July 25, 2003, in the Council Chamber at
Simcoe Hall. The Student was advised orally of the date, time and place of the hearing, and
also given written notice of the hearing by a letter dated July 15, 2003 from the University's
Judicial Affairs Officer. This letter was sent again by courier to the Student at his place of
business on July 17, 2003, when it appeared that there had been delivery problems with the
first delivery. The letter complied with the notice requirements of the Statutory Powers
Procedure Act, including the statement, "If you fail to attend the hearing, the panel may
proceed in your absence and you will not be entitled to further notice in the proceeding".
Your Committee met at the scheduled time and place, with counsel and the other
representatives of OISE/UT present. The Student did not appear, nor did any person
representing him. No messages were received from him or on his behalf at the Governing
Council Office. In the presence of your Committee, the Judicial Affairs Officer attempted to
telephone the Student at his home and his place of business, but was unable to speak to him
or obtain information as to his whereabouts. Your Committee remained in session for
approximately one hour, part of which time was spent in camera to consider how to proceed
in the circumstances. Your Committee did not consider that the written materials filed
justified calling on OISE/UT to respond to the appeal. Accordingly, the appeal was
dismissed.
August 7, 2003

Paul Holmes
Secretary

Ralph Scane
Senior Chair

Docs Open #27437 v2 – Public

Page 2 of 2

