Report 410

   DATE : October 27, 2020

   PARTIES : Ms. A.L. ("the Student") v. University at Toronto Faculty of
   Information and School of Graduate Studies

   HEARING DATE : June 15, 2020, via Zoom

   Committee Members:
   Professor Ariel Katz, Chair
   Ms. Susan Froom, Student Governor
   Professor Paul Kingston, Faculty Governor

   Appearances:
   For the Student Appellant:
   Ms.¬ Audrey-Anne Delage, Law Student, Downtown Legal Services
   Ms. Jennifer Fehr, Staff Lawyer, Downtown Legal Services

   For the University at Toronto Faculty of Information and School of
   Graduate Studies:
   Mr. Robert Centa, Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg Rothstein LLP
   Ms. Emily Home, Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg Rothstein LLP

   Hearing Secretary:
   Mr. Christopher Lang, Direction, Office of Appeals, Discipline and
   Faculty Grievances
   Ms. Krista Kennedy, Administrative Clerk, Office of Appeals, Discipline
   and Faculty Grievances

   The Student appeals a decision of the Graduate Academic Appeals Board
   (‚GAAB‚), which reviewed a decision by the School of Graduate Studies
   (‚SGS‚) to terminate her enrollment in the PhD program of the Faculty
   of Information (‚Faculty‚). The SGS termination decision followed a
   recommendation by the Faculty, based on the Faculty‚s determination
   that the Student had failed to make sufficient progress towards the
   completion of her degree.

   The Student asked the Academic Appeals Committee (‚AAC‚) to grant her
   appeal and reinstate her to the PhD program at the Faculty with 14
   months remaining to complete her PhD. The Student raised the following
   three issues:
    1. the Faculty‚s refusal to consider her request for an extension; and
    2. the standard for procedural fairness in the decision to terminate;
       and
    3. the level of supervision from her Supervising Committee.

   At the outset, the AAC indicated that its role is to evaluate the
   decisions of the bodies it reviews and consider whether the relevant
   academic regulations and requirements have been applied correctly,
   consistently, and fairly.

   To determine whether the SGS had complied with the relevant SGS
   Calendar, the AAC reviewed section 8.5.2 of the Calendar, which
   establishes a process that must be followed before a graduate unit may
   recommend the termination of a doctoral student‚s registration. It also
   reviewed sections 8.1, 8.3, and 8.4 of the Calendar, as well as SGS‚
   Guidelines for Departmental Monitoring of Progress Through the PhD,
   which underscores the important safeguard against rushed,
   ill-considered, and arbitrary termination decisions which section 8.5.2
   provides. In interpreting these provisions, the AAC agreed with the
   Student‚s interpretation and held that section 8.5.2 includes
   cumulative requirements that both doctoral students and the graduate
   unit must comply with. Among other things, section 8.5.2 requires that
   two meetings between a student and their supervising committee take
   place. The AAC noted that a meeting between the student and their
   committee, during which the committee assesses the student‚s progress
   in the program and provides advice on future work, must take place
   before the committee reports on the student‚s progress. It is not
   enough that the committee reports unsatisfactory progress twice, but to
   serve as a basis for a recommendation of termination, the committee
   must do so in each of two consecutive meetings. Since only one such
   meeting had taken place between the Student and her Supervising
   Committee, the AAC rejected SGS‚s arguments that it did not have to
   comply with section 8.5.2, and that even if it had to comply with this
   provision, it had complied with its intent.

   In deciding the extension issue, the AAC considered, among other
   things, the requirements set out in the Calendar, the evidence relating
   to the practice of granting extensions, SGS‚s submission that the
   Student was not entitled to an extension because extensions may only be
   granted in exceptional circumstances, and the inherent flexibility in
   the concept of ‚exceptional circumstances‚. The AAC found that the
   Student‚s inability to achieve satisfactory progress within the
   original deadline could have justified extending the completion
   deadline and that granting an extension was something that the Faculty
   had to consider. It concluded that the Faculty‚s failure to consider an
   extension and to advise the Student on how to apply for it were
   unreasonable. It held that this unreasonable behaviour tainted the
   Faculty‚s recommendation to terminate the Student‚s registration and
   tainted the SGS decision that was based on that recommendation.
   Additionally, the AAC found that the GAAB‚s conclusion that the
   extension would not have made a difference was unreasonable.

   To determine whether the standard for procedural fairness had been met
   in the decision to terminate the Student‚s registration and whether the
   Faculty had given the Student sufficient notice of the possibility of
   termination, the AAC reviewed comments that the Committee on Standing
   had provided to the Student in an Annual Progress Review. The AAC
   stated that whether notice was given is a question of fact, but whether
   that notice was sufficient is a question of law. It also noted that the
   existence of notice does not necessarily make the notice sufficient, as
   a matter of law, and added that sufficient notice is a legal concept
   and an aspect of the duty of fairness. Relying on Baker v Canada
   (Minister of Citizenship and Immigration) , [1999] 2 SCR 817, the AAC
   concluded that the comments by the Committee on Standing and the notice
   did not accord with the high level of procedural fairness that a
   decision to terminate a doctoral student entails. Further, given the
   Student‚s previous termination, she submitted that the knowledge of her
   previous termination deprived her of an impartial assessment of her
   work. In considering this submission, the AAC applied the legal test
   relating to bias, namely whether a reasonably informed bystander could
   reasonably perceive bias on the part of the decision-maker. The AAC
   found that knowledge of the Student‚s earlier history could very likely
   have created a bias, at least a subconscious one, which deprived her of
   an impartial assessment of her work and led to a rushed decision to
   terminate her.

   Concerning the level of supervision the Student had received from her
   Supervising Committee, the AAC disagreed with the assertion that the
   supervision the Student had received exceeded SGS‚ expectations in
   terms of quality, timeliness, and availability. For example, the AAC
   noted that the GAAB‚s conclusion about the adequacy of the support the
   Student had received from the Faculty was based on a very restrictive
   concept of what good supervision entails. Given that the Student had
   received a single set of detailed written comments and based on the
   Supervision Guidelines, the AAC rejected the suggestion that it could
   infer that supervision over the course of the program was adequate. In
   the AAC‚s view, the supervision fell below SGS standards.

   In allowing the appeal, the AAC found that the Faculty and SGS did not
   follow the relevant University regulations before the decision to
   terminate the Student‚s registration was made. Moreover, it found that
   the process did not comply with the requirements of procedural
   fairness; that it was unreasonable for the Faculty and SGS to terminate
   the Student‚s registration without considering whether other measures,
   such as extending her timeline for completion, were more appropriate;
   and that the level of supervision and support that the Student received
   fell short of the appropriate standard. According to the AAC, not only
   did the Faculty and SGS not help the Student overcome institutional
   roadblocks that stood in her way to achieving her educational potential
   but their actions and inactions entrenched them.

   Appeal allowed.
   [1]View Report

References

   1. file:///media/29494
