Case No. 1561
THE UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO

IN THE MATTER OF charges of academic dishonesty made on October 19, 2023,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic
Matters, 2019,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Act, 1971, S.O. 1971, c. 56 as amended
S.O. 1978, c. 88
B E T W E E N:
UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
- and X

M

REASONS FOR DECISION
Hearing Date: January 16, 2024, via Zoom
Members of the Panel:
Simon Clements, Chair
Professor Dionne Aleman, Faculty Panel Member
Alexander Bowie, Student Panel Member
Appearances:
Lily Hamer, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg Rothstein LLP
Sonia Patel, Co-Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg Rothstein LLP
Hearing Secretary:
Samanthe Huang, Coordinator & Hearing Secretary, Office of Appeals, Discipline and Faculty
Grievances
Not in Attendance:
X
M

1.

This panel of the University Tribunal held a hearing on January 16, 2024, to consider the

charges brought by the University of Toronto (the “University”) against X

M (the

“Student”) under the Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters, 2019 (the “Code”). It is alleged
that the Student committed plagiarism on a paper submitted on July 27, 2021, contrary to section
B.I.1(d) of the Code.
A.

Preliminary Issue: Proceeding in the Absence of the Student

2.

The hearing was scheduled to begin at 1:45 pm on January 16, 2024. At that time,

Assistant Discipline Counsel advised that neither the Student nor a representative of the Student
had responded to the Notice of Virtual Hearing.
3.

When the Student had not joined the hearing via the Zoom video conferencing platform

(“Zoom”) at 1:45 pm, Assistant Discipline Counsel made submissions on proceeding with the
hearing in the absence of the Student. She advised that on October 19, 2023, the charges were
served on the Student by email to the email address of the Student which was the email address
the Student had provided to the University in the University of Toronto Repository of Student
Information (“ROSI”).
4.

The University submitted the Affidavit of Natalia Botelho, a legal assistant at Paliare

Roland Rosenberg Rothstein LLP (“Paliare Roland”) who described the efforts made by the
office to contact the Student. On September 13, 2023, Ms. Sonia Patel, a lawyer at Paliare
Roland, emailed the Student at the ROSI email to introduce herself and invite the Student to
attend a phone call or virtual meeting to discuss the allegations. Ms. Patel sent a follow-up email
to the Student at the ROSI email on September 20, 2023.
5.

On October 19, 2023, the Office of the Vice-Provost, Faculty and Academic Life served

the charges in this matter on the Student by email to the ROSI email.
6.

On November 1, 2023, Ms. Patel emailed the Student a disclosure brief which was

successfully delivered to the Student’s ROSI email address.
7.

On November 22, 2023, Ms. Patel emailed the Student about scheduling a hearing date.

She provided a list of available dates, including January 16, 2024, and asked the Student to
advise her as soon as possible if they were not available on any of these dates. Ms. Patel advised

2

that if she did not hear back by November 27, 2023, she would request that a hearing be
scheduled.
8.

On November 29, 2023, the ADFG Office issued a Notice of Virtual Hearing for a

hearing to take place via Zoom on January 16, 2024, at 1:45 p.m. The ADFG Office sent the
notice to the Student at the ROSI email.
9.

On December 13, 2023, the ADFG Office issued a Revised Notice of Virtual Hearing.

The date and time of the hearing remained unchanged. The ADFG Office sent the notice to the
Student at the ROSI email.
10.

On January 4, 2024, Ms. Patel emailed the Student a copy of the affidavit of Professor

Margaret Kohn. Ms. Patel stated that the Provost would rely on the affidavit at the hearing and
asked the Student to let her know whether they intended to cross-examine Professor Kohn. The
Student did not respond to this correspondence.
11.

On September 15, 2023, Ms. Patel called the Student at the two personal phone numbers

listed on ROSI. Ms. Patel was not able to reach the Student on either of these phone numbers.
12.

On September 20, 2023, Janice Patterson, a legal assistant at Paliare Roland, tried to call

the Student on the same numbers and was also unsuccessful.
13.

Ms. Patel attempted to call the Student again on December 7, 2023, at the phone number

listed with the Student’s mailing address on ROSI. Ms. Patel received an automated message
saying her call “could not be completed as dialled”.
14.

On December 7, 2023, Paliare Roland arranged for a courier to deliver a package to the

Student at Shenghua North Road, No. 288, Chengdu, China 610000, the Student’s address in
ROSI. The courier package contained a letter from Ms. Harmer, copies of the Notice of Virtual
Hearing and Charges in this matter. The courier was unable to confirm delivery to the address in
ROSI with the postal code of 610000. However, the courier was able to access Chengdu with the
postal code of 610003. Paliare Roland instructed the courier to attempt to deliver the package to
610003 instead. On December 8, 2023, the courier company confirmed the address.
15.

On December 12, 2023, the courier company requested a phone number for the recipient.

Paliare Roland provided the three phone numbers in the Student’s ROSI. The next day, the
3

courier company advised that they had been unable to reach the recipient at the phone numbers
provided.
16.

On December 18, 2023, the courier company advised that they had made repeated

delivery attempts but had been unable to deliver the package.
17.

Ms. Botelho affirmed that as of January 9, 2024, Paliare Roland had not received any

communication from the Student.
18.

The University submitted the Affidavit of Mr. Andrew Wagg who is the Manager,

Incident Response at Information Security, Information Technology Services at the University of
Toronto.
19.

Information Technology Services provides many services to the University, including

management of the email accounts used by students. To access an email account one needs to
input both the user's login id and the password for that account. The Microsoft 365 Exchange
portal automatically records the last time someone accessed a particular university-issued email
account. This is denoted with the code "LastUserActionTime". The LastUserActionTime log
only updates when someone logs in to a university-issued email account.
20.

On January 4, 2024, Mr. Wagg checked the portal records to determine the last time

someone accessed the email account of the Student and determined that the last time someone
accessed that account was on January 3, 2024 at 4:17 p.m., local Toronto time.
21.

Section 6 of the Statutory Powers and Procedures Act (the “Act”) states that the parties to

a proceeding shall be given reasonable notice of the hearing by the tribunal. Section 7(3) states
that where reasonable notice of the hearing has been given to a party to a proceeding in
accordance with the Act and the party does not participate in accordance with the notice, the
tribunal may proceed without the party’s participation and the party is not entitled to any further
notice in the proceeding.
22.

Rule 13 of the University Tribunal’s Rules of Practice and Procedure (the “Rules”) states

that the charges, notices of hearing, and disclosure material may be served on a student by email
or by courier. Rule 21 mirrors the provision in section 7(3) of the Act. Where notice of an

4

electronic hearing has been given to the Student in accordance with the Rules and the Student
does not attend hearing, the Tribunal may proceed in the absence of Student.
23.

The University requested that the Tribunal proceed with this hearing in the absence of the

Student.
24.

Pursuant to rule 13, a notice of hearing may be served on a student by various means,

including by sending a copy of the document by courier to the student’s mailing address in ROSI
or by emailing a copy of the document to the student’s email address in ROSI.
25.

The University’s Policy on Official Correspondence with Students expressly states that

students are responsible for maintaining a current and valid postal address and email account on
ROSI. Students are expected to monitor and retrieve all mail, including emails, on a frequent and
consistent basis.
26.

The onus of proof is on the University to demonstrate that it provided the Student with

reasonable notice of the hearing.
27.

In this case, the University provided reasonable notice to the Student. The Student

provided the University with a mailing address, email address, and phone numbers. The office
of Assistant Discipline Counsel utilized all these means of communication to try and contact the
Student, all to no avail.
28.

The Notice of Virtual Hearing had been served on the Student by email on November 29,

2023, and again on December 13, 2023, when there was a change in panel members. Someone
last logged into the email account of the Student, using an ID and password presumably known
only to the Student on January 3, 2024, at which time the Student would have been able to read
the Notice of Virtual Hearing and would have known that the hearing was to take place over
Zoom on January 16, 2024.
29.

For these reasons the Tribunal finds that reasonable notice has been given to the Student

by valid means of service, and the Student has failed to attend the hearing via Zoom. The
Tribunal therefore determined it would proceed to hear the case on its merits in the absence of
the Student, and the hearing proceeded on the basis that the Student was deemed to deny the
charges made against them.

5

B.

The Charge and Particulars

30.

The Charges and Particulars were detailed in a letter dated October 19, 2023, and are set

out below:
1.

On or about July 27, 2021, you knowingly represented as your own an idea or expression

of an idea or work of another in a paper you submitted in POLB72 (the “Course”), contrary to
section B.I.1(d) of the Code.
2.

In the alternative, on or about July 27, 2021, you knowingly obtained unauthorized

assistance in connection with a paper you submitted in the Course, contrary to section B.I.1(b) of
the Code.
3.

In the further alternative, on or about July 27, 2021, you knowingly engaged in a form of

cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or misrepresentation not otherwise described
in the Code in order to obtain academic credit or other academic advantage of any kind in
connection with a paper you submitted in the Course, contrary to section B.I.3(b) of the Code.

Particulars of the offences charged are as follows:
1.

At all material times, you were a student enrolled at the University of Toronto

Scarborough.
2.

In Summer 2021, you enrolled in the Course.

3.

On or about July 27, 2021, you submitted a paper in the Course, entitled “essay.doc”,

which was worth 40% of your final grade in the Course (the “Essay”).
4.

You submitted the Essay:
(a)

to obtain academic credit;

(b)

knowing that it contained ideas, expressions of ideas or work which were not

your own, but were the ideas, expressions of ideas or work of others, including the
authors of the following articles:
(i)

Gardner, David, “Thomas Hobbes and Niccolo Machiavelli: A

Comparison”, E-International Relations (2010 Sep 1), online: https://www.eir.info/2010/09/01/thomas-hobbes-and-niccolo-machiavelli-a-comparison/

6

(ii)

Stewart, Duncan, “Thomas Hobbes”, The Stanford Encyclopedia of

Philosophy

(Spring

2021

Edition),

Edward

N.

Zalta

(ed.),

online:

https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/sum2022/entries/hobbes/
(iii)

Williams, Garrath, “Thomas Hobbes: Moral and Political Philosophy”,

Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy, online: https://iep.utm.edu/hobmoral/ (the
“Sources”)
(c)

knowing that you did not properly reference the ideas, expressions of ideas or

work that you drew from the Sources.
5.

By taking ideas, expressions of ideas or work from the Sources or other third parties

without appropriate attribution, you knowingly obtained unauthorized assistance from the
Sources or other third parties in connection with the Essay.
6.

You knowingly submitted the Essay with the intention that the University of Toronto

Scarborough rely on it as containing your own ideas or work in considering the appropriate
academic credit to be assigned to your work.

C.

The Evidence

31.

The University filed the Affidavit evidence of Professor Margaret Kohn affirmed on

January 4, 2024. Professor Kohn is a Professor and the Graduate Chair in the Department of
Political Science at the University of Toronto Scarborough (“UTSC”).
32.

One of the courses offered by the Department of Political Science in Summer 2021 was

POLB72H3Y: Introduction to Political Theory (the “Course”). The Course was taught online by
Dr. Igor Shoikhedbrod, who no longer works at UTSC.
33.

The Student was a student in the Course.

34.

The Course syllabus informed students that they “should familiarize themselves with the

university’s policy on plagiarism. Plagiarism is a serious academic offence and will be dealt with
accordingly.” Students were instructed to read the University of Toronto’s policy on plagiarism
and provided with a link to the UTSC Academic Advising & Career Centre plagiarism tutorial.
Finally, the syllabus noted that if students had “any doubts about whether [they were]
committing plagiarism, [they should] please inquire with [their] instructor and/or teaching
assistant(s).”
7

The Essay
35.

Students in the Course were evaluated on the basis of, among other things, a 1,500-word

comparative essay due on July 27, 2021. The essay was worth 40% of the final grade in the
Course.
36.

Students were instructed to write an essay response to one of two comparative questions

or prompts. The instructions also reminded students that this was not a research essay and that
they were prohibited from using secondary texts or sources. This is an exegetical essay and not a
research essay. Exegesis is the careful reading and interpretation of texts. Students were told:
“You should write your exegesis using only the required course text. We are not looking for some
other author’s reading of the assigned texts; we are looking for your reading of the texts. No
secondary texts or sources are to be used.”
[Emphasis in original]
37.

Under “Required Course Text & Bibliography”, the instructions for the essay reiterated

that references were to come “only” (emphasis in original) from the Course text, Michael L.
Morgan (ed.), “Classics of Moral and Political Theory”, 5th ed (Indianapolis: Hackett, 2011).
The instructions stated: “No other sources are to be used.”
38.

The Student submitted their essay on or around July 27, 2021 (the “Essay”). The Essay

did not cite any sources.
39.

The Essay was submitted to Turnitin, a website which detects plagiarism. Turnitin

flagged the Essay with a 61% similarity index to other sources in the Turnitin database. Turnitin
identified a number of passages from the Essay that were identical or near identical to the text of
two online sources, neither of which were the Course text, the only permitted source:
(a) David Gardner, “Thomas Hobbes and Niccolo Machiavelli: A Comparison”, EInternational Relations (2010 Sep 1), online: https://www.e-ir.info/2010/09/01/thomashobbes-and-niccolo-machiavelli-a-comparison/; and
(b) Williams, Garrath, “Thomas Hobbes: Moral and Political Philosophy”, Internet
Encyclopedia of Philosophy, online: https://iep.utm.edu/hobmoral/

8

40.

Dr. Shoikhedbrod, the Course instructor, submitted a report attaching the Turnitin report

and alleging that an academic offence had occurred. In her capacity as Chair, Professor Kohn
reviewed the allegation and report and agreed with Dr. Shoikhedbrod’s conclusion that several
sentences from the Essay appeared to have been taken verbatim or near verbatim from the online
sources identified by Turnitin. In her affidavit, Professor Kohn provided side by side examples of
identical or near identical wording from the sources and the Student’s essay.
41.

A third source document, Stewart, Duncan, “Thomas Hobbes”, The Stanford

Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Spring 2021 Edition), Edward N. Zalta (ed.), online:
https://plato.stanford.edu/ar- chives/sum2022/entries/hobbes/ was later identified as also
containing text that was identical or near identical to passages from the Essay. Once again, in her
Affidavit, Professor Khon provided a side-by-side comparison of the wording of the essay and
the Duncan article showing that they were nearly identical.
42.

Based on the extensive overlap between the Essay and the three online sources described

above, Professor Kohn believed that the Essay constitutes plagiarism and referred the matter to
the Office of the Dean and Vice-Principal (Academic) at UTSC for further action.
D.

Decision of the Tribunal

43.

The onus is on the University to establish on the balance of probabilities, using clear and

convincing evidence, that the academic offence charged has been committed by the Student.
44.

The Student was charged with an offence under section B.I.1(d) of the Code, because

they knowingly represented as their own an idea or expression of an idea or work of another.
45.

The submission of Assistant Discipline Counsel is that the evidence shows on a balance

of probabilities that the Student plagiarised from the sources to complete the essay. The amount
and nature of overlap between the essay and the sources is too extensive to be a coincidence. The
Student must have known that they were representing the work of others as their own.
46.

The Tribunal finds that there is no other reasonable explanation for the preparation of the

essay. The Student clearly cut and pasted extensive passages from three sources with minor
editing and grammatical changes. There is no originality to the Student’s work. The course

9

syllabus clearly stated that no outside sources were to be used. The Student clearly violated that
direction. The Student is guilty of plagiarism, contrary to section B.I.1(d) of the Code.
E.

Penalty

47.

The matter continued with a hearing on the appropriate sanction. The University

requested that the Tribunal make an order that the Student be given a mark of zero in the course,
a suspension from the University for two years and a notation on their transcript for three years.
48.

Appendix “C” to the Code provides guidance to students on sanctions. Where a finding

of guilt has been made contrary to the Code, where there have been no prior offences a student
should expect to receive a zero in the course, a two-year suspension and a three-year notation.
The University filed several authorities dealing with similar offences involving plagiarism.
Assistant Discipline Counsel referred to ten decisions of this Tribunal. In nine of those decisions
a two-year suspension was made. In the tenth case the suspension was three years. There are no
exceptional circumstances that would warrant deviating from a two-year suspension and threeyear notation in this case.
49.

In addition, Assistant Discipline Counsel reviewed the Mr. C. factors, University of

Toronto v. Mr. C. (Case No. 1976/77-3, November 5, 1976) and applied them to the present case
in relation to the proposed sanction. Here, the Student has not engaged in the discipline process
in any way. The Student has not responded to any communications from Assistant Discipline
Counsel or her office. The Student did not attend the hearing. Regarding character, there is no
evidence of remorse, nor any evidence that the Student will not reoffend. There is no evidence of
extenuating circumstances. Because of the Student’s failure to attend the hearing, the Tribunal
has been provided with no comfort that the Student has reflected or reassessed their behaviour, or
has insight into their conduct.
50.

Regarding the nature of the offence, Assistant Discipline Counsel submitted that the

plagiarism is an offence of the utmost seriousness. As stated in the University of Toronto v. F.A.
(Case No. 766, June 16, 2015) at para 37, plagiarism “undermines the relationship of trust,
learning and teaching between all students and the University. The grave threat that plagiarism
poses to the core of academic integrity warrants a strong penalty. In addition, the sanction must
serve as an effective general deterrent to others, as plagiarism is an ongoing and significant issue
10

for the University.” Finally, there is a need for general deterrence of this conduct. See the
University of Toronto v. B.C. (Case No. 697, January 17, 2014 (Sanction)) at para 14,
“[p]lagiarism is a serious offence. It strikes at the heart of the integrity of academic work, and
cannot be tolerated by an academic institution. Students know this.”
F. Conclusion
51.

The Tribunal finds that the Student is guilty of the academic offence of plagiarism,

contrary to section B.I.1(d) of the Code.
52.

The Tribunal makes the following Order:
1.

The hearing may proceed in the absence of the Student;

2.

The Student is guilty of one count of plagiarism, contrary to section B.I.1(d) of
the Code;

3.

The following sanctions shall be imposed on the Student:
i.

a final grade of zero in POLB72H3Y in Summer 2021;

ii.

a suspension from the University for two years from the date of the order;
and

iii.

a notation of the sanction on the Student’s academic record and transcript
for three years from the date of the order.

4.

This case shall be reported to the Provost for publication of a notice of the
decision of the Tribunal and the sanctions imposed, with the name of the Student
withheld.

Dated at Toronto this 19th day of March 2024

Original signed by:
_________________________________________________
Simon Clements, Chair
On behalf of the Panel
11

