Case 1561

   DATE:

   March 19, 2024

   PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v. X.M. ("the Student")

   HEARING DATE:

   October 19, 2023, via Zoom

   PANEL MEMBERS:

   Simon Clements, Chair
   Professor Dionne Aleman, Faculty Panel Member
   Alexander Bowie, Student Panel Member

   APPEARANCES:
   Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg
   Rothstein LLP
   Sonia Patel, Co-Counsel,Â Paliare Roland Rosenberg Rothstein LLP
   Calvin Zhang, Counsel for the Student, Starkman Lawyers

   HEARING SECRETARY:

   Samanthe Huang, Coordinator and Hearing Secretary, Office of Appeals,
   Discipline and Faculty Grievances

   The Student was charged with one count under B.i.1(d) of the Code of
   Behaviour on Academic Matters, 2019 (the âCodeâ), for plagiarism in
   connection with a final essay submitted in a course. In the
   alternative, the Student was charged with one count of knowingly
   obtaining unauthorized assistance in connection with the essay,
   contrary to section B.i.1(b) of the Code. In the further alternative,
   the Student was charged under section B.i.3(b) of the Code for
   knowingly engaging in a form of cheating, academic dishonesty or
   misconduct, fraud or misrepresentation not otherwise described in the
   Code.

   The Student was neither present nor represented at the hearing. The
   University requested that the Panel proceed with the hearing in the
   absence of the Student. The University filed evidence regarding service
   and several attempts to contact the Student by mail, email and by phone
   using information that the Student provided to the University on the
   Repository of Student Information to no avail. Based on the
   Universityâs evidence, the Panel concluded that the Student had
   received reasonable notice of the hearing and the charges pursuant to
   sections 6 and 7 of the Statutory Powers and Procedure Act, and rules
   13 and 21 of the University Tribunalâs Rules of Practice and Procedure.
   Accordingly, the hearing proceeded in the Studentâs absence.

   The Panel reviewed the affidavit evidence of the course professor,
   submitted by the University. Students enrolled in the course were
   evaluated on the basis of, among other things, a final essay worth 40%
   of the final grade in the course. Students were expressly prohibited
   from using secondary texts or sources, and were to use only the
   required course text. The Studentâs essay was flagged upon submission
   to Turnitin, a website which detects plagiarism, and identified several
   passages from the essay that were identical or near identical to the
   text of two online sources, neither of which were the required course
   text, the only permitted source. Based on the extensive overlap between
   the essay and the online sources, the professor believed that the essay
   constituted plagiarism. Based on the Universityâs evidence, the Panel
   found that the Student was guilty of plagiarism, contrary to section
   B.i.1(d) of the Code.

   In determining the appropriate sanction, the Panel considered the
   submission of the University and the sanctioning factors in University
   of Toronto v. Mr. C. (Case No. 1976/77-3, November 5, 1976). With
   respect to the Studentâs character, the Panel noted that the Student
   had failed to engage in the discipline process in any way, and there
   was no evidence that the Student had reflected or reassessed their
   behaviour, or shown insight into their conduct. Regarding the nature of
   the offence and the need for deterrence, the Panel accepted the
   Universityâs submission that plagiarism poses a grave threat to the
   core of academic integrity that warrants a strong penalty, capable of
   general deterrence to others.

   The Panel imposed the following sanction: a final grade of grade of
   zero in the course; a two-year suspension from the University;
   three-year notation on Studentâs academic record and transcript; and a
   report to Provost for publication.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/31580
