Report 395

DATE:

   May 23, 2018

PARTIES:

   Mr. F.Z. (the âStudentâ) v. the Faculty of Faculty of Arts and Science

Hearing Date(s):

   April 12, 2018

Committee Members:

   Ms. Vanessa Laufer (Chair)
   Professor Avrum Gotlieb, Faculty Governor
   Ms. Mama Adobea Nii Owoo, Student Governor

Secretaries:

   Mr. Chris Lang, Director, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances
   Ms. Tracey Gameiro, Associate Director Appeals, Discipline and Faculty
   Grievances

Appearances:

For the Student:

   The Student

For the Faculty of Arts and Science:

   Mr. Robert A. Centa, Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenbert Rothstein LLP
   Ms. Emily Home, Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenbert Rothstein LLP
   Professor Melanie Woodin, Associate Dean, Undergraduate Issues and
   Academic Planning, Faculty of Arts and Science

   Appeal by the Student of a decision from Academic Appeals Board for the
   Faculty of Arts and Science (AAB) that denied the Student aegrotat
   standing, late withdrawal without academic penalty, and the opportunity
   to rewrite the deferred exam on the basis of medical, procedural and
   compassionate grounds. The Student had completed the coursework and had
   written two and a half hours of the three-hour final exam because he
   was experiencing abdominal pains. The Student received a grade of 48%
   on the final exam. The Faculty granted the Studentâs request to receive
   a reread of the final exam and recheck of the final course mark, which
   resulted in the final exam mark being confirmed and a re-weighing of
   the Studentâs course work so that it comprised a larger portion of the
   course mark.Â  The Student passed the course and graduated with honours
   from the University in 2014.

   Both sides had waived issues of timeliness. However, the Committee
   noted that it was reasonable for the AAB to determine that the Student
   had not met all of these requirements to file a petition set out in the
   Facultyâs rules and regulations when he had originally filed the
   petition on September 27, 2011. The petition was accompanied only by
   the signed medical certificate and the Studentâs email to the
   Registrar, which the Committee found was reasonable for the AAB to
   conclude was not sufficient to be an âaccompanying statementâ within
   the meaning of the Facultyâs rules concerning petitions. The Committee
   recommended that it would be helpful for faculties to establish clear
   policies to communicate to students when a petition has been received,
   whether or not the petition received is complete; and that makes the
   deadline for completion of a petition explicit.

   In dismissing the Studentâs request for aegrotat standing (AEG), the
   Committee referred to the University Assessment and Grading Practices
   Policy, January 26, 2012 , which provides that aegrotat standing may be
   granted âon the basis of term work and medical or similar evidence
   where the student was not able to write the final examination in the
   course. AEG is assigned by a division upon approval of a studentâs
   petition. It carries credit for the course but is not considered for
   averaging purposes.â The Faculty of Arts and Sciences Rules &
   Regulations 2011-12 Academic Calendar , provides that aegrotat standing
   ââ¦ may be authorized only by petitionâ¦.âand that ââ¦ The claim of
   illness â¦ is not sufficient grounds in itself to guarantee approval of
   the request.â The Committee found that the Studentâs medical
   circumstances were not severe enough to grant Aegrotat standing and
   that even if they were, the policy states that experiencing an illness
   does not in itself guarantee approval.Â  Â The Committee found that it
   was reasonable for the AAB to have concluded that the Student had
   completed, and not abandoned, the exam. Further, the Committee
   supported the AABâs finding that prior to the exam the Student had only
   completed 35% of the course work, which was not sufficient coursework
   to grant aegrotat standing.

   The Committee went on to dismiss the Studentâs request for late
   withdrawal without academic penalty (WDR) on the basis of the Facultyâs
   Petition Guide which provides that WDR after the end of classes is a
   remedy reserved where circumstances beyond the studentâs control arose
   after the last date for course cancellation, and is not appropriate
   where a student has completed all the course work. The Committee
   supported the AABâs finding that the Student did not abandon the exam
   and had finished the course, especially since he had received a regrade
   and had been accommodated by his instructor in re-weighing the
   coursework and receiving a deferral of the final exam.

   The Committee dismissed the Studentâs request to rewrite the final exam
   on the basis of the finding of fact that the Student had not abandoned
   the exam, as well, the Committee felt that too much time had passed
   since the exam was written (close to six years ago) that it would place
   an undue burden on the Student and on the instructor to recreate an
   appropriate exam. In these circumstances, the Committee found an exam
   rewrite would be neither fair nor reasonable. The Studentâs allegations
   of bias and insufficient reasons were dismissed on the basis of
   insufficient evidence supporting the submissions.

   Appeal dismissed.
   [1]View Report

References

   1. file:///media/12640
