Case 821

DATE:

   April 28, 2016

PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v T.I.

Hearing Date(s):

   April 20, 2016

Panel Members:

   Roslyn Tsao, Chair
   Michael Saini, Faculty Member
   David Kleinman, Student Member

Appearances:

   Robert Centa, Assistant Discipline Counsel
   Lauren Pearce, Student-at-Law, Paliare Roland Barristers
   Michael Jones, Program Coordinator, Institute for Communication,
   Culture, Information & Technology
   Rahul Sethi, Instructor of the Course
   Catherine Seguin, Deanâs Designate, University of Toronto Mississauga

In Attendance:

   Lucy Gaspini, Manager, Academic Integrity and Affairs, University of
   Toronto Mississauga
   Tracey Gameiro, Associate Director, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty
   Grievances
   Student charged with four offences under s. B.i.1(d) , one offence
   under s. B.i.1(b) and, in the alternative, two offences under s.
   B.i.3(b) of the Code . The charges related to allegations from two
   separate courses; in the first, the Student was charged with plagiarism
   and obtaining unauthorized assistance in connection with a take home
   Quiz, and in the second, the Student was charged with plagiarism in
   connection with three separate Assignments. The Student was not present
   at the hearing. The Panel concluded that the efforts made to contact
   the Student by email were reasonable pursuant to Paragraph 9(c) of the
   Rules of Practice and Procedure . The Panel ordered that the hearing
   proceed in the Studentâs absence.
   Student was found guilty with respect to the four charges of
   plagiarism. The University then withdrew the unauthorized aid charge
   and the alternative academic dishonesty charges. The Student readily
   admitted to plagiarizing material from the internet for the Quiz and
   Assignments in a meeting with the Deanâs designate. The Panel took into
   account the Studentâs admission of guilt and evidence from the Course
   Instructor as to the marked difference between the Studentâs rough
   drafts and final submitted assignments. The Panel also took into
   account a number of aggravating factors, including that the Student had
   participated and been sanctioned in the discipline process fewer than 4
   months before these Charges were brought, that the Student was in her
   third year of studies, that the Charges relate to plagiarism over two
   courses and two terms and multiple assignments, that there were
   deliberate and deceitful acts undertaken by the Student in an attempt
   to hide the plagiarism from detection, and that the Student admitted
   her guilt but did not participate with counsel to create an Agreed
   Statement of Facts, which would have reduced the Tribunalâs time and
   resources. The Panel accepted the Universityâs submissions on sanction
   and imposed a grade assignment of zero in both Courses; a 4-year
   suspension; a 5-year notation on the Studentâs academic record and
   transcript; and that the case be reported to the Provost for
   publication.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12904
