UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
GOVERl~ING COUNCIL

Report # 348 of the Academic Appeals Committee
October 18, 2010

To the Academic Board
University of Toronto

Your Committee reports that it held a hearing on Friday, October I, 20 I 0, at which the following
were present:
Ms. Renu Manclhane, Chair
Professor Denise Belsham
Professor William Gough
Dr. Sarita Verma
Ms. Joeita Gupta
Secretary: Mr. Christopher Lang, Director, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances
In Attendance:
Mr. M . K., the Student
Professor Angela Lange and Ms. Sandra Speller, University of Toronto Mississauga, the
Respondent

I.

The Appeal

The Student is appealing the October I, 2009 decision of the University of Toronto Mississauga
("UTM") Academic Appeals Board, denying his petition for late withdrawal without academic
penalty from two courses in which he was enrolled during the 2009 summer session: PHL283H5
and PHL370H5.
II.

Facts

The Sh1clent is a certified Canadian immigration consultant, and commenced his studies at UTM
as a mature student in September 2008.
In December 2008, the Student had a child which had an impact on his studies. At the encl of the
2008-2009 academic year, clue to his poor academic perfo1mance, the Sh1clent was placed on
academic probation and advised by UTM not to enroll in summer courses. Despite this advice,
the Student enrolled in four courses during the 2009 summer session. He eventually withdrew

I

from two courses, but remained enrolled in PHL283H5 and PHL370H5. The Student completed
one assignment in PHL283H5, and no assignments in PHL370H5. There was no final exam in
PHL3 70H5, and the Student did not complete the final exam in PHL285H5.
On Thursday, August l 3, 2009, the Student spoke with an academic counselor in the Registrar's
Office at UTM. He was advised that the last day to apply for late withdrawal without academic
th
11
penalty was Monday, August 17, 2009. Between August 13 and August 17' , the Student
weighed his various options in terms of the two courses in which he remained enrolled.
The deadline for withdrawing from summer courses came and went. The Student missed the
deadline. One day after the deadline, on August 18, 2009, the Student submitted an online
petition for an extension for completion of course work for PHL370H5. On or about August 19,
2009, the Student withdrew his August I 8th petition, and petitioned for late withdrawal without
academic penalty for both courses. These petitions were denied and he failed both courses. The
Shident's GPA dropped below the minimum threshold established by UTM and he was
subsequently suspended for one year. The Shident now applies to your Committee for late
withdrawal without academic penalty from PHL283H5 and PHL370H5.

III.

Previous Decisions

On August I 9, 2009, the Student filed petitions for late withdrawal without academic penalty
from PHL283H5 and PHL370H5. On September I, 2009, the Committee on Standing at UTM
refused both of the Student's petitions.
The Student eventually appealed to the UTM Academic Appeals Board. His appeal was denied.
In a letter dated October I, 2009, the Board wrote as follows:

I.

On the basis of your presentation at the meeting and your overall academic
record, the members of the Board decided that you did not have a compelling case
for an exemption from the University regulations that apply to all students.

2.

The Board believes that you did have sufficient time to drop the courses before
August 17th Yet despite ample opportunities to drop the courses on time, you
make a conscious decision to leave that process to the very last minute.

3.

Given your academic record, your approach to your shidies that you described to
the Board, and the myriad of issues plaguing your personal life, the Board felt that
the one year suspension was in your best interest, for it would allow you to deal
with your personal issues, and to develop your academic skills.

The Student now appeals the decision of the UTM Academic Appeals Board to the Academic
Appeals Committee of Governing Council.

2

IV.

Decision

Submissions
In his written and oral submissions to your Committee, the Student noted that the birth of his
child and other family issues negatively affected his performance in PHL283H5 and PHL370H5.
The Student was candid and forthcoming in his oral submissions regarding the unexpected and
serious family issue that arose on August I 7th which resulted in him missing the deadline to
petition. Your Committee notes that, tln·oughout the various proceedings, UTM has accepted
that the events on August I 7th occurred and were, indeed, unexpected and serious, and
maintained this position at the hearing before your Committee.
However, UTM refuses to grant the Student relief on the basis that, regardless of the events of
unexpected and serious events of August I 711\ he had sufficient time to drop the courses prior to
that date. Given that the Student completed little or no work in the two courses and had
previously sought academic counseling in regards to his options, UTM argues that the Student
should not have waited until the last minute to drop the courses. By waiting until the deadline,
UTM' s position is that the Student took a calculated risk, and that relief cannot be sought once
that risk materialized.

Reasons
The Student is seeking late withdrawal without academic penalty from two courses that he took
during the summer of 2009: PHL283H5 and PHL370H5. The Student claims that he missed the
deadline to petition for late withdrawal without academic penalty clue to an unexpected and
serious family issue that arose on August 17th and which prevented him from attending at UTM
in person to file a petition. The Student filed his petition two clays later, on August 19th and
your Committee finds that the Student acted in good faith in so doing. The issue before your
Committee is whether UTJ'vl should have allowed the Student's appeal based on the extenuating
circumstances.
In aniving at its decision, your Committee considered the reasons behind the ability of students
to withdraw late without academic penalty. The remedy of late withdrawal without academic
penalty is an extraordinary remedy, reserved for unusual and unique situations. The idea of
"drop dates" is predicated upon the University's legitimate expectation that a student will make a
decision whether to continue in a course within a reasonable period of time. By the drop date,
the student is expected to have assessed his or her situation and made a decision. If the student
elects to continue with the course, the consequences of that election must be accepted and no
allowance will be made for the effect of circumstances existing at the drop date however
detrimental to the student's perfonnance they may be. Exceptions to this policy are rare, but
may include situations where unexpected circumstances arise after the "drop elate", where preexisting circumstances significantly worsen, or where pre-existing circumstances that were
reasonably expected to abate do not.
While UTM denies the Student relief on the basis that he could have dropped the courses in
advance of August 17th, your Committee notes that, under the normal circumstances, this is not a

3

factor that should be considered in determining whether to grant relief in such cases. The very
existence of a "drop date" implies that students are entitled to wait until that date to make their
final decision, regardless of how forgone that decision may seem to the University.
Your Committee accepts that there was an unexpected and serious family issue that arose on
August 17th, and finds that the Student falls into the nmTow exceptions noted above where
extenuating circumstances require allowing late withdrawal without academic penalty after the
stated deadline.
Your Committee unanimously allows the Student's appeal and wishes the Stt1dent success in his
continued studies at the University of Toronto.
The appeal is allowed.

4

