Report 348

DATE:

   October 18, 2010

PARTIES:

   M.K.,Â  (the Student) v. UTM

Hearing Date(s):

   October 1, 2010

Committee Members:

   Renu Mandhane, Chair
   Prof. Denise Belsham
   Prof. William Gough
   Dr. Sarita Verma
   Joeita Gupta

Appearances:

For the Student Appellant:

   M.K. (the Student)

For the University of Toronto School of Graduate Studies:

   Prof. Angela Langef
   Sandra Speller

   Appeal of a decision to deny the Student their petition for a late
   withdrawal without academic penalty from two courses. The Student was a
   mature student and had a child during the 2008-2009 calendar year. The
   Student was placed on academic probation during that year and was
   advised by UTM not to enrol in summer courses. The Student did so
   despite this advice. The Student eventually withdrew from two courses,
   remaining in the two courses that came under review by the Committee.
   The Student spoke to an academic counsellor and was advised of the
   deadline for withdrawal without academic penalty. The Student missed
   the deadline. The Student submitted a petition for an extension of
   completion of coursework for one course the day after the deadline. Two
   days after the deadline, the Student withdrew their petition and
   petitioned for late withdrawal without academic penalty from both
   courses. The petitions were denied and the Student failed both courses
   and was subsequently suspended for one year due to their poor GPA. The
   Student submitted that the birth of their child and other family issues
   negatively affected their performance. The Committee found the Student
   was candid and forthcoming in their oral submissions regarding an
   unexpected and serious family issue that arose on the day of the
   deadline which resulted in the Student missing the deadline. The
   Committee noted that UTM had accepted that the event that occurred on
   the deadline date was, in fact, unexpected and serious. UTM submitted
   that since the Student had sufficient time to drop the courses prior to
   the unforeseen event and the deadline, the Student should not be
   granted relief. The Committee found that the very existence of a drop
   date or a deadline for withdrawal implies that students are entitled to
   wait until that very date to make their final decision. The Committee
   accepted that there was an unexpected and serious family issue that
   arose on the day of the deadline and that the Student fell into the
   narrow exception where extenuating circumstances required allowing late
   withdrawal without academic penalty. Appeal allowed.
   [1]View Report

References

   1. file:///media/12672
