Report 363 w Appendix 359-1

DATE:

   February 7, 2012

PARTIES:

   Mr. H.M.; Ms. M.Y.Â  v. the School of Graduate Studies

Hearing Date(s):

   November 25, 2011

Committee Members:

   Prof. Hamish Stewart, Chair
   Prof. Andrea Sass-Kortsak
   Mr. Kenneth Davy

Secretary:

   Mr. Christopher Lang, Director, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty
   Grievances

Observer:

   Mr. Jason Marin, Administrative Assistant, Appeals, Discipline and
   Faculty Grievances

Appearances:

For the Students:

   Mr. H.M.
   Ms. M.Y.

For SGS:

   Mr. Robert Centa, Counsel
   Ms. Julia Wilkes
   Vice-Dean Berry Smith
   Ms. Jane Alderdice, Director Quality Assessment and Governance

   Request for late withdrawal without academic penalty; grading of tests;
   recommendation of rebate or cancellation of tuition. The Students did
   not write the exams and as a result had received grades of FZ in five
   courses they took in their first year Ph.D. program. In the next term,
   the Students were permitted to audit the first module of two courses
   and to write the test for that module. However, the Students never
   registered for the academic year, and thus the Department refused to
   grade the tests. The Committee decided to treat the Studentsâ cases as
   one since their issues were almost identical (the Students were married
   to each other). In addition to the remedies mentioned above, the
   Students also sought other remedies such as prompt registration and
   guaranteed funding. However, the Committee held in Motion Decision
   #359-1 that the only issues for which the AAC had jurisdiction to grant
   remedies were (1) whether the grades of FZ should be replaced, (2)
   whether the Department should grade the tests the Students took in
   later period, and (3) whether the AAC should recommend any rebate or
   cancellation of fees. As for the first issue, the male Studentâs father
   died about a month before their exams, and neither wrote the exams.
   Between the death of the male Studentâs father and about one month
   after the exams when the Department contacted the Students to discuss
   their termination, the Students made no request for special
   consideration for failing to write the exams. The Committee found that
   the Students had not offered a satisfactory explanation for their
   failure to make a timely request for special consideration on account
   of these circumstances. Although the male Student submitted and the
   Committee accepted that he was not feeling good enough to go to school
   and it took him a month and a half to recover, the Committee held that
   there was nothing to indicate why the Studentâs circumstances were so
   severe as to prevent making a request for special consideration. As for
   the female Student, the Committee found that there was nothing at all
   to indicate why she was unable to make such a request. Moreover, given
   that the Students were previously given special consideration, the
   Committee did not find credible the Studentâs claim that he did not
   make the request because he had the impression that such a request
   would not be granted. Thus, the Committee held that neither Student was
   entitled to the extraordinary remedy of late withdrawal without
   penalty. As for the second issue, the Committee found that the tests,
   which the Students wrote in the subsequent term for the courses in
   question, should not be graded because the Students were not registered
   at the time. Finally, the Committee held that since the Students had
   not succeeded in having the FZ grades removed, there was no reason to
   make any recommendation concerning rebate or cancellation of tuition.
   Appeal dismissed.
   [1]View Report

References

   1. file:///media/12604
