Case No.: 1035
THE UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
IN THE MATTER OF charges of academic dishonesty filed on February 20, 2019,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic
Matters, 1995 (“the Code”),
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Act, 1971, S.O. 1971, c. 56 as am.
S.O. 1978, c. 88
B E T W E E N:
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO (“the University”)
- and Y

S

(“the Student”)

Hearing Date: September 9, 2019
Members of the Panel:
Mr. Bernard Fishbein, Chair
Professor Lynne Howarth, Faculty Panel Member
Mr. Rory Smith, Student Panel Member
Appearances:
Ms. Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg Rothstein LLP
Mr. Brian Hauff, Representative for the Student
In Attendance:
The Student
Hearing Secretary:
Ms. Jennifer Dent, Associate Director, Office of the Appeals, Discipline and Faculty
Grievances

1.

On or about February 20, 2019 the Student was advised that she had been

charged under the University of Toronto’s Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters (the
“Code”) as follows:

1.

On or about November 29, 2017, you knowingly

represented as your own an idea or expression of an idea,
and/or the work of another in a written assignment titled “Man
Ray’s Subversion of the Classical form” (“Assignment 2”) that
you submitted in partial completion of the requirements for
FAH101H5F (“Course”) contrary to section B.I.1(d) of the
Code.
2.

In the alternative to paragraph 1, on or about November

29, 2017, you knowingly used or possessed an unauthorized
aid or obtained unauthorized assistance in Assignment 2 that
you submitted in partial completion of the requirements for the
Course contrary to section B.I.1(b) of the Code.
3.

In the alternative to paragraphs 1 and 2, on or about

November 29, 2017, you engaged in a form of cheating,
academic

dishonesty

or

misconduct,

fraud

or

misrepresentation not otherwise described in the Code in
connection with Assignment 2 submitted in order to obtain
academic credit or other academic advantage of any kind in
the Course, contrary to section B.I.3(b) of the Code.
The particulars related to the charges are as follows:

1.

At all material times, you were a registered Student

at the University of Toronto Mississauga.
2.

In Fall 2017, you registered in the Course, which

was taught by Professor Bernice Iarocci.

2

3.

Students in the Course were required to submit a

written assignment worth 15% of the final grade in the
Course.
4.

On or about November 29, 2017, you submitted

your Assignment 2, titled “Man Ray’s Subversion of the
Classical form” for credit in the Course.
5.

You submitted Assignment 2 after knowingly using

an unauthorized aid and/or obtaining unauthorized
assistance to write it, and knowing that it contained ideas
and the expression of ideas, and text from an unnamed
source or sources which were not written by you and to
which you gave no attribution.
6.

You knowingly represented the work of another

person, or persons, as your own. You knowingly included
in Assignment 2 ideas and expressions that were not your
own, but were the ideas and expressions of another
person, or persons, which you did not properly
acknowledge in your Assignment.
7.

You knowingly submitted Assignment 2 with the

intention that the University of Toronto rely on it as
containing your own ideas, expressions of ideas or work
in considering the appropriate academic credit to be
assigned to your work.
8.

For the purposes of obtaining academic credit

and/or other academic advantage, you knowingly
committed plagiarism in and used an unauthorized aid
and/or obtained unauthorized assistance with your
Assignment 2 in the Course.

3

2.

At the hearing, the University advised this panel of the Tribunal that if it was

successful in securing a conviction on the first charge (namely plagiarism contrary to
section B.1.1(d) of the Code) it would withdraw the two remaining charges.

3.

Immediately proceeding the commencement of the hearing, the University and

the Student entered into the following agreed statement of facts:

1.

For the purposes of this hearing under the Code of

Behaviour on Academic Matters (“Code”), the Provost of the
University of Toronto (the “Provost” and the “University”) and
the Student have prepared this Agreed Statement of Facts
(“ASF”) and a Joint Book of Documents (“JBD”). The Provost
and the Student agree that:
(a)

each document contained in the JBD may be

admitted into evidence for all purposes, including for the
truth of the document’s contents (unless otherwise
indicated in this ASF), without further need to prove the
document; and
(b)

if a document indicates that it was sent or received

by someone, that is prima facie proof that the document
was sent and received as indicated.
A. Charges and Guilty Plea
2.

This hearing arises out of charges of academic

misconduct filed by the Provost on February 20, 2019. A copy
of the charges is included in the JBD at Tab 1
3.

The Student admits she received a copy of the charges,

waives the reading of the charges, and pleads guilty to
charges 1, 2 and 3.

4

4.

The Provost agrees that if the Tribunal makes a finding of

academic misconduct with respect to charge 1 the Provost will
withdraw charges 2 and 3.
5.

The notice of hearing in this matter is included in the JBD

at Tab 2. The Student acknowledges that she received both
the notice of hearing and reasonable notice of this hearing.
6.

The Student first registered at the University of Toronto

Mississauga (“UTM”) in the fall of 2016. As of August 29,
2019, she had earned 5.00 credits, with a cumulative GPA of
1.48. At the end of the 2018 Winter term she was suspended
for one year because of her low CGPA. She returned for the
2019 Summer term and is registered in courses for the Fall
2019 and Winter 2020 terms.

A copy of the Student’s

academic record is included in the JBD at Tab 3.
7.

The Student is an international Student from China,

attending the University on a Student visa. English is not her
first language.
8.

In the Fall 2017 term the Student was enrolled in

FAH101H5F: Introduction to Art History (the “Course”), taught
by Professor Bernice Iarocci. A copy of the course syllabus
for FAH101H5F, which contains a section about academic
integrity, and plagiarism in particular, is included in the JBD at
Tab 4.
9.

Students in the Course were required to submit two

written assignments worth 8% and 15% respectively.
10. The Student submitted her first assignment titled “Writing
Assignment #1: Formal Analysis” (“Assignment 1”) on

5

September 26, 2017. A copy of Assignment 1 is included in
the JBD at Tab 5.
11. The Student submitted her second assignment titled
“Paper2, Man Ray’s Subversion of the Classical Form”,
(“Assignment 2”) on November 29, 2017.

A copy of

Assignment 2 is included in the JBD at Tab 6.
12. Professor

Iarocci

determined

that

the

concepts,

vocabulary and grammar in Assignment 2 were significantly
more sophisticated than in Assignment 1, and that it was
highly unlikely that the Student had written Assignment 2.
13. A copy of the Student’s marks for the various evaluation
components in the Course is included in the JBD at Tab 7.
14. The Student attended a meeting with the dean’s
designate, Professor Elkabas, on October 24, 2018, to
discuss the University’s concerns about the authorship of
Assignment 2 (“Dean’s Meeting”). At the beginning of the
meeting Professor Elkabas administered the Dean’s Warning
from section C.i.(a)6 of the Code. During the Dean’s Meeting
The Student confirmed that Assignment 2 was her own work,
and not someone else’s work.

She explained that her

roommate helped her to translate some Chinese words to
English, and that he helped her with five sentences, but that
she had not received any other assistance with Assignment
2.
15. At the conclusion of the Dean’s Meeting the Student
signed a standard form indicating that she was not guilty of an
academic offence. A copy of the Academic Integrity Student

6

Form signed by the Student on October 24, 2018 is included
in the JBD at Tab 8.
B. Admissions and Acknowledgements
16. The Student acknowledges that at all material times she
was provided with information about academic integrity, and
about plagiarism in particular, and that she had access to
sufficient resources to understand how to avoid plagiarism.
17. The Student now admits that:
(a)

she hired someone to help her write Assignment 2

for $25 per hour;
(b)

while she participated somewhat in the work on the

paper, she received such significant help from the person
she hired that she was surprised by the high quality of the
final product and was not familiar with all of the words and
ideas used in it;
(c)

she submitted Assignment 2 as if it was her own

work, knowing that it was not, for academic credit; and
(d)

she intended for the University to rely on

Assignment 2 as being her own work, and to give her
academic credit for it, despite it not being her own work.
18. The Student admits that she knowingly represented the
ideas of another person, the expression of the ideas of
another person, and the work of another person as her own,
without attribution, and that in doing so she committed
plagiarism in her Assignment 2, contrary to section B.i.1(d) of
the Code.

7

19. The Student further admits that she knowingly obtained
unauthorized assistance with her Assignment 2 by hiring
another person to write Assignment 2 for her, contrary to
section B.1.1(b) of the Code.
20. The Student acknowledges that:
(a)

the Provost has advised her of her right to obtain

legal counsel and she has done so; and
(b)

she is signing this ASF freely and voluntarily,

knowing of the potential consequences she faces.
4.

After giving both the University and the Student an opportunity to make any

further representations they wished, based on the agreed statement of facts, the
admissions of the Student and her guilty plea this panel of the Tribunal unanimously held
that the violation of section B.1.1(d) of the Code had been made out. As agreed the
University withdrew the other charges.

5.

Again immediately prior to this panel of the Tribunal commencing its hearing

about sanctions, the Student and the University entered into the following Agreed
Statement of Facts on Penalty:

1. This matter arises out of charges of academic misconduct
filed on February 20, 2019 by the Provost of the University of
Toronto (the “Provost”) under the Code of Behaviour on
Academic Matters (“Code”). The Provost and [the Student]
have prepared this Agreed Statement of Facts on Penalty
(“ASF on Penalty”) and a Joint Book of Document on Penalty
(“JBD on Penalty”). The Provost and [the Student] agree that:

(a) each document attached to this ASF on Penalty may
be admitted into evidence at the Tribunal for all purposes,

8

including for the truth of the document’s contents, without
further need to prove the document;
(b) if a document indicates that it was sent or received by
someone, that is prima facie proof that the document was
sent and received as indicated; and
(c) this ASF on Penalty uses the same defined terms as
those used in the Agreed Statement of Facts.
2. In the Fall of 2016 [the Student] was enrolled in LIN204H5F:
English Grammar I, taught by Professor Michelle Troberg.
3. [The Student] submitted a number of test assignments for
credit in LIN204H5F, which she completed electronically.
Assignments 3 and 4 were worth a total of 14% of the overall
mark in LIN204H5F. At the beginning of each of Assignment
3 and Assignment 4, the first question asked [the Student] to
confirm that she was completing the assignment on her own,
that the results of the assignment would reflect her own
understanding of the course material and not anyone else’s,
and that she was familiar with the University’s policy on
academic integrity.

Question 1 contained a link to the

University’s policy on Academic Integrity.

A copy of

Assignment 3 is included in the JBD on Penalty at Tab 1; a
copy of Assignment 4 is included in the JBD on Penalty at Tab
2.
4. When marking the two assignments Professor Troberg
became concerned that each of Assignment 3 and
Assignment 4 appeared to contain material reproduced from
outside sources without proper acknowledgement.

9

5. Professor Michael Lettieri, Dean’s Designate, sent a letter
via email to [the Student] on June 16, 2017 alleging that she
obtained

unauthorized

assistance

while

completing

Assignments 3 and 4. He invited her to consider waiving the
right to a dean’s meeting to expedite her case by signing a
form in which she admitted to the offences and accepted the
proposed sanctions of a mark of zero for both assignments
and a notation on her transcript for twelve months, to June 23,
2018.
6. [The Student] accepted the offer, and signed the form on
June 20, 2017.

In signing the form, [the Student]

acknowledged that she understood that any subsequent
allegations of academic misconduct would be treated as a
second offence and sanctioned accordingly. A copy of the
Academic Discipline form signed by [the Student] on June 20,
2017 is included in the JBD at Tab 3.
Acknowledgments
7. [The Student] acknowledges that:
a.

the Provost advised her of her right to obtain legal

counsel, and she has done so; and
b.

she is signing this ASF on Penalty freely and

voluntarily, knowing of the potential consequences she
faces.
6.

After the panel was presented with the executed Agreed Statement of Facts

(and the accompanying Joint Book of Documents on Penalty) counsel for the Student
wished to provide the Tribunal with a number of additional documents consisting of:

10

(a)

a letter dated July 25, 2019 from counsel for the
Student to Assistant Discipline Counsel for the
University;

(b)

a document containing various definitions;

(c)

a letter dated July 22, 2019 from the Student to her
counsel; and

(d)

a letter of apology dated July 24, 2019 from the
Student.

After some discussion about this unusual method of procedure (the parties having already
agreed to statement of facts on penalty and a joint book of documents), the University did
not object to the admission of any of the documents other than the third document, the
letter dated July 22, 2019 from the Student to her counsel which purported to elaborate
or explain further what was in the Agreed Statement of Facts on Penalty. In the view of
the University, that would be hearsay and could not be accepted for the truth of its
contents because it had not been subjected to cross-examination.

In these

circumstances, counsel for the Student agreed that the Student could be cross-examined.
This was acceptable to the University.
7.

Accordingly, the Student affirmed and was cross-examined by counsel for the

University. Most of the cross-examination (as well on the additional documents) do not
significantly add to what was already in the Agreed Statement of Facts on Penalty. To
the extent that there is some material evidence that arises from that cross-examination,
it will be specifically referred to in these reasons.
8.

The University and the Student were then given opportunity to make

submissions on sanction. The University sought the following sanctions:
(a) a final grade of zero in the course FAH101H5F for 2017
Fall;

11

(b) a five year suspension from the University of Toronto
commencing on the date of the Tribunal’s order and ending
August 31,2024;
(c) a notation of this sanction on her academic record and
transcript from the date of the Tribunal’s order for six years;
and
(d) that this case shall be reported to the Provost for
publication of a notice of the decision of the Tribunal and the
sanctions imposed with the Student’s name withheld.
The only issue really in dispute was the length of the suspension that the University
sought.
9.

The University reviewed in some detail the authorities in the book of authorities

it provided to the panel:
i.

The University of Toronto andS.C, N.R.H and M.K.K,
Case Nos. 596, 597 and 598, November 23, 2011
(“S.C.”);

ii.

The University of Toronto and A.K.T., Case No. 645, May
20, 2011;

iii.

The University of Toronto and J.W., Case No. 1082,
August 23, 2019;

iv.

The University of Toronto and P.H.Q., Case No. 982, May
8, 2019;

v.

University of Toronto and A.A.D., Case No. 972,
September 26, 2018;

12

vi.

The University of Toronto and Y.T., Case No. 783, July
21, 2015; and

vii.

The University of Toronto and K.H., Case No. 602, May
6, 2011.

10.

In particular, the University relied upon and extensively referred to the decision

of the Discipline Appeals Board of the Tribunal in S.C., et al case, supra, which
established the general framework for how this type of academic misconduct ought to be
dealt with by the Tribunal. In that case all of the students charged pleaded guilty to having
committed plagiarism, contrary to section B.1.1(d) of the Code, like here. The Tribunal
however split on sanction. The majority imposed, inter alia, a five year suspension. The
Chair of the panel, in dissent, would have recommended expulsion of the student to the
Governing Council of the University. The focus of the lengthy decision of the Discipline
Appeals Board was on this difference in sanction and what the appropriate sanction
should be in the circumstances. Since the parties here also disagreed on sanction it is
useful to review in some length portions of the decision of the Appeals Board in S.C..
Again in that case, the three students pleaded guilty to a violation of the Code in that they
purchased an essay and submitted it as their own work for an assignment worth 30% of
the final grade of the particular course. The purchased papers were all different and
purported to be “custom essays”. Each of the students had committed at least two prior
offences of academic misconduct. Moreover, there was no dispute, at least in the view
of the majority, of the “clear and unwavering of expression of remorse by each of the
students”. The Appeal Board described that as follows at para 69:
“The majority found that each of the students were well and
truly afraid and panicked by the thought of being expelled and
afraid for the reactions of their parents. They were appalled
by their own actions and by their fundamental failure to heed
the prior warnings of the Dean when they were caught
cheating on two previous occasions.

It appeared to the

majority these students were deeply shamed and profoundly

13

ashamed of what they had done. The majority found that it
was this process of trial that had brought home for the
students the need for change.”
11.

The Appeal Board began its analysis by “explaining” the nature of the offence

(a violation of section B.i.1(d) of the Code) at paras 104 - 109:
104. As previous decisions of this Board make clear,
purchasing academic work for a fee and then submitting that
work with a view to securing academic credit, has always
been considered among the very most, to use the majority’s
description, “egregious” offences a student can commit in the
University environment. There are a number of reasons for
this. First, in taking these steps, there is clear evidence of
intention, deliberation and knowing deception, both in the
planning, managing and completion of the offence, all of
which occurs over a period of time, as in this case. As well,
the act of paying for the services of another in this context,
introduces a commercial element into the relationship of a
student with the University, a factor very distant from the core
values of an academic institution, where individual effort,
intellectual thought and hard work are the hallmarks.
105. Moreover, this particular variety of plagiarism is quite
different and more severe than the usual appropriation of the
work of another through internet sources or the many ways
that existing work can be commandeered. With purchased
work, as the advertising of The Essay Place [from where the
accused students had purchased the essays] makes clear,
the Student buys an original work, tailored to the specific
subject and which will not be found through the increasing

14

sophisticated antennae of Professors and their electronic
helpers.
106. But for the trail of metadata left in this case, these frauds
may well have gone undetected, or come up short against
student denials…
…
109. This Appeals Board panel then starts its consideration
from this assumption – expulsion should be considered as
a likely, perhaps the most likely, sanction in cases of
students purchasing and submitting purchased essays
as their own work, for academic credit.
[emphasis added]
12.

The Appeal Board then reviewed the principles of the C case, (Case # 1976/77-

3, November 5, 1976), also a decision of the Appeal Boards in 1976, and long recognized
as the leading decision on sentencing principles for the Tribunal. Those factors are:
(a) the character of the person charged;
(b) the likelihood of repetition of the offence;
(c) the nature of the offence committed;
(d) any

extenuating

circumstances

surrounding

the

commission of the offence;
(e) the detriment to the University by the offence; and
(f) the need to deter others from committing a similar
offence.

15

13.

These sentencing principles have been adopted in numerous cases by the

Tribunal (too numerous to list). As described in A.K.T., supra, a decision also referred
to us by the University, at paragraph 21:
These sentencing principles have been adopted in numerous
cases by the University Tribunal. The Tribunal believes that,
in addition to these basic principles, there should be some
measure of uniformity or proportionality in the sentencing
process so that there should be similar sentences imposed for
offences committed in similar circumstances.

Penalties

imposed on students at the University should preserve and
ensure fairness by avoiding disproportionate sentences so
there are not wide swings or inconsistencies between like
offences and like offenders, recognizing there is never a like
offence or a like offender. Having said that, there should not
be rigid rules or formulas applied in the sentencing process.

14.

Although this panel of the Tribunal certainly recognizes that
each case is its own and must be assessed on its own facts,
the guidance of the Appeals Board, particularly in lengthy
reasoned decisions, intended to provide a framework for
Tribunal panels, should not be lightly disregarded.

In

reviewing the factors in the C case, supra, outlined in
S.C,.the Appeal Board said the following:
131. The issue for us however is what effect should be given
to these findings, of which they are really two. The first being
the demeanour and manner in which the students actually
appeared during the hearing and the second being their
expressions of shame, regret and remorse. The majority took

16

both these into account in ameliorating the penalty and
imposing a five year suspension rather than expulsion.
132. In our view, these findings, in this case, cannot be
elevated to that degree of significance when measured
against other principles of sentencing laid down C. In our view
while such evidence is always of importance, it cannot stand
equally or take on more significance than that of deterrence.
In our view with the seriousness of the offences at issue, the
majority erred in placing the emphasis it did on this subjective
component and we would not do so.
…
134. In approaching that issue it might be helpful in light of
our function to decide appeals in a manner that will assist in
ensuring consistency and the fair application of principles to
matters like this coming before trial panels of the University
Tribunal, to set out what we consider to be the appropriate
approach to sentencing in purchased essay cases.
135. While we can accept the general point that Ms. Cohen
and Mr. Trotter’s submissions that each case needs to be
decided on its own particular set of facts and that there should
be no absolute rule, contended for by the Provost, that every
case of a purchased essay should result in expulsion, we
believe that there should be at least a broad set of factors for
panels to make reference to for guidance.
136.

As we stated in paragraph 108 above, and for the

reasons we have expressed, in our view purchased essay
offences are about as serious as can be committed in a
University setting. The Tribunal should therefore approach

17

sentencing in such cases with the working assumption
that expulsion from the institution is the sanction that is
best commensurate with the gravity of the offence. There
is no absolute rule, however, and whether or not expulsion
results will depend upon many factors, as revealed in the
particular case. Prime among those these will be to analyze
and understand the facts of that particular case. Under what
circumstances was the essay purchased and submitted.
What degree of intent and deliberation was involved. What
recognition that the conduct was grave and wrong can be
seen in the Student. Was anyone else involved. Were there
influences that can legitimately influence the penalty. What
were the subsequent events - did the student admit guilt or
attempt to continue the fraud. Is there anything particularly
egregious or saving about the case or are there other factors
that may ameliorate what is otherwise conduct to be
condemned.
137. Has the student learned anything from the entire matter.
Are there true expressions of remorse, regret and
apology, although these even if accepted, will rarely blunt
the force of the offence itself.

Are there extenuating

circumstances and can these be seen to be relevant to the
ultimate sanction.
138. The answers to these questions, even if positive in many
respects, may not blunt the presumption of expulsion, but they
may, and each review will produce its own result.
139. Of course there is the issue of previous academic
offences. If there is none, and an otherwise positive record,
perhaps expulsion will not be the result, as it was not in P.H.

18

If there are one or more, then, whatever their nature, this
is a powerful indication that expulsion may well be
warranted.

If the offence in issue, purchasing and

submitting a bought essay, has been the subject of a
previous discipline process, then it would be most
unusual for that Student to escape expulsion for a second
such offence.
140.

But previous academic offences do not have to be

identical or similar to have that same result.

Previous

offences are indications of continuing dishonest motive and a
failure to recognize and adhere to core University values,
particularly if remorse and regret were pleaded earlier in
mitigation.

All this will be important when measuring the

degree of sanction in such a setting.
141. Finally, a balancing of all the factors involved in
sentencing must occur and be seen to occur as the Tribunal
reaches an ultimate conclusion. In our view, the need for
deterrence in respect of purchased essay cases is very high
in the spectrum of those factors.
…
143. It should also be said that if expulsion is not to result
in a particular case then it would be the rarest of
alternatives that something less than a five year
suspension would be imposed.
[emphasis added]
15.

In the end, the Appeal Board in S.C. while “sympathiz[ing] with the students in

this case and, again, tak[ing] no issue with the findings made by the Tribunal about their

19

states of mind and their expressions of regret” overruled the decision of the majority and
replaced the suspension with the recommendation of expulsion.
16.

The University also referred us to a number of cases where expulsion was also

the sanction imposed; A.K.T., supra (where the purchase of the essay was also from a
commercial enterprise and notwithstanding that the student admitted guilt at the Tribunal
after having initially attempted to deceive the Professor and the Dean’s designate); J.W.,
supra (where there were prior offences and the student did not attend the Tribunal
hearing). The University also pointed us to cases where although not expulsion a five
year suspension was the sanction imposed by the Tribunal; P.H.Q. No.982, supra, (in
view of the extent of cooperation, remorse and the difficult personal circumstances of the
student); A.D., supra (notwithstanding a purchased essay but in view of the mitigating
factors, cooperation, medical challenges and difficult personal circumstances); Y.T.
supra, (where the student admitted that she copied four full paragraphs directly from a
purchased essay) and K.H.H., supra.
17.

Given the framework established in the Appeal Board decision in S.C., and the

subsequent cases, the University sought only a five year suspension and not a
recommendation for expulsion. The University did so notwithstanding that this was the
second offence of academic misconduct (also involving obtaining unauthorized
assistance in completing assignments) and for which the Student had been explicitly
warned that any future allegations of misconduct would be treated as a second offence
and sanctioned accordingly) and notwithstanding the violation involved a commercial
transaction with respect to the assistance - all of which are usually exacerbating factors
in terms of a sanction warranting expulsion. The University was prepared to do so
because the Student had entered into a remedial undertaking to complete six courses
within eight months of her return to the University and the fulfillment of the undertaking
would be a requirement before she could graduate. The University was prepared to
accept this further corroborated the Student’s expressed remorse and apology as well as
demonstrating that at least to some extent, the Student learned from the prior experiences
and would not commit such academic offences in the future. However the University said
these mitigating factors, although compelling enough not to seek expulsion, were not

20

sufficiently compelling in the circumstances to warrant a sanction any less than a five year
suspension, given the seriousness of the offence and the pressing need for good
deterrence in these kind of cases.
18.

Counsel for the Student opposed this sanction. Essentially, the Student argued

that the sanction was too severe. The Student attempted in argument to minimize her
conduct to such an extent that the panel repeatedly questioned whether the Student was
repudiating both agreed statements of fact that she had signed before and during the
proceedings. Counsel for the Student confirmed that she was not resiling from the agreed
statement of fact or the admissions or her guilty plea contained therein.
19.

Notwithstanding that confirmation, the Student still attempted to argue that she

had not really committed plagiarism but rather had only hired a tutor without the
knowledge or obtaining prior permission of her instructor. The Student further argued
that she had language difficulties, and did not understand that she had committed an
academic offence within the concept of “knowingly” in the Code.
20.

Essentially the Student’s argument was that the sanctions ought to be “more

reasonable”. The Student argued that effectively a five year suspension would mean that
the Student was “lost” to the University and (in fact her visa would expire – and she would
be “gone” - long before the suspension ended) and that really nothing was accomplished
by such a severe sanction.
21.

When pressed for what would be the appropriate sanction in this set of

circumstances, counsel for the Student argued that the loss of her previous credits and
compelling her to start her University education over again at the present time (having
been away from the University now for two years entering the course of these
proceedings) would be sufficient. Counsel for the Student presented no precedent or
jurisprudence to support these submissions.
After deliberating, this panel unanimously accepted the University’s recommendation for
sanction and in particular for a five year suspension.

21

22.

This panel accepts that the proper framework for assessing this type of

misconduct, a violation of section B.1(1)(d) of the Code is set out in S.C.. In other words,
for all the reasons set out in S.C., and adopted in subsequent decisions of the Tribunal,
the ordinary and general sanction for violations of section B.I.1(d) of the Code should be
expulsion unless moderated or modified by convincing and persuasive mitigating factors
in which case a five year suspension could be substituted. Of course each case must be
decided on its own facts and there may be unique circumstances in the particular case
which justify and warrant departure from this general statement. However this case is not
one of them.
23.

In seeking only a five year suspension, the University, perhaps to its credit,

overlooked what would otherwise clearly be exacerbating circumstances. This was not
the first incident of academic misconduct and particularly not a first incident with respect
to a violation with respect to providing unauthorized assistance with the preparation of
her own work. Although the Student ultimately did cooperate and admit wrongdoing, it
was only prior to the hearing when the agreed statements were executed and the
admissions and guilty pleas made (after initially denying the allegations at the meeting
with the Professor and the Dean’s representative). Although counsel sought to explain
that by the fact that the Student had previously obtained “bad advice” and which changed
when counsel who attended at the hearing was retained or consulted, it does not alter the
fact that the Student on her own was not initially prepared to admit or “own up” to her
misconduct.

However, the University was prepared to overlook these exacerbating

factors in its recommendation for sanction, and, although we certainly have the authority
to do so and are not bound by the University’s recommendation, we are not prepared to
impose a sanction even greater than the University sought in these circumstances.
24.

The Student however sought to minimize her misconduct by characterizing it as

only mistakenly hiring a tutor without the knowledge or permission of her Professor. That
is not credible and this panel rejects such an explanation for a number of reasons. First,
in the Agreed Statement of Facts, the Student, explicitly admitted that “she knowingly
represented the ideas of another person, the expression of the ideas of another person,
and the work of another person as her own without attribution, and in doing so she

22

committed plagiarism in her assignment, contrary to section B.1.1(d) of the Code”. This
is to say nothing of her admission also in the Agreed Statement of Facts that “she
knowingly obtained unauthorized assistance with her Assignment 2 by hiring another
person to write Assignment 2 for her contrary to section B.1.2(b) of the Code” which
charge the University ultimately withdrew.

All of this was done with and after the

assistance of counsel. Secondly, in the Agreed Statement of Facts, the Student explicitly
conceded “while she participated somewhat in the work on the paper, she received such
significant help from the person she hired that she was surprised by the high quality of
the final product and was not familiar with all of the words and ideas used in it.” This is
much more than merely the improper hiring of a tutor.
25.

Moreover, if the admissions in the Agreed Statement of Facts were not enough

(and they are), the additional evidence that the Student gave including the additional
documents that the Student sought to have admitted goes even further in corroborating
this. In the document which the Student wrote to counsel, and which was admitted (and
which she was subject to cross-examination) the Student wrote:
“My friends saw I was very down and my roommate said, you
should hire someone to help you write this paper. I agreed
and they called someone who could help me write this kind of
paper as I was in desperate need of help. He was a Masters’
Student who was very helpful. We did the research together,
but he supplied most of the research himself as his time
was limited.
…
I did receive complete help from my tutor through this
essay and he did help me completely through to the final
essay. I was really surprised at the final essay and how
well it read. Some of the words and ideas I was not sure
about and did not have time to research their meaning.

23

Although I had total assistance throughout the preparation of
this assignment, I did learn a lot about preparing a paper.”
[emphasis added]
26.

Additionally, at both the meeting with the Professor and at the subsequent

Dean’s meeting the Student admits that she “did not tell truth”. The explanation that she
had hired a tutor to help her (and certainly far too much) was not proffered at that time.
In fact, during cross-examination when asked the name of the “tutor” the Student refused
to identify him, even when directed by the panel that she must answer – although
immediately prior to argument about sanction, the Student did proffer the name. To the
panel all of this belies the more innocent characterization or gloss of hiring of a tutor
without permission that the Student sought to put on her conduct. It all suggests that it
was deliberate misconduct and if not recognized as such from the outset, was so
recognized very soon afterward. In fact, this attempted gloss on the Student’s conduct
cannot help but undercut the remorse and apology which was professed.
27.

There really are no exceptional mitigating factors here. Whatever her language

difficulties, not only did the Student register to attend the University, she testified before
us in English with apparent adequate understanding, and conceded in cross-examination
that she did not avail herself of any language assistance proffered by the University and
disclosed in the course materials. Moreover, even assuming some connection to that
and the use of “knowingly” in the Code as suggested by counsel for the Student (and we
are not necessarily agreeing there is such a connection), “knowingly” is explicitly defined
in the Code to include those items that one ought to reasonably have known. There is
nothing in the Student’s conduct or the proffered explanations, that did suggest that she
did not reasonably know that she was engaging in misconduct. In fact her prior offence
and its warning strongly suggest otherwise.
28.

The Student argued that the effect of the sanction the University sought would

result in her effectively being “lost” to the University or never completing her education at
the University. To understate it, even if true, that is regrettable. We do not question the
shame and humiliation that the Student feels about her conduct having been detected

24

and this resulting disciplinary process. Even if we were to accept the Student’s complete
remorse and regret over this misconduct (and ignore our previous remarks about the
failed attempt to mischaracterize or put a gloss on it), without sounding overly harsh, this
is the result of choices (albeit poor ones) and conduct that the Student voluntarily made
and undertook.
29.

Again, without wishing to appear overly harsh, the University’s Code of

Behaviour on Academic Matters and, in particular with respect to the submission of work
to the University, is not only to instruct individual students, not only to protect the interests
of the University, but to protect the interests of all students of the University, to say nothing
of all of those outside of the University community who rely on the imprimatur of the
University. The value of all students’ work that students actually perform themselves
cannot be diminished or cheapened by tolerating or not appropriately punishing those
that seek to obtain credit by work other than their own work. We take the directions of
the Appeal Board in S.C. to tell us the gravity of this type of misconduct and the value of
general deterrence ought to have a greater weight than (but do not eliminate) our own
compassion or the remorse or the serious consequences that inevitably fall on the
Student.
30.

Not surprisingly, counsel for the Student offered this panel of the Tribunal no

Tribunal jurisprudence (or any jurisprudence for that matter) to support as lenient
treatment of this academic misconduct as counsel advocated.
31.

For all the foregoing reasons, this panel of the Tribunal unanimously accepted

the recommendation of sanction made by the University and imposes the following
sanction:
(a) a final grade of zero in the course FAH101H5F for
2017 Fall;
(b) a five year suspension from the University of Toronto
commencing on the date of the Tribunal’s Order and
ending August 31,2024;

25

