Case #1035

   DATE : October 30, 2019

   PARTIES : University of Toronto v. Y.S.

   HEARING DATE : September 9, 2019

   Panel Members:
   Mr. Bernard Fishbein, Chair
   Professor Lynne Howarth, Faculty Panel Member
   Mr. Rory Smith, Student Panel Member

   Appearances:
   Ms. Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg
   Rothstein LLP
   Mr. Brian Hauff, Representative for the Student

   In Attendance:
   Ms. Jennifer Dent, Associate Director, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty
   Grievances

   The Student was charged with plagiarism under s. B.i.1(d) of the Code
   of Behaviour on Academic Matters, 1995 (the â Code â) on the basis that
   she knowingly represented the work of another as her own without proper
   acknowledgement in an assignment submitted for academic credit.

   The parties submitted an Agreed Statement of Facts (ASF) in which the
   Student admitted that she hired a third party to write an assignment
   for her which she submitted for academic credit as if it was her own
   work. The Student admitted that while she participated somewhat in the
   work on the assignment, she received such significant help that she was
   surprised by the quality of the final product and was not familiar with
   all of the words and ideas used in it. Based on the representations of
   both the University and the Student, and the ASF, the Tribunal held
   that the violation of s. B.i.1(d) of the Code had been made out.

   After presenting the Panel with the ASF and accompanying Joint Book of
   Documents on Penalty, counsel for the Student wished to provide the
   Tribunal with a number of additional documents. Although this was an
   unusual method of procedure, the University objected to only one of the
   documents (a letter from the Student to her counsel elaborating on what
   was in the ASF). The parties agreed that the Student would be affirmed
   and cross-examined on the contents of that document. The Panel noted
   that most of the cross-examination did not add significantly to what
   was already in the ASF.

   The Panel noted that the only issue really in dispute was the length of
   the suspension sought by the University; the University sought only a
   five year suspension, notwithstanding that this was the Studentâs
   second offence of academic misconduct and that the violation involved a
   commercial transaction. The University was prepared to do so because
   the Student had entered into a remedial undertaking to complete six
   courses within eight months of her return to the University and the
   fulfilment of the undertaking would be a requirement before she could
   graduate. The University relied upon a number of authorities, in
   particular the decision of the Discipline Appeals Board (DAB) in S.C.
   et. al . In that case, the DAB noted that purchasing academic work for
   a fee and then submitting that work with a view to securing academic
   credit has always been considered to be among the most egregious
   offences a student can commit in the University environment. The DAB
   stated that expulsion should be considered a likely sanction in these
   cases. The Panel recognized that each case must be assessed on its own
   facts, but that the guidance of the DAB should not lightly be
   disregarded.

   The Panel stated that the ordinary sanction for plagiarism should be
   expulsion unless moderated by convincing and persuasive mitigating
   factors, in which case a five year suspension could be substituted.
   While the Panel noted that there may be unique circumstances which
   justify departure from this general statement, this case was not one of
   them. The Panel stated that in seeking only a five year suspension, the
   University had overlooked what would clearly otherwise be exacerbating
   circumstances: this was not the Studentâs first incident of academic
   misconduct, and although the Student did ultimately cooperate and admit
   wrongdoing, the Student was not initially prepared to âown upâ to her
   misconduct.Â  Because the University was prepared to overlook the
   exacerbating factors, the Panel was not prepared to impose a sanction
   greater than the University was seeking. The Panel noted that the value
   of all studentsâ work cannot be diminished by tolerating or not
   appropriately punishing those that seek to obtain credit by work other
   than their own work. Counsel for the Student offered no jurisprudence
   to support a more lenient treatment of this academic misconduct.
   Although it noted that it had the authority to do so, the Panel stated
   that it was not prepared to impose a sanction greater than that sought
   by the University in the circumstances.

   The Â Tribunal imposed the following sanctions: a final grade of zero;
   a five year suspension from the University from the date of the order,
   ending August 31, 2024; and a notation of the sanction on the Studentâs
   academic record and transcript from the date of the order for six
   years. The Tribunal also ordered that the case be reported to the
   Provost for publication of a notice of the decision and the sanctions
   imposed, with the name of the Student withheld.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/28693
