UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
IN Tiffi MATTER OF charges of academic dishonesty made on October 4, 2010;
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University o./Toronto Code ofBehavio11r 011 Academic

1'ilatters, 1995;
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Act, 1971, S.O. 1971, c. 56, as
amended S.O. 1978, c. 88;
BETWEEN:
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
-AND-

L

1"f

REASONS FOR DECISION ON CHARGES

Members of the Panel:
Mr. Ronald G. Slaght, Q.C., Barrister, Chair
Professor Brnno Magliocchetti, Depatiment ofitalian Studies, Faculty Panel Member
Ms. Alice Kim, Student Panel Member
Appearances:
Mr. Robert Centa, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Barristers
Mr. Lawrence Geffen, Barrister and Solicitor, Counsel for Ms. L
M
Witnesses:
the Student
Ms.L
M
Ms. Meredith Rappapo1t, Assistant, Test and Exam Services, Office of Space
Management
Ms. Andrea Burden, Invigilator for final exam in HISI09YlY: The Development of
European Civilization on European Civilization August 19, 2010
Dr. Chrystia Wynnyckyj, Invigilator for final exam in IIlSl09Y!Y: The Development of
European Civilization on August 19, 2010
Mr. Anthony Cantor, Course Instructor for HIS109YIY: The Development of European
Civilization
In Attendance:
Dr. Francis Ahia, Associate Director, Transitional Year Program
Ms. Jessica Latimer, A11icling Student, Paliare Roland Barristers
Ms. Natalie Ramtahal, Coordinator, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances, Office
of the Governing Council

-2 -

[l]

This matter cmnc on for hearing before this Tribunal on Tuesday, January 25,
201 l. Ms. M
Ms.M

stands accused of three Charges. The University alleges that

, in a final exmnination in the course HIS 109Yl Y written on August

19, 2010, committed plagiarism, knowingly representing as her own an idea or
expression of an idea and/or the work of another, contrary to the Code of
Behaviour on Academic 1\101/ers, 1995 (the Code). The second charge is that Ms.
M

possessed and used an unauthorized aid during the examination, contrary to

the Code, and the third is a general allegation that Ms. M.

knowingly engaged

in a form of cheating and academic misconduct in order to obtain an academic
credit, also contrary to the Code, The Charges are attached to these Reasons as
Attachment I.
[2]

The basic facts of the matter are easily stated.

[3 J

Ms.M

wrote the examination in a semi-private carrel, A 11, an enclosed space

with an open entrance. After she left the carrel and signed out of the examination
centre, one of the invigilators in a routine inspection of the room, discovered two
pages of Notes (marked l and 3) folded in a crnmpled state on Ms. M
The invigilators reviewed Ms. M

's chair.

's examination books, and found that

paragrnphs from the Notes which contained descriptions of a number of topics
relevant to the course material, such as Capitalism, Calvinism, Fascism, and
Imperialism, were reproduced virtually verbatim in answer to certain questions in
Ms.M
[4]

's written examination books,

The University called four witnesses, including two invigilators who were present
during the examination and Anthony Cantor, who taught the course.

.. 3 [5]

Ms.M

Ms. M
[6]

gave evidence in her own defence.

's Evidence About the Source Material

Ms. iv!

in her direct evidence acknowledged that the passages called into

question in her answer books had been sourced by her from the internet. She gave
evidence that she had not been able to obtain all the recommended readings, that
she felt more comfortable doing her research on the internet. Pai1icularly, she
understood that there would be questions on the final exam about the "isms" and
she Googled various subjects such as these, saw much information and material
and chose certain descriptions of the subjects that "made sense" to her. She then
memorized these internet passages, and used this memorized work to answer the
exam questions.
[7]

Thus, for example, Calvinism was a subject reviewed in the course and which she
thought might be on the exam. She Googled Calvinism, saw many entries,
selected one that made sense to her, and when she saw that it was a subject she
could choose to write about on the exam, she wrote what she had memorized from
the internet.

[8]

She did this for many oft he mini-subjects she thought could be on the exam.
When some appeared (at least 4 of them did) she followed the same practice; she
wrote in her exam book the material she had memorized from the internet about
that subject.

[9]

Although Ms. M

denied there had been any disc11ssion about plagiarism

during the course, there was abundant evidence that in the course syllabus, orally,

-4•
and frequently, students were both warned against plagiarism and referred lo
various sources, if they were in any doubt about what plagiarism is.
[10]

If Ms. M

's evidence is to be accepted, then on any standard of proof, the

University has satisfied its onus to prove plagiarism. What Ms. lv!

wrote were

not her own thoughts, ideas, analysis 01· even words. She wrote, according to her
from memory and virtimlly verbatim, various memorized internet passages,
without attribution. While some of the passages are relatively basic in their terms,
others are more complex and in any event all are the ideas and the expression of
the ideas of others,
[I l]

Paragraph B.l. l. (d) of the Code makes it an offence:
"to represent as one's own any idea or expression of an idea or work of another in
any academic examination or term test or in connection with any other form of
academic work, i.e. to commit plagiarism ... ",

[12]

If Ms. M

actually did what she said she did, she has committed the offence of

plagiarism and is guilty of the charge against her laid under section B.I. I. (d).

The Notes

[13]

The Notes, Exhibit 2 in their original form, consist of two typewritten pages, a
copy of which is attached to these Reasons as At1achment 2. There are
paragraphs numbered l to 5 on what is marked page 1 in the bottom left. The
second page, marked 3, contains paragraphs 11 to 16. They were found by
Chrystia Wynnyckyj, an invigilator working during the examination, who was on

-5 -

her way to do a routine tidying up o[ Ms, M

's carrel, after Ms. M

had been

signed out o[ the examination centre at 9:37 p.m.
(14]

Dr .. Wynnyckyj told us that she went through the opening into the cmrcl, where
the chair was slightly at an angle to the desk and saw the Notes lying on the chair.
They were in a somewhat crumpled state, according to her evidence, folded a
couple of times, as she described it, into something that looked to us like a pocket
handkerchief, folded. This was about 9:50 p.m.

[ 15)

Dr. Wynnyckyj took the Notes to the invigilators' carrel where she and Andrea
Burden, another invigilator, compared the Notes to Ms. M

's exam booklet~;

handed in a few minutes before. They found exrnnples of verbatim and almost
word for word repetition of several paragraphs from the Notes in the exam books.
[ 16)

As it tums out, the Notes were identical to ce1tain internet passages, that were
subsequently found by University investigation and admitted into evidence on
consent, and which Ms. M

con firmed were the actual passages she had found

and memorized from the internet.

The Examination

[ 17)

There was much evidence about steps taken to ensure the integrity of an
examination, including signing in and signing out procedures, designed to prevent
unauthorized aids being brought into examinations. Andrea Bmden went through
the safeguards and explained the forms and procedures. Ms. M

was subjected

to such measures, including pocket turnouts and face to face questioning, She
signed forms certifying that she had no unauthorized aids, on two occasions in

-6-

this case by reason of a fire alarm that caused the evacuation and then retmn of
the students who were then asked to sign another form once again ce1iifying that
no aids had been accessed or transported during the alarm period,
(18]

Ms. M

brought to the hearing the clothes she said she wore to the exam (no

other witness could remember her dress), - short shorts, a sleeveless opaque top
and sandals, The inference we were asked to draw was that it would not be
possible for Ms. M

to transport these Notes in all the circumstances of the

secul'i ty and her dress,

[ 19]

In our view not much turns on any of this, The fact is the Notes were smuggled
into the examination centre by someone, and they were found in Ms. M

's

carrel, on he1· chair. Their physical state when found, as described and as we
observed, is consistent with an attempt to minimize their bulk at some point
during the process,

The Onus of Proof

(20]

The University alleges Ms. M

brought the Notes into the examination to copy

answers to questions she anticipated would be on the examination, and that she
did so, For some reason, - carelessness, bad luck, whatever, two of the three
pages of Notes were left behind.
(2 IJ The University must satisfy us, on a balance of probabilities, with clear cogent
evidence, that this is what occurred. See University ofToron10 v. X, a decision of
the Discipline Appeal Board, March 25, 2009 and F.H. v. i\fcDouga/1, 2008
S.C.C, 53.

-7-

[22]

If this did occm, then there is no doubt that Ms. Iv!

is guilty of all charges:

using an unauthorized aid, plagiarism, and academic misconduct.

The Evidence

[23]

The evidence is clear that no one saw the Notes prior to their being found at about
9:50, after Ms. M

had left. No one saw Ms. M

in possession of the Notes.

She navigated the security process without incident. She signed, on two
occasions, certifications that she had no unauthorized aids. In her evidence, she
denied the Notes were hers, that she knew anything about them, how they came to
be on her chair or that she did or would ever cheat on an examination.
[24]

On the other hand, Andrea Burden said that when she went to Ms. tvi, ·· 's carrel
to direct Ms. M
lvl

[25]

to leave in the course of the fire alarm she observed Ms.

slrnffling her papers and shoving some things under her papers.

She thought it odd both that Ms. M

was one of only three students who had

not immediately left the examination centre as directed and also about what
seemed to be Ms. M

's attempt to hide something. At the time, Ms. Burden

could have looked into the latter issue more carefully, but the centre was then in
the midst of a fire alarm and concerns with safety and evacuating the hall took
priority in her mind. And after the alarm, the invigilators were extra busy dealing
with the various tasks that had then to be completed because of the alarm.
[26]

There are some compelling facts surrounding the Notes and Ms. M

's papers.

It is essentially admitted, and we find as a fact, that the relevant internet
references entered into evidence on consent, and the exa111il1ation answers are

-8-

identical or vii1ually identical. This is evidence from which we may draw the
inference that Ms. lv!

used Notes she prepared from the internet to \\~·ite the

answers in her examination book.
[27]

Ms. M

says these answers were memorized, a prodigious feat but, we suppose,

not an impossible one. Nonetheless if that is so it would have to be the case that
Ms.M

had memorized many additional excerpts from the internet, not just

these few that actually appeared on the test and in the examination booklets.
[28)

These specific paragraphs were selected by her from the many that were available
to her on the internet. They also showed up in Notes which she denies putting
together. The Tribunal is simply unable to accept her evidence that she had
memorized this material in almost perfect fashion and that these answers were
written from that memory bank, and that it is just coincidental or in the realm of
the unexplained that these specific passages are also found in the Notes.

[29]

Professor Cantor gave evidence that all but two of the paragraphs in the Notes
were directly relevant to the issues in the course and were subjects that could be
examined upon. The other two were at least tangentially relevant.

[30)

In that respect, there were four students (of about 35 in total), including Ms.
M

writing the exam in HIS 109YlY that evening. None of the plagiarized

material from the Notes appears in any of the examination books of the other
three students.
[31]

Moreover, two of the three left and signed oi1t before Ms. M

completed her

examination. The fom1h student was in a private room, B3, (i.e. a carrel with a
closed door) across the aisle from Ms. M

's carrel, A 11.

-9[32]

We were taken to the answers written by student B3. By way of example, that
student's answer to the question seeking a description and substantive discussion
of Fascism is full and complete, sophisticated in its response and was awarded a
mark of 5 out of 5. (Ms. M

's plagiarized answer received a I out of 5.) We

can see no basis for the suggestion made by Ms. M

in evidence and Mr.

Geffen in argument, that student B3 may have had these Notes up his sleeve for
possible deployment, if necessary, mid then they were abandoned by him in Al l
at some point.
[33]

Moreover, student B3 was still writing his examination and did not sign out until
9:59, or about 9 minutes after the Notes were found on Ms. M

's chair. On the

basis of all this evidence, we find nothing from which to infer that any student,
other than Ms. M

, had any connection to these Notes.

Findings

[34]

On the basis of all the evidence we find that the Notes had relevance only to HIS
109Yl Y and only the four writing the examination in that course would have any

interest in smuggling the Notes into the examination centre. We find no evidence
to support the involvement of any of the other three students. None of their
answers employed any material from the Notes. Two left before Ms. M
one after the Notes were found. Student B3, the closest in proximity to Ms.
M

, received a mark of 90 on his examination, and his answers were

comprehensive and clearly his own work. There is no basis to support that
student's involvement in any mam1er whatsoever.

, and

- IO [35)

While Ms. M

passed through the security measures, and denies any

involvement with the Notes, we find that Ms. M

brought the Notes into the

examination centre and carrel A 11 and used them in constructing answers to the
questions asked on the examination.
[36)

The Notes were found in that carrel on her chair. There was no evidence that any
other student ever entered that carrel and of course there was no evidence of any
motivation in anyone else to perpetrate this fraud upon Ms. M

(37)

Most importantly, the Notes, the examination answers and the internet passages
Ms.M

(38)

admits she used, are all vii1ually identical.

This evidence permits only one inference; that Ms. M

did her work on the

internet, found passages that made sense to her, reduced these materials to what
was probably a three page set of Notes, smuggled the Notes into the examination
centre and used them to write her examination.
[39)

Mr. Geffen argues that this makes no sense, because why would Ms. M

or

anyone, having done all that, proceed to leave the Notes in the very place where
she was alone writing the exam. And why are there only two pages not three. In
our view however, even the best laid plans can go awry. It is more probable that
Ms. M

left them behind in error, than is any other possible explanation for

their presence on her chair.
[40)

Finally, we simply do not accept Ms. !VI

's evidence that she had nothing to do

with the Notes and that she wrote these verbatim excerpts from her memory only,
We find these explanations not credible, and when her evidence is measmed
against the evidence taken as a whole, there is no substance to her position.

- 11 I'll]

Ms.M

spoke sincerely about her difficulties in even being in a position to

attend this University course, her wish to succeed, her desire to set an example for
her son and to improve herself, all as rensons why she would not do what is
alleged against her.
[42]

Although not central to our conclusions, in Olli' view, these very factors, are likely
what motivated Ms. M

to knowingly flout the rules, in an effort to pass this

course, a goal which would otherwise likely elude her. Ms. tv[

told us in her

direct examination that she was nol a scholar, an A student or even a B student.

Conclusion

[43]

Ms. M

is guilty of Charges# 1 and #2, and in such circumstances we

understand that the Provost will withdraw Charge #3.
[44]

The Tribunal will reconvene to consider the appropriate penalty .
...

-,) \.'. \-

Dated at Toronto, this_, date ofJammry, 201 l.

Ronald
Chair

a. §IaghC Q.,t.

I

ATT ACI-IMENT l

irORONTo

OFFJCE or THE VICE - PROVOST, FACULTY & AcADE~HC LirE

Via email
CONFIDENTIAL

October 4, 2010
MissL
M
.m @.utoronto.ca
Student#:

1

DearMissM
On the advice of the University Discipline Counsel, I am writing to inform you that you are
hereby charged with the offences as detailed on the attached.
By copy of this letter I have informed Mr. Clu·istopher Lang, Director, Appeals, Discipline and
Faculty Grievances, of the Academic Tribunal, who will be in touch with you regarding the
Tribunal's proceedings.
Yours Sincerely,

t_{).,Jl_, fv) •1t¼A<!,/
Professor Edith Hillan
Vice-Provost, Faculty & Academic Life

EIJ/dsh

Encl.
cc:

Christopher Lang
Robert Centa
Laudann Wade

McMuuich DuilJ!ng, 12 Qmcn's Park Cmccnt,Room 103,Turumo, ON MSS ISS Cm.1dJ
F~x: +t 416 971-!J80 • vp.acadcrni(@utorn11to,u

UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
RE: L
M
CHARGES
Note: Wherever in the Code of Behaviour on Academic Mallers, 1995 ("Code") an offence is
described as depending on "knowing", the offence shall likewise be deemed to have been
committed if the person ought reasonably to have known.
1.

On or about A,1gust 19, 2010, you knowingly represented as your own an idea or

expression of an idea, and/or the work of another In an examination that you submitted for academic
credit in HIS 109Y1Y (the "Course"), contrary to section B.l.1(d) of the Code.

2.

On or about August 19, 201 o, you knowingly possessed an unauthorized aid during, or

obtained unauthorized assistance in connection with, an examination that you submitted for
academic credit in the Course, contrary to section B.l.1(b) of the Code.

3.

In the alternative, on or about August 19, 2010, you knowingly engaged in a form of

cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or misrepresentation not otherwise described In
the Code In order to obtain academic credit or other academic advantage of any kind in connection
an examination you submitted for academic credit in the Course, contrary to section B.l.3(b) of the
Code.

Particulars

4.

At all material times, you were a registered student in the Transitional Year Program at the

University of Toronto. In Summer 2010, you enrolled in the Course.

5.

Students In the Course were required to write an examination ("Examination"). On or about

August 19, you wrote the Examination In Semiprivate Exam Room A11 ("Room") in the TexUExam
Centre. No aids were permitted.

2
6.

After you handed in your Examination answer booklets, a University invigilator discovered

notes in the Room. The notes contained text that appeared verbatim or nearly verbatim in your
examination answer booklets.

7.

You knowingly included in yom answers lo the Examination ideas and expressions that

were not your own, but were the Ideas and expressions of others, which you did not acknowledge In
the Examination.

8.

You knowingly possessed an unauthorized aid, namely, the notes, or received

unauthorized assistance from lhe notes during the Examination.

ATTACHMENT 2

I. lmpcl'ialis111

The policy or forccl'ull)' extending a nation's m1lhorily by lerrilorial gain or by lhc cslablish111rnl nr
econo111ic and pnliticnl dn1ninrn1ce over olhcr nations.
The policy, prnclicc, or advocacy or seeking, or acquiescing in. lhc exlcnsion or the contrnl,
dominion. or empire

or a nation. ashy the ru.:quirernent or new, esp. distnnti territory or

dependencies, or by the closer union or parts more nr less independent or each other for opi;rntions
or war, copyright, inlenrnl co111111erce, etc.

2. Capitalis111
An economic system in which lhc means or produclion and dis1rib111ion me privately or corporalely
ow11cd and developmcnl is proporlionalc to !he accumulalion and rei11vesl111cnl or pro Ii ls gained in
a free mnrkcl

J. Fascism
A govern111ental syslcrn led by a dictator having complelc powe,-. i<,rcibly suppressing opposition
and criticism, regimenting all industry, commerce, clc., and emphasizing an aggressive nationalism
and oflen rueis111 ..
4, Rl•uaissanl'C

lhe aclivily, spiril, or lime or lhe greal revival or art, literature, and learning in Europe beginning in
the 14th century and extending lo the 17th cenlury, 111arking the trnnsilion fro111 lhc 111cdicval lo the
modern world.
mUct:Jivc
5.

or, pertaining lo, or suggestive or the Emopean Reuaissance or lhe 14th through !he 17th centuries:
Renaissance allitudes.
6,

11oli11g or pertaining to the group orarchileclurnl styles exis!Lng in Italy in lhc 15th aud 16th
centuries as adaplalions orancieut Romau nrehileelmal delails or composilional for111s lo
co11te111pormy uses, characterized al first by the free and inventive use or isolnled dclails, lalcr by
the more i111ilalive use of whole orders and compositional mrangcmcnls, with greal attention lo the
fonnnlalion or compositional l'llies alter the precepls or VitJ'llvius and !he precedenls or existing
ruins, and al all periods by an emphasis 011 sylllmetry, exacl mnlhe111alienl relationships bclween
parls, and a gcncrnl effect of simplicily and repose.

7.
noting or pertaining to any or the various adaplations of this group or styles in foreign architecture
dmrnclcrizcd lypically by the ph1)'fol or grotesque use of isolalcd details in more or less lrndilional
buildings.
8,

noting or pertaining lo lhe fornishings or decorations oflhe Re11nissa11ec, in which Jllolils of
classical dcl'ivalion frcquenlly appear.
S. Rcfonnation
The acl of refi:mning; stale of being reformed
1 I 1' "I',,.

11, Criticism
The rules and principles which regulate the practice of the critic; the art of judging with knowledge
and propriety of the beauties and faults of a literary performance, m or a production in the fine arts;
as, dramatic criticism.

12, Calvinism
Calvinism, the Protestant religious perspective associated with the work of John Calvin, includes
both !he teachings of Calvin and the later developments of his world view. Calvin's doctrine was
catholic in its acceptance oflhe Trinity, human sinfulness, and !he saving work oi'Jcsus Christ. It
was Protestant in its commitment to the final authority of the Bible,justitlcation by Grace through
faith alone, and the bondage of the will for Salvation. It was distinctly reformed in its stress on the
omnipotent sovereignly of God, the need for discipline in the chmch, and the ethical seriousness of
life.

13. Catholicism
Catholicism is a broad term for the body of !he Catholic faith, its theologies and doctrines, its
liturgical, ethical, spiritual, and behavioral charncterislics, ns well as a religious people as a whole.
For many the term usually refers to Christians and churches belonging to the Roman Catholic
Chmch in full commm1ion with the Holy See.
14. Socialism
Sodali3n1 is an economic und political theory n<.lvuct1lii1~ jJttblic w· Cl1mn.10E, own~1shjp a11d

cooperative management of the means of production and allocation ofresomces.
In a socialist economic system, production is carried oul by a free association of workers to directly
maximize use-values (instead of indirectly producing use-value through maximizing exchangevalues), through coordinated planning of investment decisions, distribution ofsmplus, and the
means of production. Socialism is a set of social and economic arrangements based on a poslmonetmy system of calculation, such as labour time, energy units or calculation-in-kind; al least for
the factors of production.
15. Communism
Communism is a sociopolitical structure that aims for a classless and stateless society with the

communal ownership of property.
Karl Marx posited that comnnmism would be the linal stage in society, which would be achieved
through a proletarian revolution and only possible after a transitional stage develops the productive
forces, leading to a superabundance of goods and services.
16. Fanaticism
Fanaticism is misplaced enthusiasm, overzealous, no spiritual self control. Tillich: "fanaticism is the
attempt to repress elements of one's own being for the sake of others. If the fanatic encounters these
elements in somebody else, he fights against them passionately, because they endanger the success
of his own repression. To be a fonatic is lo emulate what one thinks as lo those who actually have
the true power. It is going too far because the spirit has not been trusted enough to know the limit
3 11' ,I g ,,

