UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
GOVERNING COUNCIL
REPORT NUMBER 275 OF THE ACADEMIC APPEALS COMMITTEE
Your Committee reports that it held a hearing on Tuesday March 11, 2003, at which the
following were present:
Assistant Dean Bonnie Goldberg, Chair
Professor Clare Beghtol
Professor Sherwin Desser
Professor Luigi Girolametto
Mr. Sean Mullin
Mr. Paul Holmes, Judicial Affairs Officer
In Attendance:
Ms. R., the Appellant
Mr Shaun Laubman, Downtown Legal Services
Ms Nicole Redgate, Downtown Legal Services
Vice-Dean Susan Howson, Faculty of Arts and Science, University of Toronto
The student appeals from a decision of the Academic Appeals Board of the Faculty of
Arts and Science, dated April 16, 2002, denying her appeal for late withdrawal without
academic penalty from PHL271H1F (the “course”) taken in the Summer 2001 session.
The student was appealing a decision of the Committee on Standing (dated September 4,
2001) denying her request for late withdrawal without academic penalty from the course.
This was an appeal of a petition the appellant made which was denied (dated June 26,
2001).
The student continues to seek late withdrawal without academic penalty from
PHL271H1F. The student requests this extraordinary remedy on compassionate, medical
and procedural grounds. The appellant has since graduated from the University and is
currently enrolled as a student at York University in a bid to upgrade her marks to assist
in her application to law school.
During the summer of 2001, the appellant was enrolled in two courses, studying to write
her LSAT on June 11, 2001, working at two part-time jobs, and participating in volunteer
activities. The appellant has struggled with the medical condition of bulimia for many
years, and as of February 2000, commenced treatment with a mental health counselor.
The appellant’s condition is exacerbated when she is under stress; one way that she
manages her illness is to keep very busy and to engage in a multitude of commitments at
the same time. It is when one of these activities begins placing undue stress on the

Report Number 275 of the Academic Appeals Committee
appellant that she experiences difficulty coping, severe bulimia, and an inability to
function. She also takes an anti-depressant drug to combat her anxiety.
During the summer in question, the appellant earned a respectable 75% on the course’s
first assignment, worth 20% of her final grade. Although already struggling in this
course, she earned this grade by working very hard and seeking additional help from her
professor. The course essay was due on June 12, 2001, and worth 40% of the final grade.
The appellant received an extension of two days from her professor to accommodate the
LSAT examination on the 11th. The appellant has long desired to attend law school and
writing the LSAT was an important step towards fulfilling this goal.
The appellant knew that she was experiencing extreme stress as a result of this course, a
fact confirmed to her by her mental health counselor during their weekly sessions. She
attempted to contact the course professor on June 10th, but did not receive a response. The
course drop date was June 10, 2001. She tried to drop the course through the Internet, a
day or two past the deadline, and was unable to do so. She petitioned for late withdrawal
on June 13, 2001.
While waiting for the outcome of her petition, the appellant was concerned about
continuing in her course. She wrote to the professor again on June 14th asking for
assistance and explaining her difficulties. Her professor responded that she faced
insurmountable difficulty in the course and recommended that she drop it. He also
offered to support her petition to do so.
During this time, the appellant’s bulimia worsened and the appellant recognized the need
to eliminate the main source of her stress in order to get her condition under control.
Thus, relying on her professor’s email, on the advice of her mental health counselor and
in recognition of the extremely poor state of her mental health at this time, the appellant
did not complete any further course requirements and received a 15% final grade in the
course. The appellant’s petition was refused on June 26, 2001 for lack of compelling
reasons not to complete the course. She appealed again to the Committee on Standing.
The Committee on Standing refused her petition indicating that she had not provided
compelling reasons for withdrawing before the deadline, and that she was responsible for
monitoring her workload and prioritizing her activities.
The appellant appealed to the Academic Appeals Board on April 15th, 2001. The board
voted, not unanimously, to deny her appeal. The Board held that the appellant was aware
of her stresses before the deadline for withdrawal, and that she made her situation more
difficult by taking a course without having taken the necessary prerequisites.
The ability to obtain late withdrawal without academic penalty is an extraordinary
remedy, reserved for the most serious and unique of situations. The very existence of
“drop dates” indicates that the University takes seriously the ability of a student to choose
whether or not to continue in a course for any number of reasons personal to the student.
By that date each term, the student is expected to have assessed his or her situation and
made a decision. But once the date has passed, the University takes the position that the

Page 2 of 4

Report Number 275 of the Academic Appeals Committee
student has decided, no matter what situation may have existed before the drop date or
may arise after the drop date, to continue on in the course. Exceptions to the drop date
regime are rare. Such exceptions include medical and compassionate grounds. Your
Committee believes that this is a situation in which the appellant made the only choice
available to her, which was to choose her mental health over her studies and not continue
in the course. To penalize the student for this decision would be to disregard the serious
medical and compassionate grounds surrounding her situation.
First, although the appellant initially missed the drop date for the course, the appellant
took immediate steps to withdraw from the course. She initiated attempts to get out of the
course within days of the drop date, without having been assessed a final grade in the
course, and having already obtained a respectable mid-term mark. This is not an example
of a retroactive attempt by a student to remove a poor performance in a course from a
transcript. Rather, with the assistance of a professor and a counselor, the student
identified the severity of her situation and took steps to ameliorate it.
Second, this appellant has demonstrated throughout her academic career a willingness to
seek help from a multitude of sources when faced with academic or personal difficulty.
The summer of 2001 was no exception. This is exactly the type of behaviour we ask of
students in crisis. This appellant did everything in her power to get the help she needed,
both from her mental health counselor and her professor.
The matter of the appellant’s bulimia must also be considered. The University does not
dispute that the appellant suffers from a serious medical condition. However, the
University contends that the appellant did not raise the condition of bulimia in her initial
appeal (dated June 13th, 2001), and only mentioned a medical condition of stress and
depression in the further appeal to the Committee on Standing. Thus, the University
contends that the bulimia is not a factor to be considered. The Committee disagrees. We
accept the appellant’s contention that the nature of her illness is not something that she
wished to disclose until she absolutely had to. Further, we believe that the bulimia is at
the root of many of the appellant’s difficulties and cannot be separated out. For example,
the University contends that the appellant should not have been juggling so many
activities that summer and it is the overload of activities that caused her to experience
difficulties. We have heard evidence that the appellant deliberately keeps herself busy
with a multitude of activities, both because it is her nature to accomplish a lot and
because her condition is lessened when she is focusing on other issues.
Your Committee also allows this appeal on procedural grounds. The Academic Appeals
Board decision held that the appellant’s difficulties were exacerbated by the appellant’s
registration in a course without having completed the recommended prerequisites. The
appellant contends and the university agrees that there were no prerequisites for this
course. While we heard evidence from the University that this was not the Board’s main
consideration, just one of many, we believe that the consideration of an erroneous ground
in its decision is sufficient to cast doubt on the decision. Further, it appears that the Board
did not consider the reliance that the appellant placed on her professor’s advice that she
drop the course and that he would support her attempts to do so. This was a critical aspect

Page 3 of 4

Report Number 275 of the Academic Appeals Committee
of the appellant’s decision to not continue in the course and should have been taken into
account in the Board’s decision.
Therefore, we grant the remedy of late withdrawal without academic penalty from
PHL271H1F on compassionate, medical and procedural grounds. The appeal is allowed.

March 17, 2003

Paul Holmes, Secretary
Judicial Affairs Officer

Bonnie Goldberg, Co-Chair
Assistant Dean, Faculty of Law

Page 4 of 4

