Report 275

DATE:

   March 17, 2003

PARTIES:

   Ms. R. (the Appellant) v. the Faculty of Arts and Science

Hearing Date(s):

   March 11, 2003

Committee Members:

   Assistant Dean Bonnie Goldberg, Chair
   Professor Clare Beghtol
   Professor Sherwin Desser
   Professor Luigi Girolametto
   Mr. Sean Mullin

Judicial Affairs Officer:

   Mr. Paul Holmes

In Attendance:

   Ms. R., the Appellant
   Mr Shaun Laubman, Downtown Legal Services
   Ms Nicole Redgate, Downtown Legal Services
   Vice-Dean Susan Howson, Faculty of Arts and Science, University of
   Toronto

   Request for late withdrawal without academic penalty from one course.
   The Student requested the remedy on compassionate, medical and
   procedural grounds. The Student claimed that she suffered from bulimia,
   which was exacerbated when she was under stress. Student claimed that
   she experienced extreme stress as a result of the course, which was
   confirmed to her by her mental health counselor. While waiting for the
   outcome of her petition for late withdrawal, the Student sought the
   assistance of her professor who advised her that she faced
   insurmountable difficulty in the course, recommended that she drop it
   and offered to support her petition to do so. The Student claimed that
   her bulimia worsened and relying on the advice of her professor and
   mental health counselor, and in recognition of the state of her mental
   health, she chose not to complete any further course requirements. The
   Student subsequently failed the course. The Committee found that the
   Studentâs decision to choose her mental health over her studies and not
   continue in the course was the only choice available to her and to
   penalize the Student for that decision would be to disregard the
   serious medical and compassionate grounds surrounding her situation.
   The Committee found that with the assistance of a professor and a
   counselor, the Student identified the severity of her situation and
   took steps to ameliorate it. Although the Student missed the drop date
   for the course, she initiated attempts to get out of the course within
   days of the drop date, without having been assessed a final grade in
   the course, and having already obtained a respectable midâterm mark.
   The Committee considered the Studentâs bulimia and the fact that she
   did not raise the condition in her initial appeal, and found that the
   condition was at the root of the Studentâs difficulties and should be
   considered in the Committeeâs decision. The Committee also allowed the
   appeal on procedural grounds, finding that the Divisional Appeals Board
   considered an erroneous ground in its decision and that the Board
   should have considered the reliance that the Student placed on her
   professorâs advice in its decision. Appeal allowed. The Committee
   ordered that the grade in the course be vacated and replaced with the
   nonâgrade report WDR.
   [1]View Report

References

   1. file:///media/12649
