Case 807

DATE:

   April 7, 2016

PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v C.D.

Hearing Date(s):

   February 29, 2016

Panel Members:

   Roslyn M. Tsao, Chair
   Richard B. Day, Faculty Member
   Jeffery Couse, Student Member

Appearances:

   Tina Lie, Assistant Discipline Counsel
   Kristi Gourlay, Manager, Office of Student Academic Integrity
   Ralph Tassone, Instructor of the Course
   Lesley Mak, Associate Director, Academic Program Services at Rotman
   Commerce

In Attendance:

   Krista Osbourne, Administrative Assistant, Appeals, Discipline and
   Faculty Grievances

   Student charged with three offences under s. B.i.1(a) and two offences
   under s. B.i.3(b) of the Code . The charges related to allegations that
   the Student forged Verification of Student Illness or Injury Forms to
   obtain academic accommodation and that the Student engaged in academic
   dishonesty, fraud or misrepresentation to obtain academic advantage by
   representing that he had written and submitted two quizzes and two
   final examination answer booklets in a Course when in fact he had not.
   The Student was not present at the hearing. The Panel concluded that
   reasonable notice of the hearing was provided pursuant to Paragraph
   9(c) of the Rules of Practice and Procedure .

   Student was found guilty with respect to the forged document charges.
   The Student admitted to forging three Medical Notes at a meeting with
   the Deanâs Designate, and the Panel accepted evidence from the
   purported examining physician to support a finding of guilt on these
   charges. The Panel took into account the fact that the Student was
   fully aware that he was engaging in dishonest/fraudulent conduct at the
   time of committing the forgeries on the three separate occasions.

   Student was found guilty with respect to the academic dishonesty
   charges. The Student maintained that he had written two quizzes and
   that he had submitted two booklets for the final examination of the
   Course, but no quizzes had been submitted, and only one examination
   booklet had been submitted. The Panel noted that it is not necessary to
   know exactly what happened to the alleged quizzes and examination
   answer booklet; the Panel needs only to find that offences occurred on
   a balance of probabilities. The Panel took into account the clear and
   convincing evidence of the Course Instructor with respect to his
   marking protocols and examination invigilation and concluded that it
   was more likely than not that the Student attempted to mislead the
   Course Instructor about two fictitious quiz results and a missing
   examination booklet that was purportedly submitted. The Panel noted
   that the circumstances relating to the offences about the missing
   quizzes and the final examination in the Course were symptomatic of
   calculated behaviour and misconduct.

   The Panel noted that the Student had not participated in the hearing
   process and showed no indication of remorse, emphasizing its concern
   about the likelihood of repetition and the detriment to the University
   occasioned by the offences. The Panel also noted that the offences
   spanned multiple occasions and over a year in time, and that the
   third-year Student was well aware of the elements of academic
   dishonesty. The Panel imposed a grade assignment of zero in the four
   affected courses; a 5-year suspension from the University, or a
   suspension until the Governing Council decision on expulsion, and a
   corresponding notation on the Studentâs academic record and transcript;
   a recommendation of expulsion; and that the case be reported to the
   Provost for publication.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12898
