Report 388

DATE:

   May 8, 2017

PARTIES:

   Mr. F.Z. (the âStudentâ) v. the Faculty of Arts and Science/Woodsworth
   College

Hearing Date(s):

   March 28, 2017

Committee Members:

   Ms. Sara Faherty, Chair
   Professor Hugh Gunz, Faculty Panel Member
   Mr. Mohammad Amin, Student Panel Member

Secretary:

   Ms. Krista Osbourne, Administrative Clerk and Hearing Secretary,
   Appeals,
   Discipline and Faculty Grievances

Appearances:

For the Student:

   Mr. Cormac Donovan, Student Lawyer, Downtown Legal Services
   Ms. Jennifer Fehr, Staff Lawyer, Downtown Legal Services
   The Student

For the Faculty of Arts and Science/Woodsworth College:

   Professor Anne-Marie Brousseau, Associate Dean, Undergraduate Programs
   Mr. Rob Centa, Paliare Roland
   Ms. Emily Home, Paliare Roland, Articling Student

   Request to change a course grade from 70% to 80%.Â  Student had
   enrolled in two courses which did not directly overlap in terms of
   timing, but occurred on two different campuses, so attending both would
   have been virtually impossible given the commute. At issue was whether
   this type of scheduling conflict was a valid reason for the Student
   missing his mid-term exam. If so, the Student requested that the weight
   of the mid-term exam be reallocated to his final exam so that his final
   grade could improve.

   The Faculty of Arts and Science challenged the jurisdiction of the
   Committee to grant the relief sought, citing section 11.1 of the
   Faculty of Arts and Science Academic Handbook , which states that
   academic appeals involving marking concludes âwith the Deanâs Office
   being the final level of appeal.â The Committee agreed that this policy
   limited their jurisdiction to review the academic merit of a Studentâs
   work, but since the Studentâs issues concerned the rules for
   determining whether the reasons for an absence were valid it had
   jurisdiction to decide this appeal. Its role was to determine whether
   the Divisionâs policies were applied fairly, and the standard for their
   application is reasonableness.

   The Committee found that what constitutes a valid reason for missing an
   exam is at the discretion of the course instructor, and referred to the
   course syllabus in their analysis. Nothing in the syllabus language
   suggested a specific process the instructor would follow to determine
   whether an absence was valid and so under these circumstances, the
   process was followed (consulting with officials) was reasonable.Â  The
   Committee did not distinguish between course conflicts that involved a
   direct overlap and courses that do not overlap directly but are located
   so far away from each other that a commute makes it either unlikely or
   impossible for a student to attend both.Â  A regular travelling
   obligation that made it impossible for a student to attend a course on
   a consistent basis would not be one that instructors are expected to
   accommodate.

   The Student submitted documentation of his Narcissistic Personality
   Disorder, however, the Committee declined to give it weightÂ  since he
   had not asked for any academic accommodations related to a disability
   before or during the course. The Committee found that together, the
   course syllabus and the Faculty of Arts and Science policy on course
   conflicts led to the conclusion that the Studentâs absence was
   reasonably found to be invalid, and there was no basis for moving the
   weight of his midterm exam to the final exam. Appeal dismissed.
   [1]View Report

References

   1. file:///media/12634
