Report 371

DATE:

   March 27, 2014

PARTIES:

   Mr. C.D. (the Student) v. the School of Graduate Studies

Hearing Date(s):

   N/A (appeal conducted on the basis of written submissions to determine
   jurisdiction)

Committee Members:

   Professor Hamish Stewart (Chair)

   Request to remove or change a grade assignment, involving a
   jurisdiction determination. The Student participated in the Summer
   Abroad France program, for which students receive a University of
   Toronto undergraduate credit (not a transfer credit). The Studentâs
   mark was graded out of 20; it was multiplied by five to convert it into
   a mark out of 100 to make it consistent with the Universityâs grading
   scale. Student was dissatisfied with the conversion of his grade. The
   Student petitioned the Faculty, arguing that the conversion formula did
   not adequately reflect the difference between French and U of T grading
   methods and, moreover, that the conversion formula was inconsistent
   with the agreement that he and other students had consented to by
   participating in the program. The Faculty dismissed the Studentâs
   petition, rejecting the Studentâs contention of inconsistency between
   the conversion formula used and that outlined in the course
   description, and noting that that the discrepancy between French and U
   of T methods did not apply to language courses aimed at international
   students. The Student then appealed to the Academic Appeals Committee
   (AAC), requesting a change or removal of the numerical grade
   assignment. The Faculty submitted that the AAC lacked jurisdiction over
   the appeal. The Committee cannot assess academic work and assign a
   grade; it can only determine if a policy was applied fairly and
   consistently. The Committee found that the Studentâs appeal was about
   the fairness of the procedure, not about the fairness of the
   procedureâs application to the Student. The Student was arguing that
   the conversion formula was a bad policy, and Committee emphasized that
   it has no jurisdiction over the fairness of the Faculty policy itself.
   The Committee also found that the Facultyâs reasons for dismissing the
   Studentâs petition adequately addressed the Studentâs concerns, both
   procedurally and substantively, and noted that the Faculty is entitled
   to rely on earlier responses sent to the Student. Appeal dismissed.
   [1]View Report

References

   1. file:///media/12618
