Report 375

DATE:

   September 5, 2014

PARTIES:

   Mr. S.S. (the Student) v. University of Toronto Scarborough (UTSC)

Hearing Date(s):

   June 4, 2014

Committee Members:

   Mr. Tad Brown, Chair
   Professor Salvatore Spadafora
   Mr. Rastko Cvekic

Secretary:

   Ms. Natalie Ramtahal, Coordinator, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty
   Grievances

Appearances:

For the Student Appellant:

   Mr. S.S., the Appellant (âthe Studentâ)
   Mr. Samuel Greene, Downtown Legal Services

For UTSC:

   Professor Mark Schmuckler, Vice Dean of UTSC

   Request for late withdrawal without academic penalty from two courses
   or, in the alternative, removal of the Courses from the Studentâs
   academic record. The Student submitted a petition requesting either to
   rewrite the final examinations or be granted late withdrawal from the
   courses after he learned that he had failed them. The petition included
   a medical note indicating that the Student had recurrent epistaxis
   throughout the period of his exams. UTSC denied the petition, noting
   that the medical form was not evidence that the Student was ill on the
   day of the examinations, and that the exam invigilators had no
   documentation of the Studentâs illness during the exam. The Student
   then appealed to the Subcommittee on Standing at UTSC, which denied his
   request. He then appealed to the Subcommittee on Academic Appeals (SAA)
   of UTSC requesting late withdrawal from the courses. The SAA denied the
   appeal for the same reasons, namely the Studentâs lack of sufficient
   documentation to justify granting the appeal.

   The Student then appealed to the Academic Appeals Committee on medical
   and compassionate grounds. The Student provided additional medical
   documents to the Committee. The Committee denied the appeal, noting
   that the Student had the option to drop the courses right up to the day
   before the examination, and 24 hours after the exam with medical
   documentation. The Committee cited the lack of evidence to support the
   impact of the Studentâs medical condition on his academic performance
   and the lack of evidence to demonstrate that the Studentâs symptoms
   became unpredictably worse at the time of the examinations. The case
   did not justify granting the extraordinary remedy of late withdrawal
   without academic penalty. Appeal dismissed.
   [1]View Report

References

   1. file:///media/12622
