Report 397

DATE:

   July 10, 2018

PARTIES:

   Ms. A. M. (the âStudentâ) v. the Faculty of Arts and Science

Hearing Date(s):

   June 1, 2018

Committee Members:

   Assistant Dean Sara Faherty (Chair)
   Professor Normand Labrie, Faculty Governor
   Mr. Aidan Fishman, Student Governor

Hearing Secretary:

   Ms. Krista Osbourne, Administrative Clerk, Appeals, Discipline and
   Faculty Grievances

Appearances:

For the Student:

   The Student via video connection

For the Faculty of Arts and Science:

   Professor Melanie Woodin, Associate Dean, Undergraduate Issues and
   Academic Planning
   Mr. Thomas MacKay, Director, Faculty Governance & Curriculum Services

   Appeal by the Student of the Facultyâs refusal to remove a Biology &
   Physics Major Program from her academic record. The Student was
   originally awarded a three-year degree with a Major in Biology &
   Physics. She then completed additional credits, entitling her to a
   4-year degree with a minor in English, a minor in Mathematics and a
   general major in Physics. Though the Faculty had added the major in
   Physics to her transcript retroactively, they refused to remove the
   Biology & Physics Major Program. The Committee found that the
   transcript was both accurate and meaningful because it reflected the
   complete history of the Studentâs studies as they progressed. The
   Committee found that even though the Faculty had agreed to make
   retroactive additions to the Studentâs transcript, it was open for it
   to do so based on the rules and requirements in place at the time of
   convocation. The Committee found that adding the Major in Physics
   enhanced the accuracy of the transcript, but removing a program would
   have the opposite effect, making the transcript less accurate because
   the Student would not have been eligible to graduate in 1991 without
   the Biology and Physics Major.Â  Â The Committee went on to note that
   the Committee did not have jurisdiction to change the Studentâs
   transcript (from a Minor in Math to a Major in Math) nor did it have
   jurisdiction to intervene if the Registrar of the Faculty offered to
   write a letter explaining an academic history on behalf of the Student.
   Appeal dismissed.
   [1]View Report

References

   1. file:///media/12642
