REPORT NUMBER 266 OF THE ACADEMIC APPEALS COMMITTEE
April 25, 2002
To the Academic Board,
University of Toronto
Your Committee reports that it held a hearing on Thursday April 25, 2002, at which the
following were present:
Assistant Dean Jane Kidner, Acting Chairperson
Professor Clare Beghtol
Professor Philip Byer
Professor Luigi Girolametto
Ms. Geeta Yadav
Secretary: Mr. Paul Holmes, Judicial Affairs Officer
In Attendance:
Ms. S.R., the Appellant (student)
Mr. Eliot Berlin, counsel for the Appellant
Professor Ian McDonald, Associate Dean, for the University of Toronto at
Scarborough (UTSC)
This committee considered an appeal by Ms. S.R. (the “Appellant”) of the decision of the
Sub-committee on Academic Appeals of the University of Toronto at Scarborough
(“Scarborough”) which held a hearing in this matter on October 22, 2001 and provided
written reasons dated October 24, 2001. The Sub-committee on Academic Appeals
upheld the decision of the Scarborough Subcommittee on Standing dated July 10, 2001
(from the Appellant’s petition of June 22, 2001), not to permit the Appellant late
withdrawal without academic penalty from the 1996 Winter session course MATA26Y.
The Appellant seeks the remedy of retroactive late withdrawal from MATA26Y or
alternatively that a notation be placed on her transcript stating the following: “during the
period covered by the transcript [the Appellant] had an unidentified learning disability
that could have entitled [her] to accommodation; primarily in time allotted for tests and
examinations, and that such tests or examinations be written in a private room with the
assistance of a computer.”
The Facts:
The Appellant was a first year student at Scarborough in the 1996 academic year. The
Appellant received a grade of D+ in the course MATA26Y taken during the 1996 Winter
session. It is the position of the Appellant that her standing in this course was the result of

Report Number 266 of the Academic Appeals Committee
an undiagnosed learning disability which she did not become aware of until September
1998, and is not indicative of her true ability. The Appellant cited the fact that she
received a very high mark in a similar math course (MATH1505) which she took at York
University in the summer of 2001 following her graduation.
In her first year at Scarborough, the Appellant took five courses, and subsequently
dropped one course. She completed the year with four courses, receiving grades of
B- (in ANTA01Y); C (in BIOA03Y); B- (in PSYA01Y); and D+ (in MATA26Y).
Her sessional and cumulative GPA was 2.18. The Appellant’s appeal relates only to her
standing in MATA26Y.
Following her first year of studies at Scarborough, the Appellant transferred to York
University. The Appellant testified that in her first year at York University she continued
to receive grades that she felt did not reflect her true ability. In the Fall/Winter 1997
session, the Appellant received grades of B; C+; C+; C+; and B in her courses.
At the end of her first year at York University, the Appellant was referred to the Learning
Disability Centre to determine if she had a learning disability and therefore needed
special accommodation at the University. The Appellant submitted that she found it very
difficult to complete the required readings for her courses, and that she had to read very
slowly in order to comprehend the material. The Appellant provided written
documentation (Psychoeducational Assessment) from the Jewish Vocational Service of
Metropolitan Toronto dated September 1998 which concluded that “[the Appellant] has a
reading disorder… Based on this, [the Appellant] will require specific accommodations
for University courses.”
Following her assessment, the Appellant testified that she received special
accommodation to write all subsequent tests and exams and that as a result her marks
improved substantially. Specifically, the Appellant testified that she was permitted to take
50% longer to write her tests and exams with the option of asking for more time, and was
permitted to write in a private sound-proof room.
Decision
A retroactive late withdrawal from a course is an extraordinary remedy reserved for the
most serious cases. The Committee considered all of the evidence submitted by the
Appellant. Notwithstanding the Appellant’s learning disability, this Committee is not
persuaded that it should disturb the decision of the Sub-committee on Academic Appeals
with respect to the Appellant’s request for late withdrawal from MATA26Y.
There was no suggestion by the Appellant that she was unaware of the dates by which she
ought to have dropped the course without academic penalty. The Committee heard
evidence that all students experiencing academic difficulty in MATA26Y have the option
at mid year of taking a math reprise course in place of MATA26Y. The Appellant
provided no evidence as to why she did not avail herself of this option. The Appellant

Page 2 of 3

Report Number 266 of the Academic Appeals Committee
also acknowledged that she did not seek any academic counseling when she knew she
was not doing well in MATA26Y.
While the Committee is sympathetic to the fact that the Appellant’s mark in MATA26Y
may have been affected by an undiagnosed learning disability, the Committee is
concerned with the apparent selectivity of the Appellant’s request. The Committee noted
that the Appellant is not seeking late withdrawal without academic penalty for all of her
first year courses at Scarborough, nor is she seeking this remedy for her courses in her
first year at York University, also taken prior to her diagnosis. Rather, the Appellant is
only concerned with eliminating the mark she received for MATA26Y from her
transcript, her lowest mark at both Scarborough and York. The Appellant acknowledged
that to request late withdrawal for all of her first year courses would require her to re-do
university subjects in order to meet her degree requirements to graduate. The Appellant
indicated that she is not willing at this point to take any further university courses.
The Appellant further acknowledged that it is impossible predict to what degree her
learning disability may have been a contributing factor to the grade she received in
MATA26Y. The Committee did not hear compelling testimony that the Appellant’s
learning disability was the sole contributing factor. In particular, the Committee noted
that the Appellant received better grades on her other first year courses at Scarborough
despite the fact that they were courses requiring much greater levels of reading
comprehension, the focus of her learning disability.
The Committee also considered the Appellant’s request to have a notation on her
transcript indicating that she had an undiagnosed learning disability at the time she took
MATA26Y. Counsel for the Appellant provided a case in which such a notation was
allowed in similar circumstances. The Committee also heard testimony from Associate
Dean, Professor MacDonald, that had Scarborough been aware of the Appellant’s
learning disability in 1996, the Appellant would have been given some form of special
consideration to write her tests and exams.
The appeal with respect to late withdrawal from MATA26Y is dismissed. The appeal
with respect to the request for a notation on the transcript is allowed to the extent that the
Appellant have noted on or with her transcript that during the period covered by the
transcript the Appellant had an unidentified learning disability that could have entitled
her to special accommodation for such tests and examinations, with respect to time
allotted, location, and computer assistance provided.
May 21, 2002

Page 3 of 3

