Report 266

DATE:

   May 21, 2002

PARTIES:

   Ms. S.R., (the Student) v UTSC

Hearing Date(s):

   April 25, 2002

Committee Members:

   Assistant Dean Jane Kidner, Acting Chairperson
   Professor Clare Beghtol
   Professor Philip Byer
   Professor Luigi Girolametto
   Ms. Geeta Yadav

Secretary:

   Mr. Paul Holmes, Judicial Affairs Officer

In Attendance:

   Ms. S.R., the Appellant (Student)
   Mr. Eliot Berlin, counsel for the Appellant
   Professor Ian McDonald, Associate Dean, UTSC

   Request for late withdrawal without academic penalty from one course,
   or alternatively that a notation be placed on her transcript stating
   that she had an undiagnosed learning disability at the time she took
   the course. The Student received a grade of D+. The Student claimed
   that her standing in the course was the result of an undiagnosed
   learning disability which she did not become aware of until
   approximately two years after completing the course. The Committee
   found that there was no suggestion by the Student that she was unaware
   of the drop dates for the course nor evidence as to why she did not
   avail herself of the option, afforded to all students who were
   experiencing difficulty in the course, of taking a math reprise course
   in place of the course. The Student acknowledged that she did not seek
   any academic counseling. The Committee found that the Student was only
   seeking late withdrawal without academic penalty for the one course at
   issue, the lowest mark in her academic career, and not for all the
   courses taken prior to the diagnosis of her learning disability. The
   Committee considered the other courses the Student took in the relevant
   time period and the nature of her learning disability and found that it
   was impossible to predict the degree to which the Studentâs learning
   disability had affected her academic performance. With respect to the
   Studentâs request to have a notation on her transcript, the Committee
   considered a case in which such a notation was allowed in similar
   circumstances, and the fact that the Faculty would have been given
   special consideration to the Student had it been aware of her learning
   disability, and found that the request for the notation should be
   allowed. Appeal allowed in part. The appeal with respect to late
   withdrawal from the course was denied. The appeal with respect to the
   request for a notation on the transcript allowed. The Committee ordered
   that the Student have noted on or with her transcript that during the
   period covered by the transcript the Student had an unidentified
   learning disability that could have entitled her to special
   accommodation for such tests and examinations, with respect to time
   allotted, location, and computer assistance provided.
   [1]View Report

References

   1. file:///media/12645
