Case 1092

   DATE:

   March 1, 2022

   PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v. S.G. ("the Student")

   HEARING DATE:

   November 24, 2021, via Zoom

   PANEL MEMBERS:

   Ms. Alexi Wood, Chair
   Professor Richard DiFrancesco, Faculty Panel Member
   Ms. Serena Ju, Student Panel Member

   APPEARANCES:

   Ms. Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg
   Rothstein LLP
   Ms. Jacqueline Cummins, Law Clerk, Paliare Roland Rosenberg Rothstein
   LLP
   Ms. Erica Berry, Representative for the Student, Downtown Legal
   Services
   The Student

   HEARING SECRETARY:

   Ms. Nadia Bruno, Special Projects Officer, Office of Appeals,
   Discipline and Faculty Grievances

   The Student was charged under ss. B.i.1(d) and B.i.1(b) of the‚ØCode of
   Behaviour on Academic Matters, 1995‚Ø(the ‚Code‚) on the basis that the
   Student knowingly represented as his own an idea or expression of an
   idea, and/or the work of another, and that the Student knowingly
   obtained unauthorized assistance in connection with an assignment. In
   the alternative, the Student was charged under s. B.i.3(b) of the Code
   on the basis that the Student knowingly engaged in a form of cheating,
   academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or misrepresentation not
   otherwise described in the Code in order to obtain academic credit or
   other academic advantage of any kind in connection with an assignment.

   The Student and his representative attended the hearing. The Panel
   received an Agreed Statement of Facts (‚ASF‚) and a Joint Submission on
   Penalty (‚JSP‚). The Panel noted that the ASF outlined that the Student
   acknowledged that he entered into the ASF freely and voluntarily,
   knowing the consequences he faces, and with the advice of counsel.

   The Panel noted that the ASF outlined that upon submission of the
   assignment Turnitin flagged the assignment as having an overall 46%
   similarity index, with 39% of the assignment being similar to the
   assignment of another student (‚Student Y‚) in the course. The ASF
   further outlined that once the Professor who taught the course obtained
   the Turnitin Report, she compared the Student‚s assignment to Student
   Y‚s assignment and confirmed that large portions of the text of the two
   assignments were very similar. The Student admitted that the assignment
   contains very similar wording and ideas to that of Student Y‚s with
   numerous word substitutions and re-ordering of text. The Panel
   commented that the ASF outlined that the Student met with the Dean‚s
   Designate where he explained that he had not worked together with
   Student Y but that they had both received assistance from the same
   online service. Furthermore, the person they hired to write their
   respective assignments used the same passages in both of their
   assignments. Based on the evidence submitted in the ASF and the
   submissions from counsel for both parties, the Panel was satisfied,
   based on clear and convincing evidence, that the Student knowingly used
   or possessed an unauthorized aid or obtained unauthorized assistance;
   committed plagiarism; and engaged in a form of cheating, academic
   dishonesty or misconduct. The Panel accepted the Student‚s guilty plea
   with respect to the first charge. The University withdrew the second
   and alternative charge.

   In determining sanction, the Panel noted that a JSP should only be
   rejected in circumstances where giving it effect would be contrary to
   the public interest or would bring the administration of justice into
   disrepute. It is not the Panel‚s role to determine if it would impose
   the same penalty as proposed by the parties. Furthermore, the Panel
   noted it must determine if the outcome falls within a reasonable range
   of outcomes, recognizing the institutional value, efficiency and
   importance of outcomes that are achieved through joint submissions. The
   Panel noted that plagiarism is an extremely serious offence that must
   be treated with the appropriate penalty. Furthermore, deterrence must
   be recognized, and severe penalties enforced. The Panel characterized
   the commercial nature of this offence as an aggravating factor. With
   respect to mitigating factors, the Panel noted that this was the
   Student‚s first offence, he admitted to his guilt from the outset, and
   readily accepted responsibility for his actions. The Panel received
   submissions and case law addressing the question of whether the
   suspension for the misconduct should run concurrently or consecutively
   with the suspension the Student was serving at the time of the hearing.
   The Panel noted that prior cases demonstrated that in situations where
   a student had accepted responsibility for their actions, a concurrent
   suspension was appropriate. The Panel found that the penalty proposed
   in the JSP was not contrary to the public interest nor would it bring
   the administration of justice into disrepute. Based on the forgoing,
   the Panel accepted the JSP. The Panel imposed the following sanctions:
   a final grade of zero in the course; a four-year suspension which is to
   run concurrently with the Student‚s academic suspension; a five-year
   notation on the transcript; and a report to the Provost for
   publication.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/30289
