Case No.: 957
THE UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO

IN THE MATTER OF charges of academic dishonesty made on December 18, 2017 and
amended on January 24, 2018,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic
Matters, 1995,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Act, 1971, S.O. 1971 , c. 56 as
amended S.O. 1978, c. 88

BETWEEN:
UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO

- and -

REASONS FOR DECISION

Hearing Date: June 6, 2018
Members of the Panel:
Mr. Douglas Harrison, Barrister and Solicitor, Chair
Professor Louis Florence, Faculty Panel Member
Mr. Daniel Lazzam , Student Panel Member
Appearances:
Ms. Tina Lie, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg Rothstein LLP,
Barristers
Ms. Nisha Panchal, Student Conduct and Academic Integrity Officer, Office of the VicePrincipal and Dean, University of Toronto Scarborough
Ms. Sana Kawar, Manager, Transcript Centre, University of Toronto
In Attendance:
Ms. Tracey Gameiro, Associate Director, Office of Appeals, Discipline and Faculty
Grievances
Mr. Sean Lourim, Technology Assistant, Office of the Governing Council
Not in Attendance:
Ms. -II ■
the Student

1,

2

1.

This panel of the University Tribunal held a hearing on June 6, 2018 to consider the

charges brought by the University of Toronto (the "University") against Ms. -I ■ ,ti (the
"Student'') under the Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters, 1995 (the "Code").
A.

Preliminary Issue: Proceeding in the Absence of the Student

2.

The hearing was scheduled to begin at 1:45 p.m. on June 6, 2018. At that time,

Discipline Counsel advised that neither the Student nor a representative of the Student had
responded to the Notice of Hearing.
3.

Discipline Counsel made submissions on proceeding with the hearing in the absence

of the Student. She filed Affidavits sworn by Janice Patterson, a legal assistant employed by
the law firm of Paliare Roland Rosenberg Rothstein LLP, and Krista Osbourne, Administrative
Clerk and Hearing Secretary, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances, Office of the
Governing Council, as well as Affidavits of Attempted Service sworn by Crystal Simpson and
Ray Patykewich, a Law Clerk and an agent, respectively, for Donaldson Law Clerk Services
Inc. These affidavits set out that the following attempts had been made to provide notice of
the charges (as amended) and the hearing to the Student:
1.

On February 6, 2017, the Office of the Dean and Vice-Principal
(Academic) sent a letter to the Student (via the email address assigned
to the Student by the University (a utoronto.ca account)) advising of an
allegation of possible academic offences on transcripts the Student had
submitted to outside parties. This letter requested that the Student
arrange an appointment at her earliest convenience to discuss the
matter with the Dean's Designate. Further follow-up emails were sent
by the University to the Student in September and October 2017, and
unsuccessful attempts were made to contact the Student by phone at
the number listed for her in the University of Toronto Repository of
Student Information ("ROSI"). The Student did not respond to any of

3

these attempts to contact her. Accordingly, no meeting was held with
the Dean's Designate.
2.

On December 18, 2017, at 11:12 a.m., the Office of the Vice-Provost,
Faculty and Academic Life, served the charges in this matter on the
Student by email to the Student's utoronto email address and to a
Hotmail email address that the Student had provided in ROSI.

3.

Later that same day, at 3:26 p.m., the Office of Appeals, Discipline and
Faculty Grievances, University of Toronto, served the Student with a
letter regarding the charges filed against her, together with copies of the
Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters, 1995, the Ru/es of Practice
and Procedure of this Tribunal and a pamphlet for Downtown Legal

Services, by email to her utoronto and Hotmail email accounts. The
Office did not receive a "bounce back" message from either of the
Student's two email addresses. The Office also sent these documents
by courier to the Student at the mailing address in the Student's ROSI
account.

The courier package was successfully delivered to that

address on December 19, 2017 and signed for by "Pam Saini".
4.

Also on December 18, 2017, at 4:38 p.m., Discipline Counsel sent an
email to the Student at her utoronto and Hotmail email accounts, to
introduce herself and to advise that important correspondence would be
sent to the Student's two email accounts.

No "bounce back" was

received from either email address.
5.

On January 24, 2018, at 12:44 p.m., the Office of the Vice-Provost,
Faculty and Academic Life, served the amended charges in this matter
on the Student by email to the Student's utoronto and Hotmail email
accounts.

6.

Later in the afternoon on January 24, 2018, the Office of Appeals,
Discipline and Faculty Grievances, University of Toronto, served the
Student, by email to her utoronto and Hotmail email accounts, with (i) a

4

letter regarding the amended charges filed against her (along with a
copy of the December 18, 2017, letter from the Office of Appeals and
its enclosures), and (ii) a copy of the January 24, 2018 letter from the
Office of Vice-Provost regarding the amended charges. The Office did
not receive a "bounce back" message from either of the Student's two
email addresses. These documents were also sent by courier to the
mailing address in the Student's ROSI account.

However, after two

attempts, the courier was unable to deliver the package.
7.

On January 25, 2018, Discipline Counsel sent the Student a letter and
disclosure brief relating to this matter, as well as another copy of the
amended charges and a copy of the University's Policy on Official
Correspondence with Students, to the Student's two email accounts and

by courier to the mailing address in the Student's ROSI account.
Discipline Counsel did not receive a "bounce back" from either of the
Student's two email addresses. The courier package was successfully
delivered and accepted by "A. Shane" on January 26, 2018. However,
on March 26, 2018, the courier package was "returned to sender" to
Discipline Counsel's office via Canada Post.
8.

Discipline Counsel sent additional emails to the Student's utoronto and
Hotmail email addresses on January 30, 2018, February 7, 2018, March
29, 2018 and April 11 , 2018, regarding the scheduling of the hearing.
Discipline Counsel did not receive any "bounce back" messages from
either of the Student's two email addresses.

9.

On March 29, 2018, Discipline Counsel contacted Mike Wiseman,
Acting Director, Information Security, Information Technology Services
at the University, requesting information about the last time when
someone accessed the Student's utoronto account and if the account
was being forwarded to another email address. That same day, Mr.
Wiseman responded to Discipline Counsel to advise that the Student's
utoronto account was last accessed on July 16, 2017 and that the

5

account was currently set to be forwarded to the Student's Hotmail
account.
10.

On April 11, 2018, the Office of Appeals, Discipline and Faculty
Grievances, University of Toronto served the Student with the Notice of
Hearing, together with a copy of the aforementioned letters of
December 18, 2017 and January 24, 2018, and enclosures (which
included the charges), by email to the Student's utoronto and Hotmail
accounts. No "bounce back" message was received from either of the
Student's two email accounts. The Student was advised in this email
that since previous attempts to courier materials to her address listed in
ROSI had been unsuccessful, the Student would be receiving only
electronic copies of documents. However, if the Student wanted hard
copies of the materials, she was free to request same.

11.

On May 24, 2018, Ms. Patterson , on behalf of Discipline Counsel,
attempted to contact the Student by calling the telephone number in the
Student's ROSI account.

Ms. Patterson called the number twice and

both calls went to voicemail and the greeting only identified the phone
number. Ms. Patterson left a message identifying herself as Discipline
Counsel's assistant and left her phone number. She said she was trying
to reach the Student with respect to a University of Toronto matter on
June 6, and asked that the Student call her back. She also asked that
the Student check her University of Toronto and Hotmail email
accounts. Ms. Patterson did not receive a response to her voicema il
messages.
12.

Also on May 24, 2018 , Discipline Counsel sent an email to the Student's
utoronto and Hotmail accounts, to remind the Student of the upcoming
hearing on June 6. On May 25, 2018, Discipline Counsel sent another
email to the Student at her utoronto and Hotmail accounts, serving the
Student with an affidavit on which the University intended to rely at the
hearing. Discipline Counsel did not receive a "bounce back" message

6

from either of the Student's two email accounts, and the Student did not
respond to her emails.
13.

On May 30, 2018 , the Office of Appeals , Discipline and Faculty
Grievances, University of Toronto sent an email to the Student to her
utoronto and Hotmail email accounts to remind her of her upcoming
hearing and to request that she advise if there were any attendees from
her side. No bounce back message was received from either of the two
addresses.

4.

As of June 4, 2018 , in the case of the Office of Appeals, Discipline and Faculty

Grievances, and June 6, 2018, in the case of Discipline Counsel, the Student had not
responded to any of the above-noted correspondence.
5.

Pursuant to sections 6 and 7 of the Ontario Statutory Powers Procedure Act (the "Act")

and Rule 17 of the Tribunal's Rules of Practice and Procedure (the "Rules"), where
reasonable notice of an oral hearing has been given to a party in accordance with the Act and
the party does not attend the hearing, the Tribunal may proceed in the absence of the party
and the party is not entitled to any further notice in the proceeding .
6.

The University requested that the Tribunal proceed with this hearing in the absence of

the Student.
7.

Pursuant to Rule 9 of the Rules, a Notice of Hearing may be served on a student by

various means, including by sending a copy of the document by courier to the student's
mailing address in ROSI or by emailing a copy of the document to the student's email address
in ROSI.
8.

The University's Policy on Official Correspondence with Students expressly states that

students are responsible for maintaining a current and valid postal address and email account
on ROSI. Students are expected to monitor and retrieve all mail, including emails, on a
frequent and consistent basis.

7

9.

The onus of proof is on the University to demonstrate that it provided a student with

reasonable notice of the hearing.
10.

Based on the totality of the attempts made to provide notice to the Student, including

at the address provided by the Student and via the Student's two email addresses, and given
the package sent on December 18, 2017, was accepted and not returned , and there were no
"bounce backs" from the email addresses, the Tribunal concluded that the Student was given
reasonable notice of the hearing in compliance with the notice requirements of the Act and
the Rules.
The Tribunal therefore determined it would proceed to hear the case on its merits in

11 .

the absence of the Student, and the hearing proceeded on the basis that the Student was
deemed to deny the charges (as amended) made against her.

B.

The Charge and Particulars

12.

The Amended Charges and Particulars were detailed in a letter to the Student dated

January 24, 2018 (which superseded the letter of December 18, 2017) and are set out below:
1.

On or about May 17, 2015, you knowingly forged or in any other way altered or
falsified an academic record, and/or uttered, circulated or made use of such
forged, altered or falsified record , namely, a document that purported to be your
Transcript of Consolidated Academic Record, which you submitted to York
University (the "Purported Transcript"), contrary to section B.l.3(a) of the Code.

2.

In the alternative, by submitting the Purported Transcript to York University on or
about May 17, 2015, you knowingly engaged in a form of cheating, academic
dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or misrepresentation not otherwise described in
order to obtain academic credit or other academic advantage of any kind , contrary to
section B.l.3(b) of the Code.

8

Particulars
1.

You were a registered student at the University of Toronto Scarborough from Fall
2012 to Winter 2014.

1.1
2.

In approximately February 2015, you applied for admission to York University.
On or about May 17, 2015, you submitted the Purported Transcript, together with
a copy of the descriptions for the courses that you had purportedly taken at the
University of Toronto, to York University as part of your application, for the
purposes of obtaining transfer credits at York University.

3.

The Purported Transcript was an academic record .

It was forged , altered or

falsified . It falsely represented your academic record at the University of Toronto,
including:
(a) Your sessional grade point averages;
(b) Your annual grade point averages;
(c) Your cumulative grade point averages;
(d) The courses in which you had enrolled;
(e) The grades that you had obtained;
(f) The credits that you had obtained; and
(g) The terms in which you had been enrolled.
4.

By submitting the Purported Transcript to York University, you uttered, circulated
or made use of a forged , altered or falsified academic record.

5.

You submitted the Purported Transcript to York University in support of your
application for admission and to obtain an academic advantage. You did so
knowing that it contained false information, and that it had been forged, altered or
falsified .

9

C.

The Evidence

13.

The University called the evidence of Ms. Sana Kawar, Manager of the University of

Toronto Transcript Centre in the Faculty of Arts and Science, and submitted the Affidavit of
Michelle Cousins, an International Admissions Assessor at York University ("York").
14.

On February 5, 2015, York received an application for admission from the Student.

15.

On May 18, 2015, the Student submitted to York's MyFile portal (an online portal

through which prospective students can upload documents in support of their applications,
among other functions), a document that purported to be a copy of her official transcript from
the University of Toronto (as defined above, the "Purported Transcript") along with a
document containing descriptions of the courses listed in the Purported Transcript. These
documents were submitted in an attempt to obtain transfer credits from York for courses the
Student purportedly completed at the University of Toronto.

16.

The Student was accepted for admission to York commencing in September 2015,

conditional upon York receiving an original transcript from the University of Toronto.
17.

One of Ms. Cousins' duties as International Admissions Assessor at York is to ensure

that international students who apply for admission to York comply with the necessary
admissions requirements. In late 2016, Ms. Cousins was reviewing the Student's file and
determined that the Student had not provided the original transcript from the University of
Toronto.
18.

On December 12, 2016, Ms. Cousins sent an email to Ms. Kawar to verify the

authenticity of several transcripts that York had received from students or prospective
students, including the Student. Ms. Cousins had been in contact with Ms. Kawar previously
for transcript verification requests.
19.

Upon receipt of Ms. Cousins' email, Ms. Kawar, who has been the Manager of the

Transcript Centre since 1997, checked the date of issuance shown on the Purported
Transcript against the records in ROSI and found that no transcript had been issued for the

10

Student on May 17, 2015, the date shown on the Purported Transcript. Upon further review
of the Purported Transcript, Ms. Kawar saw that it contained the signature of Karel Swift as
University Registrar. Ms. Kawar knew that Mr. Swift has not been the Registrar since 2012.
Additionally, Ms. Kawar noted that a watermark that would be generally visible on a copy of
a University of Toronto student transcript was not visible on the Purported Transcript.
20.

Accordingly, on December 13, 2016, Ms. Kawar emailed Ms. Cousins to advise Ms.

Cousins that the Purported Transcript had not been issued by the University of Toronto,
suggesting that the document York had on file for the Student was not valid nor a true
representation of the Student's University of Toronto transcript. Ms. Kawar also noted in her
email that the Registrar's signature was of the previous registrar who had earlier retired from
the University.
21.

The Purported Transcript represented that the Student had completed 11 credits with

a cumulative GPA of 2.18 from Fall 2012 through Winter 2015. At the hearing, the University
presented a copy of the Student's actual transcript and Academic History, which indicated
that she had received only 2.5 credits with a cumulative GPA of 1.67 during her time at the
University from Fall 2012 through Winter 2014.
D.

Decision of the Tribunal

22.

The onus is on the University to establish on the balance of probabilities, using clear

and convincing evidence, that the academic offence charged has been committed by the
Student.
23.

The Student was charged with an offence under Section B.l.3(a) of the Code, which

states:
It shall be an offence for a .. . student ... knowingly:

(a) to forge or in any other way alter or falsify any academic record, or to utter,
circulate or make use of any such forged, altered or falsified record, whether the
record be in print or electronic form;

11

24.

The Student was charged in the alternative with an offence under section B.1.3(b) of

the Code, which states:
It shall be an offence for a ... student ,,, knowingly:

(b) to engage in any form of cheating , academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or
misrepresentation not herein otherwise described , in order to obtain academic credit
or other academic advantage of any kind .

25.

It is accepted that a transcript is an academic record , as defined in section 2(c) of

Appendix "A" of the Code.
26.

The Tribunal determined that the evidence clearly established that the Purported

Transcript provided by the Student to York was false .
27.

Having concluded that the Purported Transcript was a forgery, and given that it was

circulated and/or made use of by the Student, as evidenced by the fact that the Student
provided it to York in an attempt to gain admission and to obtain transfer credits, the Tribunal
found on a balance of probabilities that the Student circulated and made use of the forged
record.
28 .

The Tribunal found that the Student is guilty of forging or in any other way altering or

falsifying an academic record , and/or uttering, circulating or making use of such forged,
altered or falsified record , contrary to section B.l.3(a) of the Code.
29.

The Tribunal having made such a finding of guilt, the University withdrew the

alternative charge against the Student.

E.

Penalty

30.

The matter continued with a hearing on the appropriate sanction. The University

requested that the Tribunal (a) recommend to the President of the University that he
recommend to the Governing Council that the Student be expelled from the University, (b)
make an order immediately suspending the Student for up to five years (or to the date of any

12

decision by the Governing Council to expel her), (c) make an order that a corresponding
notation be made on the Student's transcript; and (d) direct that the Tribunal's decision be
reported to the Provost in order that it may be reported in the campus press with the Student's
name withheld.

31 .

Discipline Counsel submitted that the Tribunal, in determining the appropriate sanction

in a given case, should consider the matters laid out in Mr. C. v. University of Toronto (Case
# 1976/77-3, November 5, 1976), namely (a) the character of the person charged; (b) the
likelihood of a repetition of the offence; (c) the nature of the offence committed; (d) any
extenuating circumstances surrounding the commission of the offence; (e) the detriment to
the University occasioned by the offence; and (f) the need to deter others from committing a
similar offence.
32.

Discipline Counsel noted that the only evidence before the Tribunal showed that the

Student was prepared to make use of a forged document, which was deliberately dishonest.
It was noted that the Student had not participated in the disciplinary process in any manner,
including not meeting with the Dean 's Designate and not responding to the University's
numerous attempts to communicate with her. There was no evidence of either remorse or of
any mitigating circumstance available to the Tribunal that it could take into account.

33.

Discipline Counsel submitted that there was nothing to suggest the Student would not

re-offend or that she has learned from her mistake. While there were no prior offences on
the Student's record, she had not shown remorse and she had not accepted any responsibility
for her actions.
34.

While the offence committed by the Student is essentially forgery, in this instance it

also amounts to an attempt to defraud another academic institution. Forgery of an academic
record is one of the most serious offences a Student can commit. The public, as well as other
academic institutions, rely on the University's records, assuming they are accurate. Making
use of a forged transcript undermines the credibility of the University and its students and
alumni. See The University of Toronto v. R. W (Case# 502, April 18, 2008) at para. 16.

13

35.

Discipline Counsel submitted that attempting to create general deterrence is important

for offences that are difficult to detect. In situations involving forged records, the University
must rely, at least in part, on third parties detecting an issue and bringing it to the University's
attention.

Accordingly, Discipline Counsel submitted that when forgery is detected, it

becomes more important that the Tribunal send a strong message that these acts will not be
tolerated.
36.

As noted by the Tribunal in The University of Toronto v. N.R. (Case# 714, October

11 , 2013, at paras. 22-23:

The offence of forging an academic transcript is viewed by the University as at the most
serious end of the range of sanctions.... Forging or falsifying an academic history is
among the most serious offences a student can commit. The University's reputation
and credibility depends on the reliability of its official records. This type of offence is
detrimental to the University and it is important that others are deterred from engaging
in similar conduct. ...
The falsification of records of transcripts strikes at the heart of the honesty and integrity
which is at the core of the academic experience and evaluation.

37.

Discipline Counsel provided the Tribunal with a chart setting out the range of penalties

imposed for forgery of academic records in prior cases along with copies of those decisions.
It is clear that a recommendation for explusion is a common penalty for such an offence,
particularly when the student has not admitted guilt or acknowledged wrongdoing, as it the
case here.

38.

The Tribunal deliberated and concluded that, under the circumstances, it was

appropriate to make a recommendation for expulsion and to make the other orders sought by
the University.

F.

Conclusion

39.

The Tribunal finds that the Student is guilty of the academic offence of altering or

falsifying an academic record , and/or uttering, circulating or making use of such forged ,
altered or falsified record , contrary to section B.l.3(a) of the Code;

14

40.

Accordingly, the Tribunal orders that the following sanctions be imposed on the

Student:

1.

The Student be immediately suspended from the University of Toronto for a
period of up to 5 years from the date of the Tribunal's order or until Governing
Council makes its decision on expulsion, whichever comes first, and that a
corresponding notation be placed on her academic record and transcript; and

2.

the Tribunal recommends to the President of the University that he recommend
to the Governing Council that the Student be expelled from the University.

41 .

The Tribunal also orders that the case be reported to the Provost for publication of a

notice of this decision and the sanctions imposed, with the name of the Student withheld.

Dated at Toronto this

Mr.Do~

y;ft..- day of ~

hair

2018

