Case #957

   DATE: August 8, 2018
   PARTIES: University of Toronto v. J.A.(âthe Studentâ)
   Hearing Date(s):Â  Â  June 6, 2018
   Panel Members:
   Mr. Douglas Harrison, Barrister and Solicitor, Chair
   Professor Louis Florence, Faculty Panel Member
   Mr. Daniel Lazzam, Student Panel Member
   Appearances:
   Ms. Tina Lie, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg
   Rothstein LLP, Barristers
   Ms. Nisha Panchal, Student Conduct and Academic Integrity Officer,
   Office of the ViceÂ Principal and Dean, University of Toronto
   Scarborough
   Ms. Sana Kawar, Manager, Transcript Centre, University of Toronto
   In Attendance:
   Ms. Tracey Gameiro, Associate Director, Office of Appeals, Discipline
   and Faculty Grievances
   Mr. Sean Lourim, IT Support, Office of the Governing Council
   Not in Attendance:
   The Student
   Trial Division - s. B.i.3(a) â forging or falsifying an academic
   recordÂ  Â â forged transcript â no prior academic misconductÂ  âÂ
   student not present âÂ  notice provided â recommendation of expulsion,
   suspension of up to five years pending expulsion, and a report to the
   Provost with the Studentâs name withheld
   The Student was charged with one charge of forging or falsifying an
   academic record contrary to s.B.i.3(a) of the Code, or in the
   alternative one charge of academic dishonesty not otherwise described
   contrary to s. B.i.3(b) of the Code . The charges related to a
   transcript that had been submitted in support of the Studentâs
   application to York University.Â  The Panel heard evidence from the
   Manager of the Transcript Centre at the University, as well as
   affidavit evidence from the administrator responsible for admissions at
   York University. York contacted the University to authenticate the
   transcript that the Student had submitted in support of her
   application, and the Universityâs administrator noted that the number
   of credits and the grades reported on the document submitted by the
   Student were not the grades the Student received at the University.Â
   The Panel found that the Student guilty of forging an academic record
   contrary to s.B.i.3(a) of the Code.Â  The University withdrew the
   alternative charge.
   The Student did not attend the hearing.Â  The Panel found that adequate
   notice of the hearing had been provided to the Student pursuant to
   sections 6 and 7 of the Ontario Statutory Powers Procedure Act (the
   "Act") and Rule 17 of the Tribunal's Rules of Practice and Procedure
   (the "Rules"),Â  which provide that a Notice of Hearing may be served
   on a student by various means, including by sending a copy of the
   document by courier to the student's mailing address in ROSI or by
   emailing a copy of the document to the student's email address in
   ROSI.Â  The University sent two courier packages to the Studentâs
   address, one of which was returned, as well as a number of emails to
   the email addresses provided by the Student on ROSI which had not
   bounced back.Â  The hearing proceeded in the Studentâs absence, with
   the Panel deeming the Student to deny the charges against her.
   The University requested: (1) that the Student's degree be suspended
   for a period of up to five years pending expulsion; (2) that the
   Tribunal recommend that the Student be expelled from the University;
   (3) that a corresponding notation be put on the Studentâs transcript;
   and (4) that the case be reported to the Provost with the Studentâs
   name withheld.Â  In determining the appropriateness of the penalty as
   proposed, the Panel referred to the Mr. C . [Case No. 1976/77-3;
   November 5, 1976] factors: (a) the character of the person charged; (b)
   the likelihood of a repetition of the offence; (c) the nature of the
   offence committed; (d) any extenuating circumstances surrounding the
   commission of the offence; (e) the detriment to the University
   occasioned by the offence; and (f) the need to deter others from
   committing a similar offence.Â  Without the Student attending the
   hearing, there was no evidence of remorse or any mitigating
   circumstances to consider. The Student had no prior offences, but the
   forgery of a document was a very serious offence - an attempt to
   defraud another academic institution, one which undermines the
   credibility of the University and its students and alumni ( University
   of Toronto v. R. W (Case# 502, April 18, 2008) at para. 16; University
   of Toronto v. N.R. (Case# 714, October 11, 2013, at paras. 22-23).Â
   The Panel found the penalty proposed by the University to be in line
   with precedent, particularly as the Student had not admitted guilt or
   acknowledged wrongdoing. The Panel ordered that: (1) the Student be
   suspended for a period of up to five years pending expulsion; (2) a
   recommendation that the Student be expelled; and (3) that the case be
   reported to the Provost with the Studentâs name withheld.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12971
