Case 794

DATE:

   July 6, 2015

PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v P.T.

Hearing Date(s):

   May 19, 2015

Panel Members:

   John A. Keefe, Chair
   Graeme Hirst, Faculty Member
   Jeffery Couse, Student Member

Appearances:

   Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel
   Julia Wilkes, Counsel for the Student

In Attendance:

   Ms. P.T., the Student
   Lucy Gaspini, Manager, Academic Integrity and Affairs, University of
   Toronto Mississauga
   Christopher Lang, Director, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances
   Ms. R.T., the Studentâs sister
   Student charged with one offence under s. B.i.1(b) , two offences under
   s. B.i.1(d) , two offences under s. B.ii.1(a) and, in the alternative,
   two offences under s. B.i.3(b) of the Code . The charges related to two
   separate allegations, first that the Student aided and abetted her
   sister in committing plagiarism and in using an unauthorized aid or
   obtaining unauthorized assistance from the Student in one course, and
   second that the Student knowingly represented the ideas of another as
   her own work in a written assignment in another course.
   Student was found guilty with respect to the charges of aiding and
   abetting her sister in committing plagiarism and in using unauthorized
   assistance. The Student and her sister each submitted identical
   assignments that contained a few identical errors. There was an Agreed
   Statement of Facts, and the Student pleaded guilty to the charges under
   the first allegation. The Tribunal accepted the plea and found the
   Student guilty of plagiarism, unauthorized aid, and being a party to an
   offence. The University then withdrew the alternative charge of
   academic dishonesty not otherwise described.
   Student was found guilty with respect to the charge of plagiarism.
   Student submitted an assignment that contained numerous words and
   expressions of idea that were verbatim or nearly verbatim from a text
   of an unattributed source. There was an Agreed Statement of Facts, and
   the Student pleaded guilty to the charge of plagiarism. The Tribunal
   accepted the plea and found the Student guilty. The University then
   withdrew the alternative charge of academic dishonesty not otherwise
   described.
   There was a Joint Submission on Penalty and an Agreed Statement of
   Additional Facts for Sanction, which indicated that the Student had
   been disciplined on a prior occasion in respect of a charge of
   plagiarism. That the Student had been warned that a repeat offence
   would lead to more serious consequences was an aggravating factor. The
   Agreed Statement of Additional Facts also included evidence of
   mitigating factors, namely that at the time of the offences, the
   Studentâs parents were unemployed, and therefore the Student was
   required to work a fulltime job while also enrolled as a fulltime
   student.
   Even taking into account the aggravating and mitigating factors, the
   Panel decided that the sanctions proposed in the Joint Submission on
   Penalty were reasonable and there was no basis to reject them. It is
   clearly established that the Tribunal should only reject a Joint
   Submission on Penalty where it is truly unreasonable or unconscionable.
   The Panel imposed a grade assignment of zero in both courses affected
   by the charges; a 3-year suspension; the earlier of either a 4-year
   notation on the Studentâs academic record and transcript, or a notation
   until the Studentâs graduation from the University; and that the case
   be reported to the Provost for publication.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/29343
