THE UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
IN THE MATTER OF charges of academic dishonesty made on February 10, 2015
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code of'Behaviour on Academic
lvfaffers, 1995,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Act, 1971, S.O. 1971, c. 56 as
amended S.O. 1978, c. 88

BETWEEN:
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO

-AND-

P

T

REASONS FOR DECISION

Date of Hearing: May 19, 2015
Members of the Panel:
Mr. John A. Keefe, Barrister and Solicitor, Chair
Professor Graeme Hirst, Faculty Panel Member
Mr. Jeffery Couse, Student Panel Member
Appearance
Ms. Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Barristers
Ms. Julia Wilkes, Lawyer for the Student, Wardle Daley Bernstein Bieber LLP
In Attendance:
Ms. P
T
, the Student
Ms. Lucy Gaspini, Manager, Academic Integrity and Affairs, University of Toronto, Mississauga
Mr. Christopher Lang, Director, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances, Governing Council
Ms. R
T
, Observer

2

INTRODUCTION
1.

The University Tribunal was convened on Tuesday, May 19, 2015 to hear five charges
under the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters, 1995 (the
"Code") laid against the student (the "Student") by letter dated February 10, 2015, from
Professor Sioban Nelson, Vice-Provost, Faculty & Academic Life ("Charges").

2.

The Tribunal was advised that the matter would proceed on the basis of an Agreed
Statement of Facts, and a Joint Submission on Penalty, both dated May 19, 2015.

3.

The Student was present at the hearing and represented by counsel. Her twin sister,
R

4.

T

was also present.

Originally, the charges were brought against both the Student and R

T

. At

the outset of the hearing, the Tribunal was advised that the charges against R

had

been withdrawn and that she would be pleading guilty to one or more of the charges at
the Decanal level. The Tribunal was also advised that the Student would be pleading
guilty to charges 1, 2 and 4 and that, upon the Tribunal finding the Student guilty on
those charges, charges 3 and 5 would be withdrawn.
THE CHARGES
5.

The charges against the Student are as follows:

1.

On or about January 16, 2014, you knowingly represented the ideas of another, or
the expression of the ideas of another as your own work in Assignment 2 that you
submitted in partial completion of the course requirements in ENV/POL250Y5Y
(the "Environmental Politics Course"), and/or you knowingly aided or assisted
R

T

to represent the ideas of another, or the expression of the ideas

of another as her own work in Assignment 2, contrary to sections B.I. l (d) and/or
B.II.1.(a) of the Code.
2.

On or about January 16, 2014, you knowingly used or possessed an unauthorized
aid or aids or obtained unauthorized assistance in connection with Assignment 2

3
in the Environmental Politics Course, and/or you knowingly aided or assisted
R

aT

to use an unauthorized aid or obtain unauthorized assistance in

Assignment 2, contrary to sections B.I.l(b) and/or B.II.l(a) of the Code.
3.

In the alternative to paragraphs 1and2, on or about January 16, 2014, by
submitting Assignment 2 in the Environmental Politics Course, you knowingly
engaged in a form of cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or
misrepresentation and otherwise described in the Code to obtain academic credit
or other academic advantage of any kind, contrary B.l.3(b) of the Code.

4.

On or about June 19, 2014, you knowingly represented the ideas of another, or the
expression of the ideas of another as your own work in Assignment 2 that you
submitted in partial completion of the course requirements in GGR208H5F (the
"Geography Course"), contrary to section B. I.1 (d) of the Code.

5.

In the alternative to paragraph 4, on or about June 19, 2014, by submitting
Assignment 2 in the Geography Course, you knowingly engaged in a form of
cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or misrepresentation and
otherwise described in the Code to obtain academic credit or other academic
advantage of any kind, contrary B.I.3(b) of the Code.

THEAGREEDSTATEMENTOFFACTS
6.

The Agreed Statement of Facts was marked as Exhibit 1. It was signed by counsel for the
University and the Student. The Student acknowledged that the facts set out in the
Agreed Statement of Facts were true.

ENVIRONMENTAL POLITICS - CHARGES 1 AND 2
7.

In 2013/2014 Fall Winter Term, the Student was enrolled in ENV250Y5 Environmental
Politics in Canada (the "Course"). The Student and her sister were enrolled in the course
at the same time.

4

8.

As part of the course requirements, students were required to submit three written
assignments each worth 3 I /3 percent.

9.

Assignment 2 was due on January 16, 2014. The assignment involved identifying
citation errors in a list of citations and correcting them. Part two of the assignment
required the students to correctly cite a list of books and articles.

10.

The Student and her sister each submitted identical assignments that contained a few
identical errors.

11.

The assignment was due on January 16, 2014. Upon review it was determined that the
Student and her sister had collaborated on the assignment. On September 29, 2014, the
Student attended a meeting with the Dean's Designate and explained that she provided
aid and assistance to her sister by editing and changing her sister's assignment and
submitting the edited and changed version on her sister's behalf.

12.

At the hearing, it was acknowledged by counsel for the Student that R

had also

admitted guilt and would be dealt with in a separate proceeding.
13.

The essence of the offence is that the Student aided and abetted R

in committing

the offence of plagiarism, contrary to section B.I.1 (d) and B. II. l(a) of the Code. At the
same time, the same acts in question also involved aiding and abetting R

to use

unauthorized assistance from the Student in completing assignment 2, contrary to s. B.I. 1
(b) and section B. II. l(a) of the Code.
14.

University counsel acknowledged that, although there are two charges, they relate to one
act. The Tribunal considered the conduct to involve one act of wrongdoing that
constituted offences under two separate provisions of the Code. After reviewing the
particulars set out in the Agreed Statement of Facts, the Tribunal asked the Student to
confirm that she agreed to the facts as set out in the Agreed Statement of Facts. The
Student acknowledged the facts and pleaded guilty to charges 1 and 2. The Tribunal
deliberated and concluded that it was prepared to accept the Student's guilty plea and
found the Student guilty on counts 1 and 2. University counsel then withdrew count 3.

5

POPULATION GEOGRAPHY -CHARGE 4
15.

The Student was enrolled in GGR208H5F - Population Geography ("Geography
Course") in the summer term 2014.

16.

As part of the course requirements, the Student was required to submit a written
assignment on June 19, 2014 for an academic credit representing 25 percent of her final
grade.

17.

The assignment submitted by the Student contained numerous words and expressions of
idea that were verbatim or nearly verbatim from a text of an unattributed third party
sources.

18.

The Student submitted the assignment to the computer program Turnitin which showed
that approximately nineteen percent of the words in the assignment were taken from
unattributed sources.

19.

In the Agreed Statement of Facts, the Student admitted that she knowingly committed
plagiarism in submitting the assignment, contrary to section B.I.l(d) of the Code.

20.

After reviewing the facts as set out in the Agreed Statement of Facts, the Student
acknowledged that the facts were substantially correct and she pleaded guilty to charge 4.

21.

The Tribunal deliberated and concluded that it was prepared to accept the Student's
guilty plea and found the Student guilty on the count 4. The University counsel then
withdrew count 5.

JOINT SUBMISSION ON PENALTY
22.

The parties submitted a Joint Submission on Penalty dated May 19, 2015. They also
submitted an Agreed Statement of Additional Facts for Sanction, dated May 19, 2015
signed by University counsel and the Student.

23.

In the Joint Submission on Penalty, the University and the Student jointly submitted that
that the appropriate penalty in all the circumstances would be as follows:

6
(a)

a final grade of zero in:
ENV250Y5 in the Winter 2014 term; and
GGR208H5 in the Summer 2014 term;

(b)

a suspension from the University to commence May 1, 2015, and end April 30,
2018;and

(c)

a notation of the sanction on the Student's academic record and transcript from
the date of the Order until April 30, 2019 or her graduation from the University,
whichever occurs first.

24.

The Parties further submitted that it would be appropriate for the Tribunal to report this
case to the Provost for publication of a notice of the decision of the Tribunal and the
sanction imposed in the University newspapers, with the nal11e of the student withheld.

25.

The Student acknowledged that she had signed the Joint Submission on Penalty and the
Agreed Statement of Additional Facts for Sanction freely and with the advice of outside
legal counsel.

26.

The Agreed Statement of Additional Facts for Sanction indicate that the Student had been
disciplined on a prior occasion in 2011 in respect of a charge of plagiarism, and, more
specifically, that she submitted work for academic credit in ANT208H5 in 2011 from
published sources that was unacceptably similar to an assignment submitted by her sister
R

27.

.

The offence was dealt with at the Decanal Level. The Dean's Designate imposed a
sanction of a grade of zero for the assignment and a six month notation on the Student's
transcript from March 14, 2012 to September 14, 2012.

28.

At the time that offence, was disposed of, the Student received a letter dated March 21,
2012 from the Vice-Dean Undergraduate of the University of Toronto Mississauga that
stated as follows:

7

I trust that you have had time to reflect on the seriousness o/
this incident and will not commit another academic office.
Please be advised that any subsequent allegations o/ (~!fence
are usually re/erred to directly to the Tribunal for
investigation. I urge you to do everything in your power to
make success o/your academic career at the University o/
Toronto, Mississauga.

29.

Included in the Agreed Statement of Additional Facts for Sanction, was evidence of
mitigating circumstances. At the time of these offences and at the present time, both of
the Student's parents were unemployed. The Student and her two sisters were required to
contribute to the family expenses by working approximately f01iy hours per week at two
jobs at the relevant time ofthe offences. In early January, 2014, the Student's parents
and her two sisters had to travel to India to care for an ailing uncle who was severely
developmentally handicapped and had become paralyzed. So, at the time of the first
offence in January 2014, the Student was registered as a full time student and working
full time. At the time of the second offence, she was working pati-time. Her uncle
passed away in October 2014. The Student's parents were unable to make ends meet
and were forced to sell their house in November 2014.

DECISION ON PENALTY
30.

After considering the Agreed Statements of Additional Facts for Sanction including the
evidence of the mitigating circumstances and the Joint Submission on Penalty, and the
submissions of counsel for the University and counsel for the Student and reviewing the
authorities provided by University counsel, the Tribunal concluded that it would accept
the recommended sanctions.

31.

The factors to be considered in determining penalty are well-established
(a)

the character of the person charged;

(b)

the likelihood of a repetition of the offence;

(c)

the nature of the offence committed;

(d)

any extenuating circumstances surrounding the commission of the offence;

(e)

the detriment to the University occasioned by the offence.

8
(f)

the need to deter others from committing a similar offence.

(sec In the matter of'the University o/Toronto Code of13ehaviour, an appeal hy Mr. C',
[Case No. 1976/77-3; November 5, 1976] page 12.)
32.

The Student attended the hearing. She acknowledged her guilt. She admitted, at an early
stage in both cases, that she had committed the acts in question. The mitigating
circumstances were significant and they were carefully considered by the Tribunal.

33.

The Tribunal acknowledged that this was a repeat offence of a similar nature to that
which the Student had been found guilty of at an earlier occasion and that she had been
warned that a repeat offence would lead to more serious consequences.

34.

The Tribunal concluded that the sanctions proposed in the Joint Submission on Penalty
were reasonable and that there was no basis to reject the penalty recommended in the
Joint Submission on Penalty. The Tribunal was directed to several cases where it is
clearly established that the Tribunal should only reject a Joint Submission on Penalty
where it is truly unreasonable or unconscionable (see University of Toronto and
, November 12, 2012, where the following is stated:

The Tribunal was mindfitl that in general, a Joint Submission
in this context should be accepted by the Tribunal unless to do
so " would be contrmy to the public interest or bring the
administration ojjustice into disrepute (f effect was given to
the Joint Submission (sec also R. v. Tsicos, 2006 CANU
33849 (Ont. C.A. per Cronk J. A.))"
35.

After careful consideration, the Tribunal did not consider that it would be contrary to the
public interest or bring an administration of justice into disrepute if the Joint Submission
on Penalty was accepted.

ORDER
36.

At the conclusion of the hearing, the Tribunal made the following order:
(a) THAT the Student is guilty on counts 1, 2 and 4;
(b) TBAT the Tribunal imposes the following sanctions on the Student:
a.

a final grade of zero in:

9
I.

ENV250Y5 in the Winter 2014 term; and

II.

GGR208H5 in the Summer 2014 tenn;

b. a suspension from the University to commence May 1, 2015, and to end
April 30, 2018; and
c. a notation of the sanction on her academic record and transcript from the
date of the Order until April 30, 2019 or her graduation from the
University, whichever occurs first.
d. That this case should be reported to the Provost for publication of a notice
of the decision of the Tribunal and the sanction or sanctions imposed in
the University newspapers, with the name of the Student withheld.

-IA
Dated at Toronto, this£ day of July, 2015.

