UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
IN THE MATTER OF charges of academic dishonesty made on March 3, 2016.
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic

Matters, 1995,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University o_/Toronto Act, 1971, S.O. 1971, c. 56 as amended

S.0. 1978, c. 88
BETWEEN:
UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO (the "University")
-AND~

LIi (the "Student")

REASONS FOR DECISION
Hearing Date: June 27, 2016
Panel Members:
Ms. Roslyn M. Tsao, Lawyer, Chair
Professor Faye Mishna, Factor-Inwentash Faculty of Social Work, Faculty Panel Member
Ms. Vassilia (Julia) Al Akaila, Student Panel Member
Appearances:
Ms. Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel for University, Paliare Roland Barristers
Ms. Lucy Gaspini, Manager, Academic Integrity and Affairs, University of Toronto-Mississauga
Professor Kalina Staub, Instructor for ECOl 00: Introductory Economics, University of Toronto
Mississauga
In Attendance:

Mr. Christopher Lang, Director, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances
Mr. Sean Lourim, IT Support, University of Toronto
Not in Attendance:
Ms. ~
Student

ta,

2

1.

The Trial Division of the Tribunal heard this matter on June 27, 2016. The Student was
charged on March 3, 2016 under the following sections of the Code:
(a)

plagiarism contrary to section B.I.l(d);

(b)

obtaining of unauthorized assistance contrary to section B.1.1 (b ); and

(c)

in the alternative, academic dishonesty contrary to section B.1.3(b ),

relating to an essay ("Assignment") submitted in ECO 100 ("Course") on or about
November 10, 2014.
Hearing to Proceed in Absence of Student

2.

The Student did not attend at the Hearing. The Tribunal waited until after the scheduled
commencement of the Hearing to allow for the Student to appear.

3.

The University presented evidence to the Tribunal confirming proper service of the
Charges dated March 3, 2016 by e-mail to the Student's e-mail address contained in the
Student's ROSI record.

4.

The University presented evidence to the Tribunal confirming proper service of the
Notice of Hearing dated May 17, 2016 and the Revised Notice of Hearing (revised only
with respect to panel members) by e-mail to the Student's e-mail address contained in the
Student's ROSI record. The Notice and Revised Notice of Hearing contain the requisite
warning for non-attendance.

5.

The University confirmed that the Student had last logged into her ROSI email account
on January 25, 2015.

6.

As servic~ of the Charges and Notice of Hearing was effected in accordance with
Paragraph 9(c) of the Rules of Practice and Procedure, the Panel proceeded with the
Hearing in the absence of the Student.

3
Evidence - Professor Staub

7.

The University tendered Professor Staub via Skype from the University of North Carolina
where she is now an instructor.

8.

Professor Staub was the instructor of the Course at the relevant time.

There were

approximately 1200 students enrolled in this first year, full year, Course, in 3 sections.
9.

The Syllabus for the course confirmed the course requirements, including the Assignment
at issue which was a writing assignment worth 4% of the course mark (there was another
writing assignment worth another 4% of the course mark).

10.

Professor Staub confirmed that she reviewed the seriousness of academic misconduct,
including plagiarism, both in the Syllabus and in class. The Syllabus also made it clear
that Turnitin.com would be used for the review of assignments to detect possible
plagiarism.

11.

The Assignment was an essay due approximately during the week of November 3rd ,
2014. The Assignment was an individual, as opposed to group, assignment.

12.

The Student submitted her essay to Turnitin on November 10, 2014 at 10:33 p.m.
Turnitin reported a "Similarity Index" of 85% to another student's assignment submitted
in the same course.

13.

Typically, Professor Staub would consider a similarity index of less than 15% to be
acceptable but anything over 15% would attract scrutiny.

14.

Professor Staub reviewed the Student's Assignment and the assignment submitted by
another student ('Student LL") on November 10th at 7:00 p.m. to review whether the
similarities were explicable.

15.

Professor Staub observed, and as is obvious by a comparison of the two assignments, that
academic misconduct had occurred. The Panel notes that the majority of the Student's
Assignment is identical to LL's assignment, including grammatical or syntax-related
errors.

4

16.

When asked by the Panel, Professor Staub advised that she did not know which student
had copied from the other.

17.

Professor Staub had a meeting with the Student about this matter before referring it to the
Dean's Office.

Findings and Decision of the Tribunal

18.

As in the Decision of The University v. JY, (Case No. 834), dated February 25, 2016,
there was no definitive evidence regarding which of the Student and LL was the
originator of the written assignment. As in the J Y Case, the Panel does not need to
reach a definitive conclusion on that issue because of Section B.ii.l(a)(ii) and/or (iv) of
the Code:
B.ii. l(a)

Every member is a party to an offence under this Code who knowingly:
(i)

actually commits it;

(ii)

does or omits to do anything for the purpose of aiding or
assisting another member to commit the offence;

(iv)

abets, counsels, procures or conspires with another member to
commit or be a party to an offence; ...

19.

It is not necessary for the Panel to decide whether it was the Student or LL who drafted

the original content of the Assignments, whether the students collaborated or whether the
Student copied LL's Assignment or vice versa - all of these scenarios will attract a
finding of guilt provided that we conclude that the Students collaborated or that LL
and/or the Student was aware that her/his work or the other's was being used for
assistance.
20.

The Panel finds that there is clear and convincing evidence that either, the students
collaborated or that one of them (likely Student LL) knowingly made his/her work
available to the Student to copy.

5

21.

Based on the findings above, the Student is found guilty of plagiarism contrary to section
B.1.1 (d) of the Code and of obtaining unauthorized assistance contrary to section 8.1.1 (b)
of the Code.

22.

The University withdrew the alternative charge.

Penalty

23.

The University sought the following penalty:
(a)

a zero in the Course;

(b)

a two (2) year suspension from the University commencing June 27, 2016 and
ending June 26, 2018; and

(c)

a notation of the sanction on the Student's academic record and transcript for three
(3) years ending June 26, 2019.

24.

The Student has no prior record of academic misconduct and appears to have last
attended at the University in the Spring 2015 term (ending April, 2015).

25.

The Student having not appeared to advise of any mitigating circumstances, the Tribunal
accepts the University's recommended penalty after considering the circumstances in this
case and the sanctions granted in similar cases.

26.

An Order has been signed by the Panel to this effect.

27.

The Tribunal is to report this decision to the Provost for publication of a notice of the
decision of the Tribunal and the sanctions imposed in the University's newspapers, with
the name of the Student withheld.

6

Dated at Toronto, this 18th day of July, 2016

Roslyn Tsao, Chair

