Case 850

DATE:

   July 18, 2016

PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v M.L.

Hearing Date(s):

   June 27, 2016

Panel Members:

   Roslyn M. Tsao, Chair
   Faye Mishna, Faculty Member
   Vassilia (Julia) Al Akaila, Student Member

Appearances:

   Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Barristers
   Lucy Gaspini, Manager, Academic Integrity and Affairs, University of
   Toronto Mississauga
   Kalina Staub, Instructor of the Course

In Attendance:

   Christopher Lang, Director, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances
   Sean Lourim, IT Support

   Student charged under s. B.i.1(d) , s. B.i.1(b) and, in the
   alternative, s. B.i.3(b) of the Code . The charges related to
   allegations that the majority of the Studentâs assignment was identical
   to that of another student in the Course. The Student did not attend
   the hearing. The Panel determined that reasonable notice had been
   provided pursuant to the Rules of Practice and Procedure , and it
   proceeded in the absence of the Student.

   Student was found guilty of plagiarism and unauthorized assistance. The
   University then withdrew the alternative charge of academic dishonesty
   not otherwise described. The Panel noted that though it was not clear
   which student had copied from the other, it is not necessary to
   determine who drafted the original contents of the assignment, whether
   the students collaborated, or whether the Student copied from the other
   student or vice versa â all of these scenarios will attract a finding
   of guilt provided that it is clear that the students collaborated or
   that the Student was aware that her work or the otherâs was being used
   for assistance. The Panel found that there was clear and convincing
   evidence that the students collaborated or that one of them knowingly
   made his/her work available to the Student to copy. The Panel accepted
   the Universityâs submissions on penalty and imposed a grade assignment
   of zero in the Course; a 2-year suspension; a 3-year notation on the
   Studentâs academic record and transcript; and that the case be reported
   to the Provost for publication.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12909
