Case 1293

   DATE:

   June 17, 2022

   PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v. C.L. ("the Student")

   HEARING DATE:

   March 10, 2022, via Zoom

   PANEL MEMBERS:

   Ms. Karen Symes, Chair
   Dr. Blake Poland, Faculty Panel Member
   Ms. Julie Farmer, Student Panel Member

   APPEARANCES:

   Mr. Robert Centa, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland
   Rosenberg Rothstein LLP
   Mr. William Webb,¬ Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland
   Rosenberg Rothstein LLP
   The Student

   HEARING SECRETARY:

   Ms. Krista Kennedy, Administrative Clerk & Hearing Secretary, Office of
   Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances

   On seven occasions, the Student‚Øwas charged under s. B.i.1(d) of
   the‚ØCode of Behaviour on Academic Matters, 1995‚Ø(the ‚Code‚) on the
   basis that she knowingly represented as her own an idea or expression
   of an idea, and/or the work of another in various reading responses and
   two essays. In the alternative, the Student was charged under s.
   B.i.3(b) of the Code on the basis that she knowingly engaged in a form
   of cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or
   misrepresentation in order to‚Øobtain academic credit or other academic
   advantage‚Øin connection with various reading responses and two essays.

   The hearing proceeded on the basis of an Agreed Statement of Fact
   (‚ASF‚) and a Joint Submission on Penalty (‚JSP‚). The ASF outlined
   that the Professor who taught the course for which the essays and
   reading responses in question were submitted noted that the Student‚s
   performance was significantly better on a short essay than on her first
   reading response. Upon review of the student‚s reading responses, the
   Professor found that they did not conform to the assignment
   requirements and were unrelated to the course readings. The ASF further
   outlined that the Professor reviewed the document properties for the
   student‚s reading responses and found that the author of the document
   was not the Student. The Professor searched the named author and
   discovered that a user by that name had posted about essay writing
   services on Quora.com. The Professor met with the Student to discuss
   the alleged misconduct and the Student admitted to purchasing all of
   the reading responses and essays from an essay writing service. The
   Student subsequently met with the Dean‚s Designate where she admitted
   she purchased the reading responses and essays for $400.00. The ASF
   outlined that the Student admitted to purchasing the academic work and
   that she did not do any meaningful work on any of the reading responses
   or the essays. Furthermore, the Student admitted that she knew or ought
   to have known that she was representing the ideas, an expression of
   ideas, and the work of another author. The Student also admitted that
   she knew or ought to have known that she was committing plagiarism
   contrary to s.B.i.1(d) of the Code, and knew or ought to have known she
   engaged in a form of cheating or academic dishonesty contrary to
   s.B.i.3(b) of the Code. Based on the admissions made by the Student,
   the ASF, and the supporting materials, the Panel concluded that all
   seven charges had been proven with clear and convincing evidence on a
   balance of probability and accepted the guilty plea of the Student in
   respect of those charges. The University withdrew the charge made in
   the alternative.

   The Student provided an oral statement to the Panel during the hearing.
   The Student told the Panel that she felt deep regret for her actions
   and the loss of her integrity flowing from those actions. The Student
   outlined that she experienced disruptions to her sleep and appetite
   after the misconduct and that she feels as though she‚s squandered the
   opportunities given to her as a result of her parents‚ sacrifices. The
   Student assured the Panel that if she were spared from expulsion, she
   intends to return to the University to ‚properly earn the
   prestigiousness that is a University of Toronto degree.‚ The Panel
   noted that this statement showed insight into her actions, and it had
   no doubt as to the sincerity of her remorse and the regret she feels
   for her actions.

   In determining sanction, the Panel considered the JSP. The Panel noted
   that as set out in the Discipline Appeals Board in the University of
   Toronto and S.C., N.R.H. and M.K.K. (Case Nos. 596, 597 and 598,
   November 23, 2011) at para. 136, ‚purchased essay offences are about as
   serious as can be committed in a University setting.‚ Furthermore, the
   Tribunal should approach sentencing with the ‚working assumption that
   expulsion from the institution is the sanction that is best
   commensurate with the gravity of the offence‚ (para.136). However, the
   Panel noted whether or not expulsion is appropriate will depend on a
   number of factors and the particular facts of the case. When
   considering the JSP, the Panel noted that a JSP may be rejected by a
   panel only in circumstances where to give effect to it would be
   contrary to the public interest or would bring the administration of
   justice into disrepute (University of Toronto and M. A. (Case No. 837,
   December 22, 2016), para. 25). The Panel considered the factors on
   determining sanction outlined in the University of Toronto v. Mr. C.
   (Case No. 1976/77-3, November 5, 1976). The Panel noted that while this
   was a serious offence, there were also important mitigating factors,
   such as the Student‚s profound regret and remorse, the admission of
   guilt, entering into the ASF and JSP, and that this was the Student‚s
   first offence. The Student also demonstrated that she understood the
   gravity of her actions and the damage that such conduct does to the
   integrity of the education system. The Panel noted that the offences
   were committed shortly after the COVID-19 pandemic when students and
   faculty had to pivot to online learning. The Panel found that the
   COVID-19 pandemic created exceptional circumstances and challenges for
   students and that the conduct of the Student cannot be examined without
   placing it in the context of the impact of COVID-19. In light of all
   the circumstances, the Panel found that the joint submission in this
   case was neither contrary to the public interest, nor would it bring
   the administration of justice into disrepute and therefore, accepted
   the JSP. The Panel imposed the following sanctions: a final grade of
   zero in the course, a five-year suspension; a six-year notation on the
   transcript, and a report to the Provost for publication.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/30586
