Case 1423

FILE:

   Case # 1423 (2022-2023)

DATE:

   January 3, 2023

PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v. S.J. (âthe Studentâ)

HEARING DATE(S):

   November 11, 2022, via Zoom

PANEL MEMBERS:

   Andrew Bernstein, Chair

   Professor Vivienne Luk, Faculty Panel Member

   Giselle Dalili, Student Panel Member

APPEARANCES:

   Tina Lie, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg
   Rothstein LLP

   Dmitriy Pak, Downtown Legal Services, for the Student

HEARING SECRETARY:

   Nadia Bruno, Special Projects Officer, Office of Appeals, Discipline
   and Faculty Grievances

   The Student was charged with one count of knowingly having someone
   personate them at a final exam and/or having an intent to commit the
   offence of personation under the Code, did or omitted to do something
   for the purpose of carrying out that intention (other than mere
   preparation to commit the offence), contrary to sections B.i.1(c) and
   B.ii.2 of the Code.Â Alternatively, the Student was also charged with
   one count of knowingly obtaining unauthorized assistance in connection
   with the exam and/or having an intent to commit the offence of
   unauthorized assistance under the Code, did or omitted to do something
   for the purpose of carrying out that intention (other than mere
   preparation to commit the offence), contrary to sections B.i.1(b) and
   B.ii.2 of the Code. In the further alternative, the Student was charged
   with one count of knowingly representing as their own an idea or
   expression of an idea or work of another in the final exam and/or
   having an intent to commit the offence of plagiarism under the Code,
   did or omitted to do something for the purpose of carrying out that
   intention (other than mere preparation to commit the offence), contrary
   to section B.i.1(d) of the Code. In the further alternative, the
   Student was charged for knowingly engaging in a form of cheating,
   academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or misrepresentation not
   otherwise described in the Code in order to obtain academic credit or
   other academic advantage of any kind in connection with the final exam,
   contrary to section B.i.3(b) of the Code.

   The Student accepted liability on all charges and agreed to a statement
   of facts containing evidence that the Student had posted an
   advertisement on Freelancer.com asking for help. Someone replied, and
   the Student sent them $200 and screenshots of the exam question and
   also sought their help. The individual, however, did not help the
   Student. Instead, they demanded more money and threatened the Student
   when the Student eventually indicated they had no more money. The
   individual subsequently advised both course instructors that the
   Student had tried to cheat. When confronted by the Deanâs designate,
   the Student admitted they had sought assistance. However, they
   maintained that they never received assistance and that the work they
   ultimately submitted was their own. The Panel found the Student guilty
   under section B.i.1(b). The University withdrew the other charges.

   The Panel considered the partiesâ joint submission on penalty (âJSPâ)
   but raised concerns. The Panel noted that if it were not for the
   relevant case law, it might have concluded that its concerns rose to
   the level of making the penalty âunreasonable or unconscionable.â For
   example, the Panel wondered whether the harsh penalty in this case was
   accomplishing any legitimate objective of a system of academic
   discipline and whether, in the circumstances, the harshness of the
   likely punishments created incentives to agree to things that did not
   necessarily appear fair to the Student. While it did not necessarily
   agree with the case law, it recognized that consistency is a hallmark
   of an effective tribunal process and gave effect to the JSP.

   The Panel imposed the following sanctions: a grade of zero in the
   course; a five-year suspension; a notation on the Student's transcript
   until their graduation; and a report to the Provost for publication .
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/30843
