Case No.: 977
THE UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
IN THE MATTER OF charges of academic dishonesty made on June 14, 2018,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters,
1995,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Act, 1971, 8.0. 1971, c. 56 as amended
8.0. 1978, C. 88

BETWEEN:

UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
- and-

ialllllcal
DECISION and REASONS
Date of Hearing: August 23, 2018
Members of the Panel:
Ms. Amanda Heale, Chair
Professor Gabe D'Eleuterio, Faculty Panel Member
Mr. Andrey Lapin, Student Panel Member

Appearances:
Ms. Lily Harmer, Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg Rothstein LLP

In Attendance:
Ms. Lucy Gaspini, Director, Academic Success and Integrity, University of Toronto

Hearing Secretary:
Ms. Christopher Lang, Director, Appeals, Discipline and Academic Grievances, University
of Toronto

Not in Attendance:
Mr. ~

ctlll, the Student

2

Introduction
1.
A hearing before the University Tribunal (the "Tribunal") was convened on August
23, 2018 to consider the Charge (as defined below) against the Student, ~
(the "Student").

DIii

The Charge
2.

The charges against the Student (the "Charges") are as follows:
(a)

That the Student knowingly forged or in any other way altered or falsified an
academic record, and/or uttered, circulated or made use of such forged,
altered or falsified record, namely, a document which purported to be a
degree certificate from the University of Toronto dated June 3, 2015,
contrary to section B.l.3(a) of the Code.

(b)

In the alternative, that the Student knowingly engaged in a form of cheating,
academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or misrepresentation not
otherwise described in order to obtain academic credit or other academic
advantage of any kind, contrary to Section B.1.3(b) of the Code.

Particulars

3.

The particulars of the offences charged are as follows
(a)

The Student was a registered student in the University of Toronto
Mississauga from Fall 2012 to Winter 2015. The Student earned no credits.
The Student did not graduate from the University of Toronto.

(b)

As part of the Student's application for a qualification evaluation with the
Chinese Center for Scholarly Exchange ("CSCSE") he provided a document
that purported to be his degree from the University of Toronto dated June
3, 2015.

(c)

The Student forged this document and falsely represented his academic
history and status.

(d)

The Student knew that this document was forged, altered, and/or falsified
when he circulated it.

(e)

The Student had an obligation to provide accurate and truthful information
and not to misrepresent his academic record. The Student had an obligation
not to provide forged or falsified documents in support of his application.

3

Process
4.
The Student did not appear at the hearing. Counsel for the University applied for
an order that the hearing proceed in the absence of the Student.
5.
Counsel for the University submitted the following evidence of the service and
attempted service of notice of the Charge and of the hearing upon the Student:
(a)

The Charges, together with an affidavit of service of Ms. Susan Murphy in
which she swore that she served the Student with the Charges by email at
the email address he had provided to the University in ROSI on June 14,
2018.

(b)

The Notice of Hearing, together with an affidavit of service in which Ms.
Tracey Gameiro affirmed that she served the Notice of Hearing on the
Student by email at the email address he had provided to the University of
Toronto in ROSI on July 13, 2018.

(c)

An affidavit of Ms. Virginia Fletcher, a law clerk with the firm Paliare Roland
Rosenberg Rothstein LLP, in which she swore as follows:
(i)

Students at the University of Toronto are required to maintain current
contact information in their ROSI records and to update their records
when this information changes. The University's Policy on Official
Correspondence with Students (the "Policy") provides that failure to
maintain and advise the University of a current and valid postal and
email address may result in missing important information and will
not be considered an acceptable rationale for failing to receive official
correspondence, and students are expected to monitor and retrieve
their mail and email on a frequent and consistent basis, including
responsibility for ensuring that University email sent to their
University-issued email accounts is received and read.

(ii)

As of June 27, 2018 and July 18, 2018, the Student had not provided
his current/future address on ROSI.

(iii)

She was advised that the Office of Academic Integrity at the
University of Toronto Mississauga campus had emailed the Student
at the email address he had provided to the University of Toronto in
ROSI (the "Utoronto Address") on multiple occasions in March, May
and June of 2017 attempting to schedule a Dean's meeting to
discuss allegations of academic misconduct, and that the Student did
not respond.

4

(iv)

She was advised that the Office of Academic Integrity had also
attempted to reach the Student by telephone at the phone number
he had registered in ROSI as effective during part of the period of his
registration as a student, on multiple occasions in March and June
of 2017, and was unsuccessful in these attempts.

(v)

She was advised that the Student did not attend any Dean's meeting.

(vi)

She sent a letter from Ms. Harmer to the Student on or about June
20, 2018, providing a summary of the anticipated evidence of the
University's witnesses, with enclosures, by email at the Utoronto
Address, did not receive a "bounceback" to the email message, and
did not receive any response from the Student.

(vii)

On or about July 5, 2018, she wrote to the Student by email at the
Utoronto Address to deliver the affidavit of Sana Kawar and propose
scheduling the tribunal hearing on August 23, 2018, did not receive
a "bounceback" to the email message, and did not receive any
response from the Student.

(viii)

On July 6, 2018, she inquired of Mike Wiseman, Acting Director,
Information Security, Information Technology Services at the
University of Toronto, and was advised, that the Utoronto Address
was last a c ~ 1 7 , 2017, and that email was being
forwarded t ~ (the "QQ Address").

(ix)

On July 19, 2018, she forwarded copies of her previous emails to the
Student at his Utoronto Address to the QQ Address, and received an
automated reply email from the QQ Address that, based on a
"Google Translate" translation, she understood to say that the
Student was on vacation and would reply to the email after the
holiday.

(x)

On July 13 and July 19, 2018, Tracey Gameiro of the Office of the
Governing Council sent emails to the Student at the Utoronto
Address, copying Ms. Fletcher. She was advised by Ms. Gameiro
that Ms. Gameiro received an automated reply from the QQ Address
to each of these emails, which were identical to the message that
had been received by Ms. Fletcher.

5

6.
Counsel for the University relied upon sections 9 and 17 of the Rules of Practice
and Procedure of the University (the "Rules") and upon sections 6 and 7 of the Statutory
Powers Procedure Act (Ontario) as authority for the Tribunal to proceed in the absence
of the Student, in light of the service and attempted service upon the Student as reflected
in the evidence.
7.
The Panel was satisfied that it was entitled to proceed in the absence of the
Student and issued an order to that effect. In this regard, the Panel did not rely on the
"Google Translate" translation of the automated reply from the QQ Address. Rather, in
the circumstances and in light of the Policy of the University on official correspondence
with its students, the Panel found that there was sufficient evidence of service and
attempted service to proceed in the absence of the Student.
The Evidence
8.
Counsel for the University focused on the first charge, that the Student knowingly
forged or in any other way altered or falsified an academic record, and/or uttered,
circulated or made use of such forged, altered or falsified record, namely, a document
which purported to be a degree certificate from the University of Toronto dated June 3,
2015, contrary to section B.1.3(a) of the Code.
9.
Counsel for the University proposed to submit evidence by way of the affidavit of
Ms. Sana Kawar, relying on Rule 61 of the Rules of Practice and Procedure. Ms. Kawar
was not in attendance. Rule 62 requires a deponent to attend a hearing if an adverse
party wishes to cross-examine on an affidavit. The affidavit of Ms. Kawar had been sent
to the Student and he did not respond, nor did he attend the hearing. As such, counsel
sought to introduce the affidavit as evidence in the hearing, and the Panel consented to
its introduction.
10.
The Panel heard evidence from Ms. Kawar, Manager at the University of Toronto
Transcript Centre in the Faculty of Arts and Science. Ms. Kawar is one of four employees
at the Transcript Centre, which provides services to students upon their request, including
issuing transcripts. Ms. Kawar often receives calls from institutions seeking to verify a
record, particularly if the record was provided to the student rather than directly to the
institution.
11 .
Ms. Kawar affirmed that on October 28, 2016, she was copied on an email from
Zhu Lei, Overseas Academic Credential Evaluation Office, CSCSE) inquiring about the
validity of two degrees, issued to the Student and to another student otherwise unrelated
to this proceeding (the "Second Student"). Attached were copies of two diplomas and
signed declarations. One of these (the "Challenged Diploma") purported to be a Bachelor
of Commerce diploma granted to the Student on June 3, 2015, together with a signed
declaration providing a date of birth, student number, programme of study, and period of
study. The other (the "Second Diploma") purported to be a diploma granted to the Second

6

Student, together with a signed declaration. Ms. Kawar reviewed the University's records
for the Student and the Second Student, and determined that the Second Diploma was
authentic and true, but that the Challenged Diploma was false. She reviewed the
Student's ROSI record, and determined that the Student was never eligible to receive a
degree from the University, and no degree was conferred on the Student by the
University. Ms. Kawar affirmed that she sent a reply email to CSCSE on October 28, 2016
advising that no degree had been granted by the University to a student matching the
information provided and that the Challenged Diploma was not a copy of a valid University
of Toronto diploma.
12.
Copies of the Challenged Diploma and the Student's ROSI record were attached
to Ms. Kawar's affidavit. The name, student number and birth day and month provided in
the signed Declaration included with the Challenged Diploma were identical to those
appearing on the Student's ROSI record. (A student's birth year does not appear on the
ROSI record.)
Decision
13.
The evidence leads the Panel to conclude on a balance of probabilities that the
Student knowingly forged or in any other way altered or falsified an academic record,
and/or uttered, circulated or made use of such forged, altered or falsified record, namely,
a document which purported to be a degree certificate from the University of Toronto
dated June 3, 2015, contrary to section B.1.3(a) of the Code. The second charge was
therefore withdrawn by the University.
Penalty
14.
Counsel for the University made submissions as to the appropriate sanction.
Counsel sought a penalty of a suspension of the Student from the University for up to five
years and a recommendation to the President of the University that he recommend to the
Governing Council that the Student be expelled from the University.
15.
The offence in this case is very serious. It is critical to the integrity of the University
and its reputation that others can rely upon the official academic records that it provides.
For this reason, the University and the Tribunal have historically taken falsified degree
certificate cases very seriously. The Tribunal has generally imposed a recommendation
of expulsion in such cases in the absence of mitigating circumstances and/or a joint
submission on penalty made by the University and the Student. Counsel for the University
presented the Panel with fifteen Tribunal decisions made in the last five years in respect
of falsified academic records in which a recommendation of expulsion was made or the
student's degree was revoked. In all but one such case, expulsion or revocation was
recommended despite the fact that the offence was, as it is here, the student's first.
16.
In this case, the Student failed to participate in the process or to offer any response
in order to mitigate or explain his conduct. As such, the Panel was not made aware of any

7

factors - such as the Student's character, a low likelihood of repetition, or mitigating
circumstances - that might militate in favour of a lesser sanction.
17.
The Panel accordingly determined that the sanction requested by the University
was appropriate, and made the following order.
Order
The University Tribunal orders that:
18.

That the hearing may proceed in the absence of the Student;

19.
That the Student is guilty of one count of forgery, contrary to sections B.1.3(a) of
the Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters;
20.
That the Student be immediately suspended from the University for a period of up
to five years;
21.
The Tribunal recommends to the President of the University that he recommend
to the Governing Council that the Student be expelled from the University;
22.
That a permanent notation shall be placed on the Student's academic record and
transcript; and
23.
This case shall be reported to the Provost for publication of a notice of the decision
of the Tribunal and the sanctions imposed, with the name of the Student withheld.

.

~J
Dated at Toronto this ~:) day of November, 2018,

