Case #977

   DATE: November 22, 2018
   PARTIES: University of Toronto v. L.D. (âthe Studentâ)
   Hearing Date(s):Â  Â  August 23, 2018
   Panel Members:
   Ms. Amanda Heale, Chair
   Professor Gabe D'Eleuterio, Faculty Panel Member Mr. Andrey Lapin,
   Student Panel Member
   Appearances:
   Ms. Lily Harmer, Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg Rothstein
   LLP
   In Attendance:
   Ms. Lucy Gaspini, Director, Academic Success and Integrity, University
   of Toronto
   Hearing Secretary:
   Ms. Christopher Lang, Director, Appeals, Discipline and Academic
   Grievances, University of Toronto
   Not in Attendance:
   The Student
   Trial Division - s. B.i.3(a) â forging or falsifying an academic
   recordÂ  Â â forged degree certificateÂ  âÂ  student did not attend
   hearingÂ  Â â first offence - suspension ofÂ  five years pending
   expulsion and a report to the Provost with the Studentâs name withheld.
   The Student was charged with one charge of forging or falsifying an
   academic record contrary to s.B.i.3(a) of the Code , or in the
   alternative, one charge of academic dishonesty not otherwise described
   contrary to s. B.i.3(b) of the Code . The charges related to a degree
   certificate that the Student had provided to the Chinese Center for
   Scholarly Exchange (CCSE) that was a forgery.Â  The Student did not
   attend the hearing. In finding that the University had taken
   appropriate steps to notify the Student of the hearing, the Tribunal
   heard evidence that the University had attempted to contact the Student
   numerous times through the email address provided in ROSI, and that the
   Student had checked her ROSI email since the notifications had
   initially been sent. The hearing proceeded in the Studentâs absence.
   The Tribunal found that the Student was guilty of forging an academic
   record on the basis of affidavit evidence that the Student had provided
   a Certificate of Degree to the CCSE that was not issued by the
   University. The affidavit evidence led the Tribunal to conclude that
   the University had proven, on a balance of probabilities, that the
   Student had forged an academic record contrary to s. B.i.3(a) of the
   Code. The University withdrew the alternative charges.Â  Â The Tribunal
   accepted the Universityâs submission on penalty and found that, given
   the seriousness of the offence, the lack of any evidence of mitigating
   circumstances without the Studentâs participation in the process, and
   the need to protect the credibility and academic quality of the
   institution for the benefit of those who rely on them, a recommendation
   of suspension for a period of five years pending expulsion was
   appropriate even though it was the Studentâs first academic offence.
   The Tribunal ordered: an immediate suspension for a period of up to
   five years; a recommendation to the President that the Student be
   expelled; and that the case be reported to the Provost with the
   Studentâs name withheld.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12978
