Case 1116

DATE:

   June 16, 2022

PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v. Z.L. ("the Student")

HEARING DATE:

   February 19, 2021 and March 18, 2022, via Zoom

PANEL MEMBERS:

   Ms. Omo Akintan, Chair
   Professor Kim Widger, Faculty Panel Member
   Mr. Branden Cave, Student Panel Member

APPEARANCES:

   Ms. Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg
   Rothstein LLP

NOT IN ATTENDANCE:

   The Student

HEARING SECRETARY:

   Ms. Carmelle Salomon-Labbe, Associate Director, Office of Appeals,
   Discipline and Faculty Grievances

   The Student was charged under s. B.i.3(a) of the‚ØCode of Behaviour on
   Academic Matters, 1995‚Ø(the ‚Code‚) on the basis that the Student
   knowingly forged or in any other way altered or falsified an academic
   record, and/or uttered, circulated or made use of such forged, altered
   or falsified record, namely a University of Toronto transcript. In
   addition and/or in the alternative, the Student was charged under s.
   B.i.3(b) of the Code on the basis that the Student knowingly engaged in
   a form of cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or
   misrepresentation not otherwise described in the Code in order to
   obtain academic credit or other academic advantage.

   At the initial hearing date, neither the Student nor a representative
   for the Student appeared. The University requested that the Panel
   proceed with the hearing in the Student‚s absence. The University
   tendered evidence that the Student had been served with the notice of
   hearing, the charges and disclosure at the Student‚s utoronto email
   address. The University also tendered evidence that the last time the
   Student accessed her utoronto email was in 2018. The University also
   attempted to reach the Student via telephone, however, both numbers
   listed in the University‚s Repository of Student Information (‚ROSI‚)
   were out of service. The Panel noted that although it was satisfied
   that the University attempted to serve notice on the Student via the
   utoronto address and that such service would typically suffice, the
   Panel determined that the due to the unique features of this case, an
   attempt should be made to reach the Student by mail or courier. The
   initial hearing date was adjourned to allow the University to make
   these additional efforts. The hearing re-convened on March 18, 2022, at
   which time the University provided evidence that they sent a courier
   package to the addresses listed in the Student‚s ROSI account and on
   the Student‚s transcript. Despite these efforts, the Student did not
   response nor did she attend the re-convened date. The Panel was
   satisfied that valid and proper service was effected on the Student
   pursuant to University Tribunal‚s Rules of Practice and Procedure
   (‚Rules‚) and ordered the hearing to proceed in the absence of the
   Student.

   Regarding the charge under s.B.i.3(a) of the Code, the Panel accepted
   affidavit evidence submitted by the University in accordance with rule
   61 of the Rules. The Panel noted that the affidavit of the Manager of
   the University of Toronto Transcript Centre in the Faculty of Arts and
   Science (‚Manager‚) outlined that their office received a request from
   University of New South Wales to verify the authenticity of various
   transcripts, including the Student‚s transcript (‚Purported
   Transcript:‚). The Manager‚s affidavit also outlined that when she
   accessed the Student‚s ROSI record and compared the Purported
   Transcript with the official transcript, the Purported Transcript
   contained various discrepancies. The Panel noted that in comparing the
   Purported Transcript with the Student‚s official transcript, it was
   obvious that the Student circulated and made use of a falsified
   document contrary to s. B.i.3(a) of the Code.

   The Panel received affidavit evidence of the Manager of Academic
   Integrity & Affairs at the Academic Integrity Unit which outlined that
   the Student had previously admitted to one academic offence
   (plagiarism) in which she was sanctioned leniently. In determining
   sanction, the Panel was directed to consider the goals outlined in in
   University of Toronto v. Mr. C (Case No. 1976/77-3, November 5, 1976).
   The Panel noted that forgery is widely recognised as a most serious
   academic offence and deserves the most serious sanctions for the
   reasons outlined in University of Toronto and S.W. (Case No. 948, April
   16, 2020). The Panel outlined that this was a very serious case of
   forgery and the impact of the forgery in this case rendered the
   Purported Transcript a work of fiction. Furthermore, the grades on the
   Purported Transcript bear no resemblance to the Student‚s official
   record. The Panel also noted that this was the Student‚s second offence
   in which she had already been disciplined. The Panel considered the
   evidence of the prior offence an aggravating factor. The Panel echoed
   the findings in University of Toronto and S.G. (Case No.: 1052, October
   20, 2020) which outlines that the penalty must reflect the
   egregiousness of this type of misconduct in order to protect the
   credibility and integrity of academic institutions. The Panel imposed
   the following sanctions: immediate suspension from the University for a
   period not to exceed five years; a recommendation that the Student be
   expelled, as per s. C.ii(b)(i) of Code; and a report to the Provost for
   publication.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/30666
