Case 1388 APPEAL

   [1]Case 1388 - Tribunal

   DATE:

   September 12, 2023

   PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v. X.M. ("the Student")

   HEARING DATE:

   August 11, 2023, via Zoom

   PANEL MEMBERS:

   Patricia D.S. Jackson, Senior Chair
   Professor Ramona Alaggia, Faculty Panel Member
   Brinda Batra, Student Panel Member

   APPEARANCES:

   William Webb, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg
   Rothstein LLP
   The Student

   HEARING SECRETARY:

   Carmelle Salomon-Labbe, Associate Director, Office of Appeals,
   Discipline and Faculty Grievances

   The Trial Division of the University Tribunal found the Student guilty
   of the offence of unauthorized assistance, contrary to section B.I.1
   (b) of the Code. On appeal before the Discipline Appeals Board, the
   Student acknowledged her liability and apologized for the offence. She
   appealed the length of the two-year suspension alone and sought a
   timely reduction of the period of her suspension so that she might
   register in the University before she lost her international student
   status. She also sought to introduce new evidence in support of her
   appeal.

   In dismissing the Student‚s motion to introduce new evidence, the Board
   considered the four traditional criteria for the admission of fresh
   evidence on appeal, i.e., that the evidence: (a) was not available at
   the time of the hearing by the exercise of due diligence; (b) must be
   relevant to a potentially decisive issue at first instance; (c) must be
   credible; and (d) if believed and taken together with the rest of the
   evidence, could reasonably be expected to affect the initial decision.
   The Board agreed with the University‚s assertion that a party seeking
   to adduce new evidence on appeal need not satisfy all of these criteria
   to succeed, and that the Board has greater discretion to permit the
   introduction of such evidence than may exist in other forums. The Board
   noted that the matters the Student sought to introduce as new evidence
   were known to her at the time of the hearing, and that the reason that
   evidence was not adduced was because she did not attend the hearing. In
   the Board‚s view, the new evidence would not affect the outcome beyond
   the adjustment the Board made to the sanctions.

   The Board discussed the standard of review and referenced section E.7
   of the Code. It noted that past decisions have recognized the Board‚s
   very broad powers, and, especially as it relates to sanction, little
   obligation to show deference to the decision below, but that there must
   be a principled reason for the Board to vary the sanction imposed at
   trial. When discussing the Provost‚s Guidance on Sanctions at Appendix
   ‚C‚ of the Code, the Board observed it is helpful guidance to students;
   it is not guidance to or from the Tribunal, nor is it binding on the
   Tribunal. It did not consider that a suspension of two years is
   appropriate in the circumstances.

   In allowing the appeal, the Board considered evidence relating to three
   other students who had admitted to copying each other‚s assignments.
   One of these students had also previously committed another serious
   academic offence. In each of these three cases, the sanction imposed on
   each student was a zero in each copied assignment, and a time-limited
   annotation on their record. In the case of the student who had
   committed three academic offences and was in first year, the annotation
   was two years; for the other two students the annotation was until
   graduation. The argument in this case proceeded on the basis that the
   same penalty was proposed to the Student if she would admit to the
   offence.

   Further, the Board commented that there must be some rational
   relationship, connected to the reasons for imposing a more serious
   sanction, between the sanctions imposed on a student who immediately
   admits an offence, and one who unsuccessfully contests it.

   The Board indicated its agreement with the University of Toronto v
   C.A.M. (Case No. 684, June 3, 2014) for the following propositions: (1)
   It is appropriate that the sanctions imposed after a contested hearing
   be more serious, often significantly more so, than those imposed at the
   decanal level; and (2) Where the record discloses a sanction proposed
   at the decanal level for the very offence in issue by the student in
   question, the difference between that sanction and the one to be
   imposed by a Tribunal must be generally explicable by the factors
   described above as they apply in the circumstances of the particular
   case.

   In addition to the six factors set out in the oft-cited Mr. C. case,
   the Board added a seventh factor to be considered in the imposition of
   the more serious level of sanctions imposed for offences found after a
   Tribunal hearing. It commented that this new factor is an important one
   for the proper and timely administration of the discipline process at
   the University of Toronto. That additional factor is the cost in time
   and resources to the University of proceeding to a contested hearing.

   According to the Board, the appropriate penalty for the Student is the
   zero in her course and a time limited annotation on her record (neither
   of which she contested) but with the period of suspension reduced to
   one year, not two. It accordingly allowed the appeal to the extent of
   reducing the two-year suspension to a one-year suspension, and
   otherwise affirmed the decision below.

   Student‚s appeal allowed as it relates to sanction.
   [2]View Case

References

   1. https://governingcouncil.utoronto.ca/case-summary/case-1388
   2. file:///media/31280
