Case 625

DATE:

   February 13, 2013

PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v. L.W.

Hearing Date(s):

   November 28, 2012

Panel Members:

   Ms. Sarah Kraicer, Chair
   Prof. Ernest Lam, Faculty Member
   Mr. Afshin Ameri, Student Member

Appearances:

   Ms. Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel for the University

In Attendance:

   The Student
   Ms. Lucy Gaspini,Â Manager, Academic Integrity and Affairs, UTM
   Mr. Christopher Lang, Director, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty
   Grievances

   Student charged with offences related to two different assignments in
   two different classes. The first series of charges included one offence
   under s. B.i.1(d), one offence under s. B.i.1(b), and in the
   alternative, one offence under s. B.i.3(b) of the Code. These charges
   related to an allegation that the Student did not attend to conduct
   field work and instead obtained data from a classmate. The Student
   submitted the calculations provided by the classmate as if they were
   his own. The Student met with the Deanâs designate regarding these
   charges and admitted guilt. The Panel accepted the Studentâs guilty
   plea for this first series of charges on the basis of an Agreed
   Statement of Facts. The University withdrew the alternative charge.

   The second series of charges included one offence under s. B.i.1(d),
   one offence under s. B.i.1(f), and in the alternative, one offence
   under s. B.i.3(b) of the Code. The second series of charges also
   included one offence under s. B.i.3(b) not issued in the alternative to
   any other charges. These charges related to an allegation that the
   Student submitted a draft essay that included verbatim or nearly
   verbatim passages from secondary sources that were not properly cited.
   The Student was required to submit a draft essay for review by
   classmates. The classmate reviewing the Studentâs paper suspected that
   parts of it may have been copied from another source. The classmate
   entered the first line of the Studentâs essay on the Google search
   engine and found that sentence and other portions verbatim in a
   website. The classmate confronted the Student and recommended he speak
   with the professor. The Student refused and asked the classmate not to
   speak with the professor. The classmate emailed the professor the next
   day and related his concerns. The classmate attached a copy of the
   Studentâs draft essay, as well as the source of the passages copied
   verbatim without citation. The professor requested the Student submit
   his draft essay and meet as soon as possible. The Student responded
   several days later by email to schedule a meeting. Attached to this
   email was a draft essay that, contrary to assignment requirements, was
   significantly different than the draft essay submitted for peer review
   to the classmate. Approximately 75% of the content of the draft essay
   submitted for peer review included verbatim or nearly verbatim passages
   from secondary sources that were not properly cited. The Student met
   with the Deanâs designate regarding these charges and indicated that he
   was not guilty. The Student, at a later, unspecified time, changed his
   plea to guilty on these charges. The Panel accepted the Studentâs
   guilty plea on the charges. The Panel found that the Student knowingly
   included uncited material and concocted sources in his draft essay.
   Passages from the draft essay were found verbatim in uncited websites
   that were instead cited to two journal articles. The Panel noted that
   while there was no evidence before it of the content of those journal
   articles, it was reasonable to infer from the extensive use of websites
   in the draft essay and the close correspondence between the text of the
   websites and the draft essay that the passages were in fact taken from
   the websites, not the journal articles. The Panel also found that the
   Student revised this draft essay between the time he submitted it for
   peer review and the time he submitted it to the professor, contrary to
   assignment requirements, for the purpose of concealing the fact that
   the original draft contained plagiarism from unattributed websites. The
   University withdrew the alternative charges.

   The Student had been previously found guilty of offences under s.
   B.i.1(b) and s. B.ii.1(a)(ii) of the Code. The Student received decanal
   sanctions for these offences after admitting guilt. There were no
   mitigating circumstances surrounding the commission of the current
   offences before the Tribunal. The Student cooperated with the
   University throughout the process. The Student attended the hearing,
   expressed remorse, and in large measure acknowledged responsibility for
   his actions. The Student had been absent from the University for nearly
   two years prior to the hearing date of his own accord. While the Panel
   did not feel it was appropriate to backdate the sanction to when the
   Student ceased to take courses, the Studentâs voluntary withdrawal was
   a relevant mitigating factor for the purposes of sanction. The Panel
   imposed a final grade of zero in the two courses, a four-year
   suspension, a six-year notation on the Studentâs transcript, and
   ordered that the case be reported to the Provost for publication.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12794
