UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
GOVERNING COUNCIL

Report # 349 of the Academic Appeals Committee
November 16, 2010

To the Academic Board
University of Toronto
Your Committee repo11s that it held a hearing on Wednesday, October 20, 2010, at which
the following persons were present:
Professor Hamish Stewart, Chair
Professor Maydianne Andrade
Professor Robert Baker
Professor Michael Marrus
Ms Priatharsini Sivananthajothy
Secretary: Ms Natalie Ramtahal, Coordinator, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty
Grievances

In Attendance:
M.r B
.B
, The Student
Mr Daniel Goldbloom, Law Student, Downtown Legal Services
Professor Berry Smith, Vice-Dean of the School of Graduate Studies
Ms Jane Alderdice, Director, Quality Assessment and Governance, School of Graduate
Studies

I.

The Appeal

In the Spring of 2009, The Student received a failing grade in CIVl 174 (Finite Elemental
Methods), He asked the Graduate Depaitmental Academic Appeals Committee
(GDAAC) to allow him to withdraw from C!Vl 774 without academic penalty. In a
decision dated June 15, 2009, the GDAAC refused his request. The Student appealed to
the Graduate Academic Appeals Board (GAAB). The GAAB heard the appeal on
September 23, 2009, and, on December 4, 2009, dismissed his appeal by a majority, The
Student appeals to your Academic Appeal Committee, seeking the remedy of late
withdrawal from ClVl 774 without academic penalty.

1

II.

Facts and Applicable Policies

The Facts of The S111de11/ 's Case
The GAAB succinctly stated the facts of the case as follows:
The Student enrolled in CIV 1174 .. , taught by Professor Bentz in the Spring of
2009. The Course Description indicates that the evaluation consisted of IO
weekly short assignments worth l % each, a mid-term test on February 27, 2009
worth 20%, and end of term project wmih 20% and a final exam held on April 20,
2009 wo1ih 50%.
The deadline for withdrawing from courses without academic penalty was
February 27, 2009. At that point in time, The Student had had 5 of the 10
assignments graded, and was doing well in the comse. The mid-term test written
February 27, 2009 was returned on Wednesday, April 15, 2009. The Student did
poorly on the mid-term. The deadline for withdrawal without academic penalty
had passed on Febrnary 27, 2009. The Student wrote the final examination on
April 20, 2009.
The Student received a mark of62% on the fmal examination and a grade ofFZ in the
CO\ll'Se.

Applicable Policies
The University of Toronto's University Grading Practices Policy, revised April 9, 1998,
is hereinafter referred to as the University Grading Policy. This Policy "applies to all
individuals and committees taking part in the evaluation of student performance in
degree, diploma, and ce1iificate credit courses (hereafter referred to as courses)." Its
provisions include the following requirement (emphasis added):
11.2 Classroom Procedmes
To ensme that the method of evaluation in every course reflects appropriate
academic standards and fairness to students, divisional regulations governing
classroom procedures 11111st be consistent with the practices below:

(f) At least one piece of term work which is a pm1 of the evaluation of a student
performance, whether essay, lab report, review, etc., shall be returned to the
student prior to the last date for withdrawal from the comse without academic
penalty.

The University of Toronto's Graduate Grading and Evaluation Practices Policy, May 12,
2004, is hereinafter referred to as the Graduate Grading Policy. This Policy "applies to
all individuals and committees taking paii in the evaluation of student perfo1mance in the
School of Graduate Studies." Its Purposes are expressed as follows:

2

The purpose of the Graduate Grading and Evaluation Practices Policy is to ensure:
(a) that grading practices in the School of Graduate Studies are consistent with
those throughout the University and reflect appropriate academic standards;
(b) that the evaluation of student performance is made in a fair and objective
manner against these academic standards;
(c) that grade scales in the School of Graduate Studies are compatible with those
in other divisions of the University.
Patt 11.1 of the Graduate Grading Policy generally parallels Part 11.2 of the University
Grading Policy, but does not explicitly incorporate para. Il.2(f) of the University Grading
Policy or any requirement comparable to it.

It is not disputed that both the University Grading Policy and the Graduate Grading
Policy apply to The Student as a student enrolled in CIV 1774. The University Grading
Policy applies because CIV 1174 is a course offered by the University of Toronto. The
Graduate Grading Policy applies because The Student was an SGS student emailed in
C!Vl 174.

III.

Previous Decisions

In June 2009, The Student appealed to the GDAAC, seeking late withdrawal from
CIVl 174 without academic penalty. "The Student argued that he was not provided with
timely feedback and that it was unfair to deny him the oppmtunity to assess his
performance, and withdraw from the course if necessary." (GAAB Decision, p. 2.) The
GDAAC found that the instructor had "provided adequate and timely feedback in the
form of 5 assignments prior to ... February 27 th ", the deadline for withdrawal without
academic penalty. Accordingly, the GDAAC rejected The Student's request.
The Student appealed to the GAAB. The Student once again argued that he had not been
provided with adequate feedback before Febniary 27. A majority of the GAAB found
that the letter of the University Grading Policy had been complied with and therefore
dismissed the appeal (p. 4). However, the GAAB, in what might characterized as obiter
dicta, expressed concem about the evaluation scheme in CNI 174H:
... the practice in CNJ 174 was not consistent with the spirit of [the University
Grading Policy]. The policy is intended to ensure student have meaningful
feedback which might then inform their decision to stay in the course or to
withdraw without penalty....
The panel recommends that the Department develop and disseminate best
practices within the existing SGS policy setting out the proportion of graded work
which should be retumed prior to the date for late withdrawals. At a minimum, a
meaningful po1iion of graded work should be returned to the student with

3

feedback before the deadline, unless there are pedagogic reasons in a particular
course where this is not possible.
A minority of the GMB would have allowed The Student's appeal.
IV.

Decision

Submissions
Both the GDAAC's decision and the GAAB's decisions were premised on the
assumption that para. II.2(!) of the University Gi·ading Policy applied to CIVI 174H. The
written submissions received in advance of the hearing were similarly premised on this
assumption.
The central thrnst of The Student's written submissions was that while the grading
scheme for CIV 1174H may have complied with the letter, it did not comply with the
spirit of para. Il.2(f). He stated that if"he had received meaningfol feedback in a timely
fashion, he would not have continued with the course" (The Student's written submission
at para. 23; see also The Student's affidavit of March 2, 2010, at para. 4). The Student's
written submission conceded that the letter of the University Grading Policy had been
complied with, but relied on the GAAB's observation that the intent of para. II.2(f) was
to require "meaningful feedback". The Student submitted that work amounting to 5% of
the final grade was not "meaningful feedback", and noted by way of comparison that in H
courses offered in the Faculty of A1is and Science, instrnctors are required to return
marked assignments worth at least 10% of the total mark before the deadline for
withdrawal without academic penalty. The Student submitted that he was entitled to the
remedy of late withdrawal without academic penalty because the spirit of the policy had
not been followed. This remedy, analogous to the equitable remedies available in a
superior court, would put The Student in the same position he would have been in if the
spirit as well as the letter of para. ll.2(f) had been followed.
In its written submissions, the SGS argued in effect that because some graded work had
been returned to The Student before February 27, the University Grading Policy had been
complied with. The SGS submitted that The Student's statement that he would have
withdrawn from the course if he had received timely feedback was "purely speculative",
and noted that there were no "extenuating circumstances" militating in favour of late
withdrawal. Finally, the SGS took issue with the GAAB 's obiter dicta, noting that the
University Grading Policy did not require "meaningful" feedback and asserting that the
word "meaningful" was "open to extensive subjective interpretation."
In his written reply, The Student submitted that the 5% portion of work returned before
February 27 was "not substantial enough to allow [him] to take stock of his academic
performance" (at para. 7), noted that he was not relying on any extenuating circumstances
of a personal nature (at para. 17), and provided additional evidence in suppo1t of his
sworn statement that he would have dropped the course if he had had more meaningful
feedback (paras. 11-13 and affidavit of June I 0, 20 I 0). Finally, The Student submitted

4

that the word "meaningful", though not capable of precise definition, was a useful way of
expressing the intent behind para. II.2(f) of the University Grading Policy. The Sh1dent
submitted that it would be "patently unreasonable for the university to require that a
'meaningless' amount of term work be returned to the sh1dent by the drop deadline."
At the hearing on October 20, Professor Smith, on behalf of the SGS, did not rely on the
arguments made in the SGS's written submissions, but instead introduced an entirely new
argument. He submitted that because para. Il.2(f) of the University Grading Policy was
not explicitly incorporated into the Graduate Grading Policy, it did not apply to any SGS
courses, including CIV 1174H; thus, any debate over non-compliance with either the
letter or the spirit of para. II.2(!) was iJTelevant. In support of this interpretation of the
grading policies, Professor Smith proffered a print-out of an e-mail dated August 28,
2009, from Anil Purandare, SGS Governance Officer, forwarding an e-mail from
Professor Brian Corman, Dean and Vice-Provost, Graduate Education, to "Graduate
Depmiment, Centre & Institute Directors, Chairs, Coordinators and Administrative
Assistants". A copy of this e-mail is appended to your Committee's report. In the email, Professor Cmman quotes the Provost, Professor Cheryl Misak, as follows:
It seems very clear to me that some of the practices embedded in the Grading
Practices Policy are not apt for many graduate courses. At issue, of course, is the
practice that a substantial piece of work be marked before the drop date. The
reasons for this practice's lack of fit in graduate education are varied. For
instance, in some graduate programs (pm1icularly in professional programs),
courses are compulsory and there is no possibility of dropping a particular course;
some courses are practicum based; and some courses, such as those in my own
discipline, waffant the bulk of the evaluation being based on a substantial research
paper which can only be written towards the end of the course. University policy
allows for local variation and I hereby interpret the current SGS grading policy as
S\1ch local option.
It is obvious from the record that in its original decision, the GDAAC assumed that para.

II.2(f) of the University Grading Policy applied to CIVI 174. The argument that para.
II.2(f) did not apply was not considered by the GAAB. It was not considered in The
Student's original written submissions. It was not raised in the SGS's written
submissions. Therefore, it was not considered in The Student's written reply or in Mr
Goldbloom's initial oral submissions. It was made for the first time during Professor
Smith's presentation of the SGS's case at the hearing.
The decisions of your Committee are in the nature of reviews of decisions made by other
tribunals and decision-makers within the University. Basic norms of procedural fairness
dictate that in an appeal hearing of this kind, the parties should not be surprised by new
arguments that have not been raised earlier in the proceedings. The paiiies are entitled, in
advance of the hearing, to have notice of the issues to be raised and of the submissions to
be made. The evidence put before your Committee is typically documentary and should
be filed in advance. The Chair of your Committee notes that the e-mail from Professor
Corman was sent on August 28, 2009, more than three weeks before the GAAB heard

5

The Student's appeal, and long before the SGS was called on to reply to The Student's
written submissions in this appeal. To the extent that the SGS relied on this document in
suppoti of its position, it had ample oppmiunity to raise the argument that para. II.2(f) did
not apply, well in advance of this hearing. Professor Smith could provide no satisfactory
explanation for the failure of the SGS to raise this argument at an earlier stage in the
proceedings.
In the opinion of the Chair of your Committee, simply to have proceeded with the hearing
at this stage would have been a denial of procedural fairness to The Student. The Chair
explained his concern to the parties and called a recess so that the pmiies could consider
their positions. When the hearing resumed, the Chair offered The Student the
opportunity to adjourn the hearing to another date, to give him time to develop a response
to the SGS's new argument. Mr Goldbloom, on behalf of The Student, stated that he was
prepared to proceed and would not object to the evidence proffered by the SGS. Yom
Committee is very grateflil to The Student and Mr Goldbloom for their willingness to
proceed on October 20.
In response to the SGS' s new argument, Mr Goldbloom made several points. First, he
submitted that Professor Smith's reliance on the new argument indicated that the SGS no
longer took issue with The Student's original arguments. Second, he sought to establish
that CIVI 174 was not a course of the kind where, according to the Provost's qi10ted
words, the application of para. II.2(f) would be unsuitable: it was not compulsory, it was
not practicum-based, and it was not evaluated on the basis of a substantial research paper.
Finally, he noted that there appeared to be no way that an SGS student could determine
whether or not pma. ll.2(f) would apply to any given course.

Reasons
The SGS argues that para. ll.2(f) of the University Grading Policy does not apply to SGS
courses because it is not explicitly repeated in the relevant pait of the Graduate Grading
Policy. Part II.I of the Graduate Grading Policy parallels Part II.2 of the University
Grading Policy; therefore, the omission of para. Il.2(f) must have been deliberate. This
argument has important implications for graduate grading practices, not only with respect
to para. ll.2(f) but potentially with respect to any provision of the University Grading
Policy that is not explicitly repeated in the Graduate Grading Policy. But the Graduate
Grading Policy might also be interpreted as preserving any provision of the University
Grading Policy that is not inconsistent with it. Both policies are equally authoritative,
and both policies apply to SGS courses. The Graduate Grading Policy was enacted after
the most recent amendments to the University Grading Policy; moreover, the stated
purposes of the Graduate Grading Policy indicate Governing Council's intention that
grading practices in SGS be consistent with grading practices in other divisions of the
University. Since para. Il.2(f) is not inconsistent with anything in the Graduate Grading
Policy, on this interpretation, it would apply to SGS courses.
Thus, a complete consideration of the arguments raised at the hearing would require your
Committee to resolve the following issues:

6

I. Does para. ll.2(f) of the University Grading Policy apply to SGS courses?
2. Does the spirit of para. II.2(f) require students to be provided with "meaningful
feedback" before the last date for withdrawal without academic penalty?
If the answer to either question 1 or question 2 is "no", then The Student's appeal would
fail. But if the answer to questions I and 2 is "yes", then a third question would arise:
3. Does a failme to provide "meaningful feedback" before the last date for
withdrawal without academic penalty result in unfairness to students, entitling
them to a remedy?

If the answer to question 3 is "yes", then the following questions relating to The
Student's experience in CIVl 174 would have to be answered:
4. Did the grading scheme for CIV 1174, though in compliance with the letter of
para. ll.2(f), fail to comply with its spirit by failing to provide The Student with
meaningful feedback on his performance before Febmary 27, 2009?
If the answer to question 4 is "no", then The Student's appeal would fail. But if the
answer to question 4 is "yes", then yom Committee would have to consider the final
question:
5. Is The Student entitled to the remedy of late withdrawal without academic
penalty?
Yom Committee found that it was unnecessary to resolve all of these questions about the
proper intet]Jretation of the grading policies. The Student concedes that, strictly
speaking, the grading scheme for C!Vl 174H complied with para. ll.2(f), but argues that
this technical compliance did not comply with the spirit of the paragraph. For that
purpose, he argues, "meaningful feedback" is required, and in the absence of "meaningful
feedback", he has been treated unfairly and is entitled to the remedy of late withdrawal
without academic penalty. A majority of your Committee was of the view that the
evaluation received by The Student was sufficient to constitute "meaningful feedback"
and therefore complied with the letter and, if required, with the spirit of the university's
grading policies. The five weekly assignments provided The Student with regular graded
feedback on different topics related to the course material and amounted to 5% of the
final grade, which, though not as great a proportion as in the Faculty of A11s and Science,
is nonetheless a meaningful, not a meaningless, amount. In other words, the majority of
your Committee found that the answer to question 4 was "no", and therefore found it
unnecessary to answer the remaining questions.
A minority of your Committee would have found that the evaluation received by The
Student did not comply with the spirit of the university's grading policies and therefore
would have granted the remedy sought.
The appeal is dismissed.

7

