Report #349

   DATE: November 16, 2010
   PARTIES: B.B.Â  (the Student) v. University of Toronto, School of
   Graduate Studies
   Hearing Date(s): October 20, 2010
   Committee Members:
   Professor Hamish Stewart, Chair
   Professor Maydianne Andrade
   Professor Robert Baker
   Professor Michael Marrus
   Priatharsini Sivananthajothy
   Appearances:
   For the Student Appellant:
   B.B. (the Student)
   Daniel Goldbloom, DLS for the Student
   For the University of Toronto, School of Graduate Studies:
   Professor Berry Smith, Vice-Dean of the School of Graduate Studies
   Jane Alderdice, Director, Quality Assessment and Governance, School of
   Graduate Studies
   University of Toronto â School of Graduate Studies âÂ  late withdrawal
   without academic penalty â University of Toronto Grading Practices
   Policy â University of Toronto Grading Practices Policy s. II.2 â
   University of Torontoâs Graduate Grading and Evaluation Practices
   Policy â meaningful feedback â 5% of work received prior to withdrawal
   deadline â Faculty of Arts and Sciences grading Policy â norms of
   procedural fairnessÂ Â  â type of course â knowing when the University
   Grading Policy would apply â sufficiently constituting meaningful
   feedback â compliance with University Grading Policy â application of
   two grading policies â appeal dismissed â minority dissent
   Appeal of a decision to deny the Student his petition for a late
   withdrawal without academic penalty. The Committee reviewed the
   University of Torontoâs Grading Practices Policy, specifically, s.
   II.2. stating that at least one piece of term work shall be returned to
   the student prior to the last date for withdrawal from the course
   without academic penalty. The Committee further reviewed the University
   of Torontoâs Graduate Grading and Evaluation Practices Policy,
   specifically its purposes and grading policy section. The Student
   conceded both grading schemes technically applied. The Student
   submitted that the course in which he wanted to withdraw did not comply
   with the spirit of para. II.2(f) of the University Grading Policy in
   that he had not received meaningful feedback. The Student submitted
   that he had only received work amounting to 5% of the final grade and
   that it did not constitute meaningful feedback. The Student further
   submitted that in similar courses offered in the Faculty of Arts and
   Sciences, instructors were required to return marked assignments worth
   at least 10% of the total mark before the deadline for withdrawal
   without academic penalty. The Student submitted that he was entitled to
   the remedy of late withdrawal without academic penalty because the
   spirit of the policy had not been followed even if it had technically
   been complied with. The School of Graduate Studies, in a submission not
   previously raised until the hearing before the Academic Appeals
   Committee, submitted in the appeal to the Committee that because the
   University Grading Policy was not explicitly incorporated into the
   Graduate Grading Policy, it did not apply to the School of Graduate
   Studies. The Committee held that the norms of procedural fairness
   demand that both parties be entitled in advance of the hearing all of
   the issues to be raised. The Committee held that, since this argument
   was new to the hearing, the Student could delay the hearing to change
   his submissions. Counsel for the Student stated that he was prepared to
   proceed and would not object to the new evidence offered by the School
   of Graduate Studies regarding the University Grading Policy. In
   response to the new submissions, Counsel for the Student submitted that
   the Universityâs reliance on the new argument indicated that the
   University no longer took issue with the Studentâs original arguments.
   Counsel for the Student also held that the Universityâs new submissions
   indicated that the course was not a course of the kind where the
   application of the University Grading Policy would be unsuitable and
   that there appeared to be no way that a student in the School of
   Graduate Studies could determine whether or not the University Grading
   Policy would apply to any given course. A majority of the Committee
   held that the evaluation received by the Student was sufficient to
   constitute meaningful feedback and complied with the strict
   interpretation and spirit of the Universityâs grading policies. The
   Committee held that, although only 5% worth of the final grade had been
   returned, less than what was customary in the Faculty of Arts and
   Science, it still constituted a meaningful amount. Appeal dismissed.

   A minority of the Committee found that the evaluation received by the
   Student did not comply with the spirit of the Universityâs grading
   policies and would have granted the remedy sought.
   [1]View Report

References

   1. file:///media/12595
