UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
TRIAL DIVISION
IN THE MATTER of the University of Toronto Act, 1971, S.O. 1971, c. 56, as
amended;
AND IN THE MATTER of the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on
Academic Matters, 1995;
AND IN THE MATTER of disciplinary charges against Mr. N.L.
Members of the Panel:
Rodica David, Q.C., Chair
Carolyn Pitchik, Faculty member
Sharon Walker, Student member
Appearances:
Robert Centa, counsel for the University of Toronto
Ms Jayne Lee, counsel for the Student
Mr. L., the Student
In attendance:
Kristi Gourlay, Manager Office of Student Academic Conduct
CHARGES AND HEARING
1. The Trial Division of the University Tribunal was convened on March 22, 2007 to
consider charges under the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic
Matters, 1995 (the “Code”). The Notice of Hearing is dated February 15, 2007.
2. The charges are as follows:
1. In or about October 2002, you did knowingly forge or in any other way
alter or falsify an academic record, and/or did knowingly utter, circulate or
make use of any such forged, altered or falsified record, whether the
record be in print or electronic form, namely, a University of Toronto
Transcript of Consolidated Academic Record, contrary to Section B.I.3.(a)
of the Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters, 1995 (“Code”).
2. In the alternative, in or about October 2002, you did knowingly engage in
a form of cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or
misrepresentation not otherwise described in order to obtain academic

38869v2

credit or other academic advantage of any kind contrary to Section
B.I.3.(b) of the Code.
3. In or about November 2003, you did knowingly forge or in any other way
alter or falsify an academic record, and/or did knowingly utter, circulate or
make use of any such forged, altered or falsified record, whether the
record be in print or electronic form, namely, a University of Toronto
Transcript of Consolidated Academic Record, contrary to Section B.I.3.(a)
of the Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters, 1995 (“Code”).
4. In the alternative, in or about November 2003, you did knowingly engage
in a form of cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or
misrepresentation not otherwise described in order to obtain academic
credit or other academic advantage of any kind contrary to Section
B.I.3.(b) of the Code.
Pursuant to Section B of the Code you are deemed to have acted knowingly if
you ought reasonably to have known that:
(a)
you forged or in any other way altered or falsified any academic
record, and/or uttered, circulated or made use of any such forged, altered or
falsified record contrary to Section B.I.3.(a) of the Code; and/or
(b)
you engaged in a form of cheating, academic dishonesty or
misconduct, fraud or misrepresentation in order to obtain academic credit or
other academic advantage of any kind contrary to Section B.I.3.(b) of the
Code.
3. The particulars of the charges are as follows:
1. At all material times you were a student at the University of Toronto in the
Faculty of Arts and Science.
2. In or about October 2002, you submitted a document to the Ontario
Universities’ Application Centre (“OUAC”), in support of an application
to medical school, that purported to be a University of Toronto transcript
in the form of a Transcript of Consolidated Academic Record (“2002
Altered Transcript”).
3. The 2002 Altered Transcript did not accurately reflect the information
contained in your official University of Toronto transcript and academic
record.
4. Rather, the 2002 Altered Transcript that you created and/or submitted to
OUAC misrepresented, altered and falsified many of the marks and grade
point averages that you had received for University of Toronto courses, as
reflected in the attached Table 1.
5. In or about November 2003, you submitted a document to OUAC, in
support of an application to medical school that purported to be a
University of Toronto transcript in the form of a Transcript of
Consolidated Academic Record (“2003 Altered Transcript”).

38869v2

6. The 2003 Altered Transcript did not accurately reflect the information
contained in your official University of Toronto transcript and academic
record.
7. Rather, the 2003 Altered Transcript that you created and/or submitted to
OUAC misrepresented, altered and falsified many of the marks and grade
point averages that you had received for University of Toronto courses, as
reflected in the attached Table 1.
4. At the outset of the hearing the Tribunal was advised that the Student had agreed
to plead guilty to Charges #1 and #3. The University withdrew the remaining
charges (#2 and #4). The Student and the University entered into an Agreed
Statement of Facts upon which the guilty pleas were based. A copy of the Agreed
Statement of Facts is attached hereto as an appendix.
5. After reviewing the facts set out in the Agreed Statement of Facts, the Student
indicated his willingness to plead guilty to Charges #1 and #3 and the panel
unanimously agreed after deliberation to accept the guilty pleas.
REASONS FOR DECISION
(delivered orally)
1.

The Tribunal has had an opportunity to consider the Joint Submission on
Sanction and we have decided to accept it. This Joint Submission is as
follows:
The University and The Student submit to the University Tribunal that, in
the circumstances of this case, the appropriate penalty is:
a. the Tribunal shall recommend to the Governing Council that it cancel and
recall The Student’s degree of Bachelor of Science;
b. permanently record the sanction imposed on his academic record and
transcript; and
c. report this case to the Provost for publication with The Student’s name
withheld.

2.

The factors that we have considered are set out below.

3.

The Student, is charged with and pleaded guilty to two separate and distinct
offences under Section B.I.3.(a) of the University of Toronto, Code of
Behavior (“Code”) of forgery of his transcripts on two separate occasions
each for the purpose of trying to gain admission into a medical programme
leading to a medical degree. Two other charges were withdrawn.

4.

Both of these offences are extremely serious; indeed, we consider these
offences to be as serious as any offence that could possibly be committed

38869v2

under the Code. An offence of this nature reflects directly on the entire
University. It is our view that it is very important that sanctions for such
serious transgressions act affect not only the person charged but also that they
act as a deterrent to anyone else who might consider -- ever for a split second
in time – to engage in this type of behaviour.
5.

The reputation of the University of Toronto is extremely important to every
single person who has any connection with the University of Toronto: every
student, every faculty member, everyone who works at the University. It is
therefore extremely important that the University of Toronto does everything
that it can to ensure that its students act honourably, that they are encouraged
to work hard, that the product of their hard work receives appropriate
recognition, and that they benefit from the rewards resulting from their
achievements. It is therefore of paramount importance that every student’s
achievements are presented accurately and can be relied on by both the
academic and outside community.

6.

In considering the sanctions that are appropriate to impose in this case, we
have taken into account a number of factors.

7.

It is important to note that the forgery was perpetrated not just once, but it
appears that when the marks that were originally forged were not high enough
to gain admission into medical school, then The Student decided to increase
his marks by way of an additional forgery indicating higher marks. In our
view the accused’s conduct is more egregious where he engaged in two
separate deliberate acts of forgery a period of time apart from one another.

8.

We note that there was no evidence given on any extenuating or mitigating
circumstances. The submission that was made -- that was accepted by the
University -- that The Student was 27 years old and that he has worked in a
Laundromat for a number of years. We do not see these factors creating any
type of extenuating circumstances.

9.

We are taken by the fact that The Student gave the Dean’s Designate the
excuse that this conduct occurred “on the spur of the moment”. We find that
explanation extremely difficult to accept. Although there is no evidence as to
how or what methodology was used to create these forged documents, it
stretches credulity to think that these documents could have been created
twice on the spur of the moment.

10.

We do not have any evidence as to whether The Student had ever been
subjected to any other disciplinary proceedings as no evidence on this point
was adduced.

11.

This case, in our view, is more serious than the precedent that was put before
us in the case of the University of Toronto v.
as it would appear from the

38869v2

■

reasons in that case that there was only one act of forgery. There were also
expressions of remorse. We have not heard any such expressions from The
Student.
12.

As a result, while we accept the Joint Submission on Sanction, which we
presume reflects much consideration by both the University and the accused,
we wish to make our views known and hope that these views will be taken
into consideration if The Student makes any application in future for
reinstatement of his degree.

13.

It appears that we have to go back to section 48 of the University of Toronto
Act of 1947 to find the jurisdiction for the restoration of a degree that has been
cancelled, recalled or suspended. There are, as far as we are aware, no specific
regulations or directions as to what the procedure is for that to be
implemented.

14.

Our jurisdiction under the Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters, is set out
in section C.II.b. 1, 2 and 3. While our jurisdiction is limited to making a
recommendation to the Governing Council under section (j)(i), we wish to
express our view that the seriousness of this conduct should be taken into
account in any future application that The Student might ever make for
reinstatement of his degree. If we had been given additional jurisdiction, we
would have recommended that a significant amount of time should expire
before The Student should even consider making such an application and
certainly before any such application could succeed.

Rodica David, Q.C. Chair

38869v2

