Case No.: 927
THE UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
IN THE MATTER OF charges of academic dishonesty made on March 23, 2017,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic
Matters, 1995,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Act, 1971, S.O. 1971, c. 56 as
amended S.O. 1978, c. 88
BETWEEN:
UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
- and -

REASONS FOR DECISION
Hearing Date: October 25, 2017
Members of the Panel:
Mr. Shaun Laubman, Lawyer, Chair
Professor Bruno Magliocchetti, Faculty Panel Member
Mr. Chad Jankowski, Student Panel Member
Appearances:
Ms. Tina Lie, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Barristers
Professor Eleanor Irwin, Dean's Designate, University of Toronto - Scarborough
In Attendance:
Ms. Tracey Gameiro, Hearing Secretary and Associate Director, Appeals, Discipline and
Faculty Grievances, University of Toronto
Ms. Cheryl Woodin, University Tribunal Co-Chair, Observer
Mr. Sean Lourim, Technology Assistant, Office of the Governing Council
Not in Attendance:
Mr. - - ~ . the Student

2

1. The Trial Division of the University Tribunal heard this matter on October 25,
2017.
2.

..-i ~ (the "Student") did not attend and the hearing proceeded in his
absence. The Student consented to the hearing proceeding in his absence and
signed a consent, dated October 20, 2017, in which he confirmed that he did not
wish to attend or participate in the proceeding.

3. The Student was charged as follows:
a. On or about March 24, 2016, you knowingly forged or in any other way
altered or falsified an academic record, and/or uttered, circulated or made
use of such forged, altered or falsified record, namely, a letter purportedly
from the University of Toronto Scarborough Office of the Registrar, dated
March 24, 2016, which indicated, among other things, that you had
completed your Bachelor of Arts degree, contrary to section B.l.3(a) of the
Code.

b. On or about March 24, 2016, you knowingly forged or in any other way
altered or falsified an academic record, and/or uttered, circulated or made
use of such forged, altered or falsified record, namely, a letter purportedly
from the University of Toronto Scarborough Office of the Registrar, dated
March 24, 2016, which indicated, among other things, that you had
registered in the law program at the University of Toronto Scarborough,
contrary to section B.l.3(a) of the Code. (the "Charges")

4. The Student and the University entered into an Agreed Statement of Facts
("ASF") and a Joint Submission on Penalty ("JSP").
5. The relevant portions of the ASF are set out below:
a. This matter arises out of charges of academic misconduct filed on March
23, 2017 by the Provost of the University of Toronto (the "Provost") under
the Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters ("Code") .

3

b. The Student admits that he received a copy of the charges filed by the
Provost.
c. The Student admits that he received a copy of the notice of hearing in this
matter and that he has received reasonable notice of this hearing.
d. The Student waives the reading of the charges filed against him, and pleads
guilty to charges #1 and #2.
e. From Fall 1998 to Winter 2001, the Student was a student at the University
of Toronto Scarborough Campus ("UTSC").
f.

On or about March 23, 2016, the Student requested a letter, by email, from
the UTSC Office of the Registrar confirming that he attended at the
University of Toronto from 1998 to 2002 for the purposes of a job
application.

g. On March 24, 2016, the UTSC Office of the Registrar provided the Student
with a letter, dated March 24, 2016, which indicated that the Student was
registered at UTSC from Fall 1998 to Winter 2001 (the "UTSC Letter').
h. The Student did not submit the UTSC Letter to his prospective employer or
the background checker retained by his prospective employer.
i.

Instead, on March 24, 2016, the Student submitted two letters dated March
24, 2016, purportedly from the UTSC Office of the Registrar, to his
prospective employer and/or the background checker retained by his
prospective employer, in support of his application for employment, as
follows:

i. the first letter indicated that the Student was registered at UTSC from
Fall 1998 to Winter 2002 and that he had completed his Bachelor of
Arts in Sociology on June 18, 2002 (the "First Forged Letter"); and

4

ii. the second letter indicated that the Student was registered at UTSC
from Fall 2002 to Winter 2005 in its "law program" (the "Second
Forged Letter").
j.

The UTSC Office of the Registrar did not sign the First Forged Letter or the
Second Forged Letter.

k. The Student was not registered at UTSC in Fall 2001 to Winter 2002 Winter,
and did not complete a Bachelor of Arts degree with UTSC, as indicated in
the First Forged Letter.

I.

The Student was not registered at UTSC from Fall 2002 to Winter 2005 in
its "law program", as indicated in the Second Forged Letter.

m. On March 24, 2016, the University of Toronto received a degree verification
request from Jennifer Luc at First Advantage, a background checking
service, seeking to confirm that the Student had received a Bachelor of Arts
degree and a Bachelor of Law degree from the University.
n. On March 28, 2016, Terry Johnston of the Office of Convocation, University
of Toronto, advised Ms. Luc that no degree had been granted to the
Student. In response, Ms. Luc sent Mr. Johnston copies of the First Forged
Letter and the Second Forged Letter. Mr. Johnston responded, confirming
that he had contacted UTSC and received confirmation that no degree had
been granted to the Student.
o. On April 12, 2016, Professor Wayne Dowler, Dean's Designate for
Academic Offences at UTSC, sent a letter to the Student inviting him to a
meeting to discuss the allegation of a possible academic offence relating to
the First Forged Letter and the Second Forged Letter.
p. On September 23, 2016, in response to emails from Nisha Panchal, Student
Conduct & Academic Integrity Officer, Office of the Dean & Vice-Principal
Academic at UTSC, to schedule the Student's meeting with the Dean's

5

Designate, the Student sent an email to Ms. Panchal advising that he had
agreed to admit to the offence set out in the Dean's Designate's letter.
q. On October 5, 2016, the Student had a telephone meeting with Professor
Eleanor Irwin, Dean's Designate for Academic Offences at UTSC.

Ms.

Panchal was in attendance and heard both sides of the conversation and
was present to take notes, but was not involved in the discussion. At the
meeting, the Student pleaded guilty to:
i. forgery of the First Forged Letter, a document purporting to be a letter
from UTSC dated March 24, 2016 stating that he had completed a
Bachelor of Arts in Sociology from Fall 1998 to Winter 2002, which
was circulated to an employment agency (contrary to s. B.l.3(a) of
the Code);
ii. forgery of the Second Forged Letter, a document purporting to be a
letter from UTSC dated March 24, 2016 stating he had been
registered in the law program at UTSC from Fall 2002 to Winter 2005,
which was circulated to an employment agency (contrary to s.
B.l.3(a) of the Code).
r.

The Student admits that he knowingly:
i. forged, altered or falsified the First Forged Letter and the Second
Forged Letter (contrary to s. B.l.3(a) of the Code);
ii. submitted the First Forged Letter and the Second Forged Letter to a
prospective employer and/or background checker retained by the
prospective employer, knowing that they both contained false
information and that they had been forged, altered or falsified;
(contrary to s. B.l.3(a) of the Code); and
iii. uttered, circulated or made use of the First Forged Letter and the
Second Forged Letter by submitting them to his prospective

6

employer and/or background checker retained by his prospective
employer (contrary to s. B.l.3(a) of the Code).
s. The Student acknowledges that:

i. the Provost had advised him of his right to obtain legal counsel; and
ii. he signed the ASF freely and voluntarily, knowing of the potential
consequences he faces.
6. Given the Student's admissions and guilty plea in respect of the Charges, as set out
in the ASF, the Tribunal found him guilty of two counts of forging or in any other way
altering or falsifying an academic record, and/or uttering, circulating or making use of
such forged, altered or falsified record, contrary to section B.l.3(a) of the Code.

Penalty
7. Following the findings on liability, the Tribunal heard from the University regarding
the JSP.
8. The University and the Student agreed that, in all the circumstance of the case, it was
appropriate to impose the following sanctions on the Student:
a. a recommendation to the President of the University that he recommend to
the Governing Council that the Student be expelled from the University;
b. the Student be immediately suspended from the University of Toronto for a
period of up to 5 years from the date of the Tribunal's order or until
Governing Council makes its decision on expulsion, whichever comes first,
and that a corresponding notation be placed on his academic record and
transcript; and
c. that this case shall be reported to the Provost for publication of a notice of
the decision of the Tribunal and the sanction imposed in the University of
Toronto newspapers, with the name of the Student withheld.

7

9. The Student acknowledged that:
a. the Provost had advised him of his right to obtain legal counsel; and
b. he signed the JSP freely and voluntarily, knowing of the potential
consequences he was facing and knowing that the Tribunal is not bound by
the JSP and has the discretion to impose a different penalty.
10. Given the seriousness of the Student's misconduct, the Tribunal was satisfied that
the recommended penalty was appropriate. The forgery at issue in this case
threatens the University's reputation amongst employers and a strong deterrent
against similar conduct by others in the future is warranted.
11.Accordingly, the Tribunal imposed the following penalty on the Student:
a. he be immediately suspended from the University of Toronto for a period of
up to 5 years from the date of this order or until Governing Council makes
its decision on expulsion, whichever comes first, and that a corresponding
notation be placed on his academic record and transcript; and
b. the Tribunal recommends to the President of the University that he
recommend to the Governing Council that the Student be expelled from the
University; and
c. that this case be reported to the Provost for publication of a notice of the
decision of the Tribunal and the sanction imposed, with the Student's name
withheld.
Dated at Toronto, this

tO day of January, 2018

