Case #927

   DATE: January 10, 2018
   PARTIES: University of Toronto v. J.F. (âthe Studentâ)
   Hearing Date(s): October 25, 2017
   Panel Members:
   Mr. Shaun Laubman, Lawyer, Chair
   Professor Bruno Magliocchetti, Faculty Panel Member
   Mr. Chad Jankowski, Student Panel Member
   Appearances:
   Ms. Tina Lie, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Barristers
   Professor Eleanor Irwin, Dean's Designate, University of Toronto â
   Scarborough
   In Attendance:
   Ms. Tracey Gameiro, Hearing Secretary and Associate Director, Appeals,
   Discipline and Faculty Grievances, University of Toronto
   Ms. Cheryl Woodin, University Tribunal Co-Chair, Observer
   Mr. Sean Lourim, Technology Assistant, Office of the Governing Council
   Not in Attendance:
   The Student
   Trial Division â section B.l.3(a) â falsification of an academic record
   âÂ  student falsified letters from the Registrar and submitted them to
   prospective employer âÂ  student not present âÂ  Agreed Statement of
   Facts âÂ  Joint Submission on Penalty âÂ  recommendation of expulsion,
   suspension for a period of up to 5 years from the date of the order or
   until Governing Council makes its decision on expulsion, corresponding
   notation on the Studentâs transcript, and report to the Provost with
   the Studentâs name withheld.
   The Student was charged with two counts of falsifying an academic
   record contrary to s. B.i.3(a) of the Code. The charges related to two
   letters that the Student had forged, purporting to be from the
   Registrar of the University, and provided to a prospective employer.Â
   The Student consented to have the hearing proceed in his absence by
   signing a consent. The matter proceeded by way of Agreed Statement of
   Facts (ASF), wherein the Student admitted that he had knowingly forged
   the two letters at issue contrary to s. B.1.3(a) of the Code . The
   Tribunal accepted the Studentâs guilty plea, and found him guilty of
   two counts of forging an academic record. The Panel accepted the
   partiesâ Joint Submission on Penalty (JSP) and ordered a sanction of an
   immediate suspension from the University for five years pending
   expulsion; a recommendation of that the Student be expelled; a
   corresponding notation of the sanction on the Studentâs academic record
   and transcript; and that the matter be reported to the Provost for
   publication.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12962
