Report #318

   DATE: April 20, 2007
   PARTIES: Student Appellant v. UTM
   Hearing Date(s): April 16, 2007
   Committee Members:
   Professor Ralph Scane, Senior Chair
   Ms Coralie D‚Souza
   Professor Louise Lemieux-Charles
   Ms Maureen Somerville
   Professor Lorne Sossin
   Secretary:
   Ms Cristina Oke

   Appearances:
   the Student Appellant
   For UTM:
   Professor Gordon Anderson
   UTM ‚ late withdrawal without academic penalty ‚ unexpected personal
   circumstances ‚ Faculty custom to grant late withdrawal, once only per
   student, when requested before final examination ‚ circumstances lasted
   longer than could reasonably be expected ‚ cultural reasons led Student
   to give greater weight to advice of teaching assistant ‚ grade must be
   evaluated against class average ‚ minority opinion that circumstances
   at the drop date required a decision to either lighten load or take a
   chance on being unable to overcome difficulties ‚ appeal allowed ‚
   grade of F vacated, retroactive withdraw without academic penalty
   allowed
   Request to withdraw late without academic penalty from one course. The
   Student failed the course. The Student claimed he faced unexpected
   personal circumstances which took a toll on the time required for his
   studies. The Student discussed his situation with his teaching
   assistant who advised that he believed the Student had sufficient
   ability to pass the course. UTM typically grants a petition for such
   late withdrawal as long as it is requested before a student writes the
   final examination, once only, on reasonable grounds. The Student stated
   that he believed that this relief was granted only on medical grounds,
   so he did not apply. He wrote all of his examinations. The Committee
   found that the circumstances faced by the Student shortly before the
   drop date lasted longer than could reasonably be expected as of the
   drop date; that for cultural reasons the Student gave more weight to
   the view of the teaching assistant than it was intended to have; and
   that the grade of F must be evaluated against the class average of D+.
   A minority of the Committee found that the circumstances which the
   Student was facing at the drop date required the Student to elect
   whether to lighten his load or take his chances on being unable to
   overcome his difficulties and therefore there was no grounds for the
   appeal. Appeal allowed. The Committee ordered that the grade of F be
   vacated, and that the Student be allowed retroactively to withdraw from
   the course without academic penalty.
   [1]View Report

References

   1. file:///media/12664
