THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
THE GOVERNING COUNCIL
Report #318 of the Academic Appeals Committee
April 20, 2007

Your Committee reports that it held a hearing on Monday, April 16, 2007, at which the following
members were present:
Professor Ralph Scane, Senior Chair
Ms Coralie D’Souza
Professor Louise Lemieux-Charles
Ms Maureen Somerville
Professor Lorne Sossin
Secretary: Ms Cristina Oke

Appearances:
the Student Appellant
For the University of Toronto at Mississauga (UTM):
Professor Gordon Anderson

This is an appeal from the decision, dated September 28, 2006, of the Academic Appeals Board
of UTM. This decision dismissed an appeal from a decision, dated May 30, 2006, of the
Committee on Standing of UTM which denied a petition to permit late withdrawal without
academic penalty from the course MAT102HS, which the Student took in the Winter Term of
2006, and in which the Student received a grade of F.
The Student gave evidence that, from about January 28, 2006, he had moved from his usual
lodging in Mississauga to the home of his sister, in Scarborough, to assist his sister after the birth
of a child, when the sister’s husband was required to be absent from the home for a considerable
time. The sister also had a three year old child. The Student and his sister were the only family
members living in the Toronto area. The sister’s husband gave no indication of the expected
length of his absence or the reason for it. The duties unexpectedly imposed upon the Student of
being the care-giver for his sister and her young family, compounded by the long commute from
Scarborough to Mississauga, took a severe toll upon the time and energy required for his studies.
The situation lasted for about one month, the Student being unable to return to his home in
Mississauga until the beginning of March. In addition, a cousin, with whom he had been
personally very close in his home country, before coming to Canada, died at a young age at the
end of January, 2006, and he was extremely disturbed by this.

39088

2
The Student acknowledges being aware of the “drop date” in early February for this and other
courses, and in fact considered whether to drop this or other courses to obtain relief. He
discussed his situation with his teaching assistant in MAT102H5S, and says that the teaching
assistant told him that he believed that the Student had sufficient ability in mathematics to pass
this course. He does not allege that the teaching assistant went beyond this in his advice. In fact,
the Student did not withdraw at this time. Near the end of the course, the Student again
contemplated withdrawal. He was generally aware of what we are told, not only by the Student,
but by the representative of UTM, is rather inaccurately called by students a one-time only
“freebie” late withdrawal without penalty from a course or group of courses, as long as it is
applied for before a student writes the final examination or examinations in the course or courses
concerned. The representative of UTM confirmed that it is the custom at UTM for the Registrar
to grant a petition for such late withdrawal, once only, if any reasonable ground is given. The
Student stated that he believed that this unusual relief was granted only on medical grounds,
which he did not have, so he did not apply. He did write all of his examinations.
In its response to this appeal, UTM pointed out that the Student had done comparatively well in
the four other courses which he had taken in that term, which might be expected to have been
equally adversely affected by the circumstances in February, 2006. The Student replied that two
of these courses were courses in Islamic and Hindu religious traditions, with which he had
considerable familiarity from his life in his homeland, and one was a course in statistics, with
which he had some prior background. With respect to the fourth course, in economics, he simply
expressed surprise that he had done as well as he did.
Your Committee is divided on this appeal. All members are aware of the University’s strict
position on the observance of “drop dates”, and have no wish to retreat from this position.
However, the majority believe that the circumstances faced by the Student at the end of January,
shortly before what your Committee was advised was the “drop date”, about the end of the first
week in February, lasted longer than could reasonably be expected as of the “drop date” . The
majority also believes that, for cultural reasons, the Student gave more weight to the view of the
teaching assistant than it was intended to have. (Your Committee wishes to make clear that it
does not criticize the teaching assistant for giving his views of the Student’s capability in the
subject when asked for advice). Finally, the majority notes that the grade of F in the subject must
be evaluated against the class average of D+. The majority therefore concludes that this is a case
which justifies allowing late withdrawal without academic penalty. The minority believes that
the circumstances which the Student was facing at the “drop date” required the Student to elect
whether to lighten his load, particularly with respect to courses which he was admittedly finding
difficult even apart from his particular personal difficulties, or take his chances on being unable
to overcome his difficulties. The minority therefore saw no grounds, under the University’s
established policy on late withdrawal, for granting relief.
The appeal is allowed. The grade of F in the course MAT102HS taken in the Winter Term of
2006 is vacated, and the Student is allowed retroactively to withdraw from this course without
academic penalty.

