Case #978

   DATE: May 27, 2019
   PARTIES: University of Toronto v. M.B. (âthe Studentâ)
   Hearing Date:Â  Â April 11, 2019
   Panel Members:
   Mr. Christopher Wirth, Chair
   Dr. Blake Poland, Faculty Panel Member
   Mr. Jin Peng Zhou, Student Panel Member
   Appearances:
   Ms. Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg
   Rothstein LLP
   Hearing Secretary:
   Ms. Krista Osbourne, Administrative Clerk and Hearing Secretary, Office
   of Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances, University of Toronto
   Not in Attendance:
   The Student
   Trial Division - s. B.i.1(b) and (d) of the Code - unauthorized aid and
   plagiarism - student did not attend hearing - Agreed Statement of Facts
   â guilty plea â Joint Submission on Penalty â final grade of zero in
   two courses; four-year suspension; notation of sanction on academic
   record until one year after graduation, withdrawal or program
   termination; and publication of notice of decision and sanction with
   studentâs name withheld.
   The Student was charged with one count of using an unauthorized aid
   under s. B.i.1(b) of the Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters , 1995
   (the " Code ") on the basis that he had six pages of relevant notes in
   his possession during a final examination. The Student was also charged
   with two counts of plagiarism under s. B.i.1(d) of the Code on the
   basis that he knowingly representedÂ  the work of another as his own in
   a book report and a slide presentation submitted for course credit.Â
   The Student was charged, in the alternative, under s. B.i.3(b) of the
   Code with three counts of cheating for academic credit.
   The Student did not attend the hearing.Â  However, in an Agreed
   Statement of Facts (ASF) submitted by the parties, the Student admitted
   that he had received reasonable notice of the hearing and further
   requested that the hearing proceed in his absence. The ASF also stated
   that the Student pleads guilty to all charges.
   The Panel found the Student guilty of two counts of plagiarism under s.
   B.i.1(d) of the Code and one count of using or possessing an
   unauthorized aid under s. B.i.1(b) of the Code .Â  The Panel based its
   finding upon the ASF, the Studentâs admissions, and a review of the
   plagiarized source material.Â  The Panel noted that the evidence was
   clear and convincing and showed on a balance of probabilities that the
   Student committed the offences as charged under s. B.i.1(b) and (d) of
   the Code .
   By way of a Joint Submission on Penalty (JSP), the parties submitted
   that the Tribunal should impose the following sanctions on the Student:
   a final grade of zero in two courses; a four-year suspension; a
   notation of sanction on the Studentâs academic record until one year
   after graduation, withdrawal or program termination; and publication of
   notice of decision and sanction, with Student name withheld.
   The Panel accepted the JSP, noting that it was required to do so unless
   doing so would bring the administration of justice into disrepute or
   would be contrary to the public interest.Â  The Panel also noted that
   this was the Studentâs first offence and that the proposed penalty was
   appropriate given the relevant factors set out in U niversity of
   Toronto v. Mr. C (Case No. 1976/77-3, November 3, 1976) .Â  The Panel
   found that the proposed penalty was in accordance with other decisions
   of this tribunal in similar circumstances.Â  The Panel imposed a final
   grade of zero in two courses; a four-year suspension; a notation of
   sanction on the Studentâs academic record until one year after
   graduation, withdrawal or program termination; and publication of
   notice of decision and sanction, with Student name withheld.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/28411
