Case #906

   DATE: October 27, 2017
   PARTIES: University of Toronto v. K.T. (âthe Studentâ)
   Hearing Date(s): July 28, 2017
   Panel Members:
   Ms. Amanda Heale, Chair
   Professor Pascal van Lieshout, Faculty Panel Member
   Ms. Alanis Ortiz Espinoza, Student Panel Member
   Appearances:
   Mr. Robert Centa, Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg
   Rothstein LLP
   Ms. Naomi Greckol-Herlich, Counsel for the Student
   In Attendance:
   Ms. Lucy Gaspini, Manager, Academic Integrity & Affairs, Office of the
   Dean, UTM
   Ms. Alexandra Di Blasio, Academic Integrity Assistant, UTM
   Ms. Krista Osbourne, Administrative Clerk and Hearing Secretary, Office
   of the Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances
   Mr. Sean Lourim, IT Support, Office of the Governing Council
   Mr. Douglas Harrison, Tribunal Co-Chair, Observer
   Not in Attendance:
   The Student
   Trial Division - s. B.i.1(b) - unauthorized aids â possession of
   handwritten notes during a final exam â student not present âÂ  two
   prior offences â agreed statement of facts â joint submission on
   penalty â guilty plea â notation longer than suspension âÂ  final grade
   of zero in the affected course, suspension of three years, transcript
   notation for four years, and report to the provost.
   The Student was charged with possession of an unauthorized aid during a
   final exam contrary to s. B.i.1(b) of the Code , or in the alternative
   one charge of academic dishonesty not otherwise described contrary to
   s. B.i.3(b) of the Code . The charges related to the Student having
   handwritten notes in his possession during a final exam. At the Deanâs
   designate meeting, the Student admitted to using the notes during his
   final exam and signed an Admission of Guilt â Academic Offence form.
   The matter proceeded by way of an Agreed Statement of Facts and a Joint
   Submission on Penalty (JSP).Â  Upon acceptance of the Studentâs guilty
   plea in relation to the unauthorized aid charge, the University
   withdrew the alternative charge that had been laid under s. B.i.3(b) of
   the Code.
   The parties submitted a Joint Submission on Penalty (JSP) proposing:
   (a) a final grade of zero in the affected course; (b) suspension from
   the University for three years; (c) a notation of the sanction on the
   Studentâs academic record and transcript for four years; and (d) that
   the matter be reported to the Provost for publication.Â  The Panel
   referred to University of Toronto v. M.A. (Case No. 837, December 22,
   2016) for the proposition that a joint submission on penalty "may be
   rejected by a panel only in circumstances where to give effect to it
   would be contrary to the public interest or would bring the
   administration of justice into disrepute" (para 25). The Panel took
   into consideration the seriousness of the offence and the fact that the
   Student had previously been sanctioned for two prior offences, in one
   case the possession of an unauthorized aid in an examination, and in
   the other the receipt of unauthorized assistance on an assignment.
   Mitigating factors were that the Student had cooperated in the process
   and entered into the ASF and JSP, thereby showing insight and remorse.
   The Panel accepted the JSP, ordering a final grade of zero in the
   affected course; suspension from the University for three years; a
   notation of the sanction on the Studentâs academic record and
   transcript for four years; and that the matter be reported to the
   Provost for publication.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12983
