Case No.: 906
THE UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
IN THE MATTER OF charges of academic dishonesty made on December 14, 2016 and on or about April
27, 2016,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters, 1995,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Act, 1971, S.O. 1971, c. 56 as amended S.O. 1978,
C. 88

BETWEEN:

UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
- and -

REASONS FOR DECISION

Date of Hearing: July 28, 2017

Members of the Panel:
Ms. Amanda Heale, Chair
Professor Pascal van Lieshout, Faculty Panel Member
Ms. Alanis Ortiz Espinoza, Student Panel Member
Appearances:
Mr. Robert Genta, Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg Rothstein LLP
Ms. Naomi Greckol-Herlich, Counsel for the Student
In Attendance:
Ms. Lucy Gaspini, Manager, Academic Integrity & Affairs, Office of the Dean, UTM
Ms. Alexandra Di Blasio, Academic Integrity Assistant, UTM
Ms. Krista Osbourne, Administrative Clerk and Hearing Secretary, Office of the Appeals,
Discipline and Faculty Grievances
Mr. Sean Lourim, IT Support, Office of the Governing Council
Mr. Douglas Harrison, Tribunal Co-Chair, Observer
Not in Attendance:

2

·-

Mr. K T

, the Student

Introduction
1.

A hearing before the University Tribunal (the “Tribunal”) was convened on July 28,

·-

2017 to consider the Charges (as defined below) against the Student, K T
“Student”).

(the

The Charge
2.

The charges against the Student (the “Charges”) are as follows:
(a)

On or about April 27, 2016, you knowingly used or possessed an
unauthorized aid in an examination, or you obtained unauthorized
assistance in an examination, in the course of ECO460H5S 2016(1) (“the
Course”), Section B.I.1(b) of the Code.

(b)

In the alternative, on or about April 27, 2016, you knowingly engaged in a
form of cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or
misrepresentation in order to obtain academic credit or other academic
advantage of any kind, which violated section B.I.3(b) of the Code.

Particulars
3.

The particulars of the offences charged are as follows:
(a)

At all material times you were a registered student at the University of
Toronto Mississauga.

(b)

In Winter 2016, you enrolled in the Course – Introduction to Financial Risk
Management, which was taught by professor Simiao Zhou.

(c)

On or about April 27, 2016, you attended and wrote a deferred
examination in the Course.

(d)

You had a sheet containing notes relevant to the Course in your
possession during the examination, contrary to the exam rules.

(e)

You knowingly possessed an unauthorized aid, namely, the notes, during
the examination and/or you knowingly received unauthorized assistance
from them during the examination.

3

(f)

By possessing the notes during the examination, you knowingly engaged
in a form of cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or
misrepresentation in order to obtain an academic advantage in the
Course.

Agreed Statement of Facts
4.

The hearing proceeded on the basis of an Agreed Statement of Facts (the "ASF"),

which was marked as Exhibit 1. The parties also presented a Joint Book of Documents
(the "JBD") that is referred to in the ASF, which was marked as Exhibit 2. A summary of
the agreed facts follows.
5.

In Winter 2016, the Student enrolled in ECO460H5S (Introduction to Financial Risk

Management) (the "Course"), which was taught by Simiao Zhou. A copy of the Course
syllabus is included in the JBD at Tab 4.
6.

On April 27, 2016, starting at 9:00 a.m., the Student wrote his deferred final

examination in the Course. Due to the evaluation methods employed in the Course, the
final exam would be worth either 50% or 30% of his final grade: students were required
to write both a midterm and a final and the evaluation on which they received a higher
grade on would be worth 50% of their final grade while the other would be worth 30%.
7.

Students were not permitted to have any aids other than a non-programmable

calculator in the final examination. The first page of the examination paper advised
students that they may be charged with an academic offence for possessing any
unauthorized aids during the writing of an exam. A copy of the Student's examination
paper, and the formula and Scantron sheet provided for the exam, are included in the
JBD at Tab 5.
8.

During the exam, one of the two Chief Presiding Officers, Mr. Joel Cahn, was

alerted by another student that the Student was covertly checking a crumpled piece of
paper. Mr. Cahn approached the Student and found an unlined piece of paper with
handwritten answers to "problem set 2" and "problem set 3" concealed under the
Student's examination paper.

4

9.

When questioned, the Student claimed that he had written on the unlined paper

during the exam.
10.

Mr. Cahn confiscated the unlined paper at approximately 11 :40 a.m. A copy of this

paper is included in the JBD at Tab 6.
11.

At approximately 11 :45 a.m., the Student approached Mr. Cahn and asked him to

"just let it go." The Student also disclosed that he had a prior academic offence on his
record and feared this would "destroy him."
12.

Mr. Cahn completed an examination anomaly report describing the events. A copy

of this report is included in the JBD at Tab 7.
13.

On May 12, 2016, the Student met with Professor Pierre Desrochers, Dean's

Designate for Academic Offences. the Student acknowledges that Professor Desrochers
gave him the warning that was required to be given under the Code.
14.

During this meeting, the Student admitted to using an unauthorized aid during the

final exam in the Course, on April 27, 2016. A copy of the Admission of Guilt-Academic
Offence sheet signed by the Student is included in the JBD at Tab 8.
Findings on Charges
15.

Following deliberations and based on the ASF and the JBD, the Panel concluded

that the first charge (as outlined in paragraph 2 above) had been proven with clear and
convincing evidence on a balance of probabilities, and accepted the guilty plea of the
Student in respect of that charge. The Panel was advised that if the Tribunal convicts the
Student on the first charge, the University would withdraw the alternative charge.

5

Penalty
16.

The University and the Student submitted an Agreed Statement of Facts and Joint

Submission on Penalty (the "JSP"), which was marked as Exhibit 4. In the JSP, the parties
submitted that the Tribunal should impose the following sanctions on the Student:
a) a final grade of zero in ECO460H5S;
b) a three-year suspension from the University of Toronto, to start from the
date the Tribunal makes its order; and
c) a notation of the sanction on the Student's academic record and transcript
for four years.
17.

The parties also submitted that this case shall be reported to the Provost for

publication of a notice of the decision of the Tribunal and the sanction imposed in the
University newspapers, with the name of the Student withheld.
18.

Counsel for the University provided submissions on the high threshold required for

a Tribunal to deviate from a joint submission on penalty. As set out in the Discipline
Appeals Board decision in The University of Toronto and M.A. (Case No. 837,December
22, 2016), a joint submission on penalty "may be rejected by a panel only in
circumstances where to give effect to it would be contrary to the public interest or would
bring the administration of justice into disrepute" (para 25).
19.

In the Panel's view, the joint submission in this case is reasonable. In particular,

the Panel took into consideration the seriousness of the offence and the fact that this was
not the Student's first offence. As reflected in the JSP, the Student had previously been
sanctioned for two prior offences, in one case the possession of an unauthorized aid in
an examination, and in the other the receipt of unauthorized assistance on an assignment.
20.

However, there were also mitigating factors to consider. The Student had

cooperated in the process and entered into the ASF and JSP, thereby showing insight
and remorse.

6

21.

Having regard to the above, and based on its review of similar cases presented by

counsel, the Panel agreed that the recommended sanctions are appropriate in the
circumstances, and made the following order:
a) The Student is guilty of one count of the academic offence of using or
possessing an unauthorized aid, contrary to section 8.1.1 (b) of the Code of
Behaviour on Academic Matters.
b) the following sanctions shall be imposed on the Student:
i.

a final grade of zero in ECO460H5S;

ii.

a suspension from the University for three years from May 15, 2017;
and

iii.

a notation of the sanction on his academic record and transcript for
4 years from May 15, 2017.

c) this case shall be reported to the Provost for publication of a notice of the
decision of the Tribunal and the sanction or sanctions imposed, with the
name of the Student withheld.

Dated at Toronto, this dt~f October, 2017,

