UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
UNIVERSITY TIUBUNAL
TRIAL DIVISION
IN THE MATTER charges of academic dishonesty made on November 19, 2009;
AND IN THE MATTER of the Universily o/Toronlo Code of Behaviour on Academic
1'vialters, 1995;
AND IN THE MATTER of the Universily a/Toronto Act, 1971, S.O. 1971, c. 56, as
amended S.O. 1978, c. 88;

BETWEEN:
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
-AND-

Y

L

Hearing Date: October 19, 2010
Members of the Panel:
Mr. William McDowell, Barrister and Solicitor, Chair
Professor Miriam Diamond, Department of Italian Studies, Faculty Panel Member
Ms. Melvin Sert, Student Panel Member
Appearances:
Mr. Robert Centa, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Barristers
Ms. Betty-Ann Campbell, Law Clerk, Paliare Roland Barristers
Professor Michael Chazan, Department of Anthropology, Instructor for ANT200:
Introduction to Archaeology
Mr. Michael Nicholson, Associate Registrar, University College
Ms. Ellen Cunningham, Registrarial Assistant, University College
In Attendance:
Dr. Kristi Gomlay, Manager of the Office of Academic Integrity
Ms. Natalie Ramtahal, Coordinator, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances
Not in Attendance:
Ms. Y
L , the Student

[I] Pursuant to the Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters, 1995 ("the Code"), Ms
Y

L

("the student") was charged with having engaged in a form of

non-specific cheating on two dates in 2009:
I.

On or about April 16, 2009, you knowingly engaged in a form of
cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or misrepresentation
not otherwise described in the Code in order to obtain academic credit or
other academic advantage of any kind when you attempted to persuade
the University that you had received a passing grade in each of
SOCI0IY, ANT200Y, PSYl00H, PSY210H, STA221H, and NRS201H
in 2007 Winter, when you had not, contrary to section B.I.3(b) of the
Code.

2.

On or about August 21, 2009, you knowingly engaged in a form of
cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or misrepresentation
not otherwise described in the Code in order to obtain academic credit or
other academic advantage of any kind when you attempted to persuade
the University that you had received a passing grade in each of
SOCIO! Y, ANT200Y, PSYI00H, PSY210H, STA221H, and NRS201H
in 2007 Winter, when you had not, contrary to section B.l.3(b) of the
Code.

[2]

Ms 1

did not appear at the hearing although it is clear from the record, notably the

letter of Ronald G. Slaght, Q.C. on April 22, 2010 that the date was peremptory to
her. (That letter was sent to an email address which was on record at the University
for Ms L ; the panel accepts that material relating to the hearing was properly sent
to that email address having regard to the September l, 2006 Policy on Official
Correspondence with Students which requires that students designate a Universityissued email account,)
[3] The University was permitted to rely upon a brief of affidavits of Faculty and
administrative staff of the University and University College in accordance with
s. l S(l)(d) of the Stat11to1y Powers and Procedures Act.
(4) The Tribunal heard from Ellen Cunningham, a Registrarial Assistant in University
College that Ms L,

had come to the office on April 16, 2009 at University College

expressing concern that she had received a grade of zero in the six courses in which
she had registered in Fall-Winter 2006-2007. Ms Cunningham testified that dming
2

that meeting Ms L claimed that she had completed all course work and done the
assignments in each of the courses. Ms Cunningham passed this information on to
Mr. Roop Jattan, a records assessor at University College, who expressed some
scepticism about Ms L 's position.
[5] Mr. Michael Nicholson, the Associate Registrar of the University College, testified
that Ms L

met with him on August 20, 2009. At that time she once again related

that her grades had been recorded incorrectly, that she should not have been
suspended, and that she wished to re-register in courses in fall 2009.
[6]

It was clear to the Tribunal that Ms L did not complete all of her course
assignments and examinations in her comse work, and the University filed affidavit
evidence from a number of instructors which attested to the fact that indeed she
seemed to have done no work for evaluation in any of her courses. (The Tribunal
reviewed the affidavits of the witnesses Augustine Vukov, Ivanka Knezevic and
John Yeomans to this effect) We did not find it necessary to hear from the all of the
faculty who were present at the hearing as we had the benefit of their affidavit
evidence.

[7] The Tribunal did hear from Professor Chazan who reviewed a number of documents
which made it plain that Ms L

had done nothing for evaluation through out his

course ANT 200 (Introduction to Archaeology) in the Fall-Winter term 2006-2007.
We note that the University might have substantially made out the charge under s.
B.l.3(b) of the Code relying only upon the evidence of Professor Chazan.
(8]

For these reasons, the Tribunal finds that the student is guilty of the offenses
charged.

Penalty

[9] Mr. Centa submitted that the penalty should be expulsion. While this may at first
impression seem to be excessive, the Tribunal concluded that it was appropriate in
this case taking into account:

3

(a)

The student's actions were repeated on more than one occasion, and the
misrepresentations were made to two different members of the University
Community. In such circumstances, there can be no doubt that the student
acted in a deliberate manner;

(b)

The student was already on academic suspension until April 2017 so, in
practical terms, accepting the University's alternate submission, any
penalty would commence in April 2017.

[ IOJ The Tribunal concluded that quite apart from anything else, it was not in the
student's interest to hold out the prospect of return to the University in all of the
circumstances.
[11] Accordingly, the Tribunal has made the following Order:

I) Ms. L,

shall be immediately suspended from the University for a period of up

to five years;
2) The Tribunal recommends to the President of the University that he
recommend to the Governing Council that Ms. L

be expelled from the

University; and,
3) The Tribunal shall repo11 this case to the Provost for publication of a notice of
the decision of the Tribunal and the sanction or sanctions imposed in the
University newspapers, with the name of the Student withheld.

~({,

Dated this )S day of December, 2010

l/

William McDowell, Co-Chair

4

