Case #586

   DATE: December 15, 2010
   PARTIES: University of Toronto v. Y.L.
   Hearing Date(s): October 19, 2010
   Panel Members:
   William McDowell, Chair
   Professor Miriam Diamond, Faculty Member
   Melvin Sert, Student Member
   Appearances:
   Robert Centa, Assistant Discipline Counsel for the University
   Betty-Ann Campbell, Law Clerk, Paliare Roland Barristers
   Professor Michael Chazan, Department of Anthropology
   Michael Nicholson, Associate Registrar
   Ellen Cunningham, Registrarial Assistant
   In Attendance:
   Kristi Gourlay, Office of Academic Integrity
   Trial Division â s. B.I.3(b); s. B.I.3(b) of the CodeÂ  â
   misrepresented academic history â claim of completed courseworkÂ  â
   hearing not attendedâ peremptory hearing â reasonable notice of hearing
   â finding on evidence of guilt â University Submission on Penalty
   accepted â repeated misrepresentations â Student already on academic
   suspension âfive-year suspension; recommendation to the President that
   the Student be expelled and report to Provost
   Student charged with two offences under s. B.I.3(b) of the Code. The
   charges related to the allegations that the Student misrepresented her
   academic history to the University stating she had received a passed
   grade in six courses on two occasions. The Student did not appear at
   the hearing. The hearing was peremptory and the Student was notified as
   such through an email to an address on record by the University. The
   University relied on a brief of affidavits of Faculty and
   administrative staff. The Panel heard the evidence and found the
   Student guilty of the offences charged. Discipline Counsel for the
   University submitted that the appropriate penalty would be expulsion.
   The Panel noted that the Studentsâ actions were repeated on more than
   one occasion and misrepresentations were made to two different
   University members. The Panel further noted the Student was already on
   academic suspension and in submitting alternate submissions, any
   penalty would commence six and a half years from the hearing date. The
   Panel concluded it was not in the studentâs interest to hold out the
   prospect of return to the University. The Panel imposed an immediate
   suspension of five years, a recommendation to the President that the
   Student be expelled from the University, and that a report to the
   Provost be issued.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12761
