Case #869 - Finding

   [1]Case 869 - Sanction

   DATE: May 1, 2017
   PARTIES: University of Toronto v. H.L. ("the Student")

   Hearing Date(s): February 21, 2017

   Panel Members:
   Ms. Johanna Braden, Barrister and Solicitor, Chair
   Professor Faye Mishna, Faculty Panel Member
   Mr. Eric Bryce, Student Panel Member

   Appearances:
   Ms. Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland,
   Barristers
   Ms. Eva Mak, Barrister and Solicitor, Counsel for the Student
   Dr. Martha Harris, former Academic Integrity Officer, Office of Student
   Academic lntegrity, Faculty of Arts and Science
   The Student

   In Attendance:
   Ms. Tracey Gameiro, Associate Director, Office of Appeals, Discipline
   and Faculty Grievances
   Mr. Sean Lourim, Technology Assistant, Office of the Governing Council

   Trial Division - ss. B.i.1(a), B.i.1(b) of Code - falsified document
   and unauthorized aid - - student attended final exam but submitted a
   pre-written document in lieu of exam-- finding of guilt on use of
   unauthorized aid - charge on falsifying exam dismissed as Tribunal not
   convinced student knew the exam she submitted was a forgery

   The Student was charged with falsifying a document and using an
   unauthorized aid under ss. B.i.1(a) and B.i.1(b) of the Code, and
   alternatively, academic dishonesty under s. B.i.3(b) of the Code. The
   Student attended the final exam in a course but surreptitiously
   submitted a document composed of answers to previous years' questions
   instead of writing the current exam.

   The Tribunal found the Student guilty of using an unauthorized aid, and
   the academic dishonesty charge was withdrawn. However, the Tribunal was
   not convinced that the Student knowingly falsified the exam. It could
   have been that the Student believed the false exam she had obtained was
   an advance copy of the actual exam, in which case she would not be
   guilty of forgery but only of possession of an unauthorized aid. Thus,
   the Student was found not guilty on this charge.

   Penalty was left to a subsequent hearing.
   [2]View Case

References

   1. http://live-the-office-of-the-governing-council.pantheonsite.io/media/13075
   2. file:///media/12945
