Report 396

DATE:

   June 5, 2018

PARTIES:

   N.C. (the âStudentâ) v. the Faculty of Architecture, Landscape and
   Design

Hearing Date(s):

   May 29, 2018

Committee Members:

   Professor Andrew Green (Chair)
   Professor Mohan Matthen, Faculty Governor
   Ms. Mala Kashyap, Student Governor

Hearing Secretary:

   Ms. Tracey Gameiro, Associate Director Appeals, Discipline and Faculty
   Grievances

Appearances:

For the Student:

   The Student

For the Faculty of Architecture, Landscape and Design:

   Dean Richard Sommer
   Ms. Andrea McGee, Registrar & Assistant Dean, Students

   Appeal from a grade of 84% in a course. The uncontested evidence at the
   hearing was that the Student had been promised a 2% increase in the
   first test of the course. There was a delay in returning the test to
   the Student, so she was unable to ensure that she had received the
   grade increase within two weeks of the time the test had been returned
   to the rest of the class. Once she did receive her mark, she
   immediately contacted her professor to confirm that her mark reflected
   the grade increase that she had been promised.Â  The professor did not
   return her email.Â  Her appeal was denied at the departmental level
   because it had not been made within two-weeks from the time the test
   had been returned to the rest of the class, as such the time limit
   provided for in section 5.14 of the Academic Handbook had expired.Â
   The Committee found that in these exceptional circumstances, where the
   Student had contacted her professor within two weeks of receiving her
   work back and had been misled into thinking a particular mark had been
   given only to find out that it had not, it was unfair to find that the
   Student could not appeal the grade. The Studentâs appeal was allowed,
   but she did not receive the grade increase requested. Rather, the
   Committee ordered that the appeal be remitted back to the Department to
   consider the substance of the Studentâs appeal on the test. Appeal
   allowed.
   [1]View Report

References

   1. file:///media/12694
