Case 605

   [1]Case 605 - Sanction

DATE:

   December 8, 2014 and May 11, 2015

PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v N.B.

Hearing Date(s):

   September 29, 2014 and January 26, 2015

Panel Members:

   Paul Schabas, Chair
   Gabriele D‚Eleuterio, Faculty Member
   Christopher Tsui, Student Member

Appearances:

   Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel for the University
   Lucy Gaspini, Manager, Academic Integrity and Affairs, University of
   Toronto Mississauga
   Nathan Innocente, Teaching Assistant
   Julie Waters, Academic Counsellor
   Kathy Gruspier, Course Instructor

In Attendance:

   Sinead Cutt, Administrative Assistant, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty
   Grievances
   NOTE: Heard together with Case #624
   Student charged with two offences under s. B.i.1(d) , three offenses
   under s. B.i.1(b) and, in the alternative, three offences under s.
   B.i.3(b) of the Code . The charges included the improperly aiding and
   assisting with another student‚s essay without proper attribution and
   the Student‚s representation of another‚s ideas as her own in an essay
   and an annotated bibliography.
   The Student did not appear at the specified time. The Panel waited for
   15 minutes after which the doors were locked and a note was left with
   instructions on entering the building should she attend. The Provost‚s
   office had not heard from the Student since 2011 but had sent emails, a
   letter which was received by someone sharing the Student‚s last name,
   and left a voicemail with an answering machine identifying itself as
   the Student‚s.
   The first charges arose from an assignment the Student submitted a year
   previously which was substantially similar to a paper that had been
   submitted during the current year. The second set related to an essay
   which had significant similarities to another student‚s in the course
   and had annotated bibliographies which were identical.
   The instructor of one course testified that she required students to
   submit papers through turnitin.com, a plagiarism detection site. A
   current student‚s paper showed a 37% match to the Student‚s original
   paper. In addition to similar structure, the paper contained several
   identical spelling mistakes.
   The Teaching Assistant of the second course testified that he had
   marked the bibliographies and noticed that the Student‚s bibliography
   cited the same 17 sources as one from the same year. There were strong
   similarities between the two papers and identical mistakes in the
   bibliographies.
   An Academic Counsellor attended a Dean‚s Designate meeting with the
   Student and took notes. The Student did not admit guilt, the notes were
   not provided, and the Panel placed no weight on her testimony.
   The Manager of Academic Integrity and Affairs at the University of
   Toronto Mississauga also gave evidence about the Dean‚s designate
   meeting and provided the Student‚s academic record.
   The Panel found that the Student had collaborated with a classmate on
   the preponderance of the evidence. The Panel found that even if the
   Student did not appreciate that she had to work independently she ought
   to have known. The Panel also found that on the balance of
   probabilities the Student knew or ought to have known that her paper
   would be used improperly by the other student. The Panel found that,
   while the facts are different for the two different charges, the
   Student‚s active participation in the collaboration offence was of
   benefit to the other student and that the Student was party to the
   offense of plagiarism under s. B.ii.1.(a)(ii) of the Code .
   The Panel found the Student was guilty of aiding in the commission of
   plagiarism, collaborating with another student, and representing as her
   own work that was prepared by both of them.
   The Panel found the Student had committed two different counts of
   academic misconduct. The University sought a grade of zero for the
   Student in the course, a four-year suspension and a notation on the
   Student‚s transcript for five years.
   The Panel agreed with the University that the starting point on
   sanction was 2 years and can increase or decrease depending on other
   factors. However, the cases of four-year suspensions that the
   University referred to involved prior incidents and the Panel found
   that to be a compelling factor which differentiated these cases.
   The Panel imposed a penalty of a grade of zero in the course, a
   suspension of three years from September 1, 2014, a notation on the
   Student‚s academic record for the earlier of four years or graduation,
   and that the case be reported to the Provost for publication.
   [2]View Case

References

   1. http://live-the-office-of-the-governing-council.pantheonsite.io/media/28417
   2. file:///media/28415
