Report 403

DATE:

   May 9, 2019

PARTIES:

   D.B. (the Student) v. Faculty of Medicine

Hearing Date(s):

   March 28, 2019

Committee Members:

   Ms. Vanessa Laufer, Chair
   Professor Mark Lautens, Faculty Governor
   Ms. Maya Kashyap, Student Governor

Appearances:

For the Student Appellant:

   D.B. (the Student)
   Mr. Michael D. Wright, Cavaluzzo LLP, Counsel for the Student
   Mr. Tyler Boggs, Cavaluzzo, LLP, Counsel for the Student

For the Faculty of Medicine:

   Ms. Emily Lawrence, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland
   Rosenberg Rothstein LLP
   Mr. Robert A. Centa, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland
   Rosenberg Rothstein LLP

   The Student was enrolled inÂ theÂ Faculty of Medicine Undergraduate
   Medical Program at the University of Toronto (MD Program) from 2012 to
   2016.Â The StudentÂ graduated from the MD ProgramÂ in May 2016.Â  He is
   nowÂ a registered member of the College of Physicians and Surgeons of
   Ontario and a practising physician.

   In the Fall of 2015, whileÂ stillÂ enrolled in the MD Program, the
   Student was referredÂ by the Clerkship DirectorÂ to the Undergraduate
   Medical Education Board of Examiners (BoE) dueÂ toÂ lapses in
   professional behaviourÂ over the courseÂ of the MD Program.Â Â The BoE
   referred the Student for remediation in professionalism.Â  The Student
   appealedÂ fromÂ the decision of the BoE to theÂ Faculty of
   MedicineÂ Appeals Committee (FMAC).Â  The FMAC upheld the decision of
   the BoE referring the Student for remediation in professionalism.

   TheÂ StudentÂ then appealed from the decision of the FMACÂ to the
   Academic Appeal CommitteeÂ (AAC) on the basis that: (i)Â the Faculty of
   MedicineÂ did not follow its ownÂ regulations and proceduresÂ when it
   referred him to the BoE; (ii)Â relevant evidence was not taken into
   considerationÂ by the BoEÂ whenÂ the decision was made; and (iii)Â the
   decision could not be supported by the evidence that was considered
   when it was made by the FMAC.Â Â The Student also arguedÂ that the
   Clerkship Director was biased against him,Â andÂ that
   sheÂ hadÂ attacked his character without evidenceÂ during
   theÂ BoEÂ process.Â  The StudentÂ arguedÂ furtherÂ that he did not
   receive proper notice of theÂ BoEÂ hearing,Â andÂ that he did not have
   adequate time to prepare a defenceÂ orÂ know the full case against
   him.Â  The StudentÂ arguedÂ thatÂ heÂ was not allowed to attendÂ in
   front ofÂ the BoE, or to have anÂ advocateÂ attend on his behalf.Â  The
   Student argued that he was not afforded due process.

   TheÂ AACÂ determined thatÂ the question before it was whether the FMAC
   decision was reasonable.Â It concluded that the FMACâs determination
   that Faculty regulations and procedures were followed was reasonable
   and that the Clerkship Director may deviate from normal practice when
   referring a case to the BoE provided a rationale is given. The AAC
   considered that the FMAC reasonably concluded that the Clerkship
   Director had reasonable grounds to refer the matter to the BoEÂ in
   light ofÂ the professionalism concerns of the Faculty. The AAC noted
   that the Clerkship Director received direct observations and
   assessments of the Studentâs professional behaviour from Faculty
   colleagues who were well-suited to make informed, context-specific
   professionalism evaluations that should not be interfered with by the
   AAC. The AAC also concluded that the FMAC was reasonable in rejecting
   the Studentâs claim that he had not received reasonable notice of the
   BoE meeting or sufficient time to prepare a defence, noting that the
   Student had been informed of the meeting and rationale for same more
   than a month in advance. The AAC went on to determine that the FMAC
   received and considered extensive evidence and that its decision was
   rationally connected to and based on that evidence, noting that the
   Student attended in person and was legally represented.Â The
   AACÂ concluded thatÂ the FMACâs determination that the BoEâs decision
   was supportable and connected to the evidence was reasonable.

   TheÂ AACÂ reviewedÂ a number ofÂ legal cases concerning procedural
   fairness,Â including the factors for procedural fairness outlined in
   the case ofÂ Baker v. Canada (Minister of Citizenship &
   ImmigrationÂ [1999] SCC 699.Â Applying those factors to theÂ specific
   context of this case where the BoE process wasÂ in cameraÂ and
   submissions were made primarily in writing,Â the AAC determined that a
   more relaxed standard of procedural fairness was appropriate, observing
   that the consequences at the BoE for the Student were
   remedial,Â educationalÂ and restorative, not punitive, and that it was
   not a situation where the Studentâs right to continue in the program or
   his career were at stake.Â In considering the case ofÂ AlGhaithyÂ v
   University of OttawaÂ 2012 ONSC 142Â (para.31),Â the AAC noted
   thatÂ theÂ case outlinesÂ that courts are reluctant to interfere with
   academic decisionsÂ unless there has been âmanifest unfairnessâ in
   theÂ procedure,Â or the decisionÂ was unreasonable.Â The AAC found that
   neither the proceedings of the BoEÂ nor the FMAC were manifestly unfair
   or that the decisions were unreasonable, noting that the Faculty of
   Medicine is well-suited to determine what is best for its communityÂ as
   its faculty members are expert assessors of professionalism within its
   academic programs,Â and theÂ AAC should not interfere
   withÂ theirÂ academic assessments. The AAC found no evidence of
   bias.Â Furthermore, the AAC determined that even if it was incorrect
   and there was any denial of procedural fairness at the BoE, any such
   defects were cured by the FMAC proceedings which amounted to aÂ de
   novoÂ hearing and met the requirements of procedural fairness. Finally,
   the AAC distinguished this case from the case ofÂ Khan v The University
   of OttawaÂ [1977] O.J. No. 2650 because the Student in this case was
   not facing a failed year or the loss of the right to continue in his
   profession and his credibility was not a central issue in the case. As
   such, the AAC concluded that procedural fairness did not require an
   oral hearing in this case.

   The AAC found the decision of the FMAC to be reasonable and dismissed
   the appeal.
   [1]View Report

References

   1. file:///media/28398
