Report #331

   DATE: April 1, 2009
   PARTIES: Mr. D. S. (the Student) v. UTSC
   Hearing Date(s): March 12, 2009
   Committee Members:
   Professor Emeritus Ralph Scane (Senior Chair)
   Professor Ellen Hodnett
   Professor Chris Koenig-Woodyard
   Ms. Anna Okorokov
   Mr. John Stewart
   Secretary:
   Ms. Mette Mai
   In Attendance:
   For the Student Appellant:
   Mr. D. S. (the Student)
   Ms. A. S.
   For the University of Toronto at Scarborough:
   Vice-Dean Professor John Scherk
   UTSC â late withdrawal without academic penalty â stresses from the
   deteriorating health of a family member â mental health disorders â
   insufficient medical report â awareness of academic difficulties before
   drop date â no reasonable expectation of alleviated condition â no
   assistance sought âÂ  appeal dismissed
   Request to withdraw late without academic penalty from four courses.
   The Studentâs academic performance had deteriorated, and after failing
   the four courses, he was suspended for twelve months. The deteriorating
   performance was attributed to stresses the Student had suffered as a
   result of the worsening health and eventual death of his aunt. The
   Student was diagnosed with Dysthymic Disorder and Generalized Anxiety
   Disorder. The Committee considered the information of the Student and a
   medical report detailing the studentâs psychiatric diagnosis. The
   medical report submitted did not express an opinion about how long the
   condition had existed, the effect it would be expected to have on the
   Studentâs academic performance, or whether the condition might have
   significantly worsened after the drop date for the courses. The
   Committee found that the Studentâs academic performance was probably
   adversely affected by his auntâs deteriorating health and that this
   exacerbated his existing medical condition. However, the Studentâs
   state after the drop date was unchanged from what it had been before
   that date. He was aware of his academic difficulties before the drop
   date, he had no reasonable expectation that his condition would become
   alleviated during the balance of the term, and he did not seek
   counselling or help, despite assistance being offered. Appeal
   dismissed.
   [1]View Report

References

   1. file:///media/12582
