Case #836

   DATE: September 11, 2016
   PARTIES: University of Toronto v S.F.
   Hearing Date(s):
   August 3, 2016
   Panel Members:
   Sana Halwani, Chair
   Dionne Aleman, Faculty Member
   Yusra Qazi, Student Member
   Appearances:
   Rob Centa, Assistant Discipline Counsel
   Emily Holme, Articling Student
   Julia Wilkes, Counsel for the Student
   In Attendance:
   S.F., the Student
   Kristi Gourlay, Manager, Office of Academic Integrity
   Krista Osbourne, Administrative Assistant, Appeals, Discipline and
   Faculty Grievances
   Maya Bielinski, Articling Student
   Michelle Henry, Observer
   S, K., Spouse of Student
   Victor O‚Brien, Observer
   Trial Division ‚ s. B.i.1(a) and s. B.i.3(a) of the Code ‚ forged
   documents and forged University Verification of Student Illness or
   Injury Forms ‚ request for accommodation‚ Agreed Statement of Facts ‚
   guilty plea accepted for charges under s. B.i.1(a) ‚‚ Joint Submission
   on Penalty ‚ first offence ‚ Student admitted guilt and cooperated
   throughout ‚‚ Joint Submission on Penalty accepted ‚ grade of zero in
   courses; four-year suspension; five-year notation; report to Provost
   for publication
   Student charged with nine offences under s. B.i.1(a) , and in the
   alternative, an offence under s. B.i.3(b) . The charges related to nine
   forged documents in three separate Petitions for accommodation sent by
   the Student, each of which allegedly contained forgedor falsified
   information. The Student pleaded guilty to the charges under s.
   B.i.1(a) and the matter proceeded by way of an Agreed Statement of
   Facts (ASF). The University advised the Panel that if the Student‚s
   plea was accepted it would withdraw the charge under s. B.i.3(b) . The
   Panel also received a Joint Book of Documents (JBD) referred to in the
   ASF.
   The ASF referred to three Petitions seeking academic accommodation, one
   in 2013, one in 2014, and one in 2015. The 2013 Petition was submitted
   to the Committee on Standing of the Faculty of Arts and Sciences
   (Committee) seeking deferral of three exams and two extensions on
   essays. In support of these requests the Student submitted a Personal
   Statement and two University Verification of Student Illness or Injury
   Forms. The Committee granted the Petition. The 2014 Petition was
   submitted to the Committee seeking deferral of one of the exams
   deferred in 2013. In support of these requests the Student submitted a
   Personal Statement, a purported Receipt of Services from a medical
   group, and a University Verification of Student Illness or Injury Form.
   The Committee granted the Petition. In 2015 the Student missed classes
   and a tutorial quiz. She sought accommodation by submitting documents
   to the Human Biology Department (Department), including two University
   Verification of Student Illness or Injury Forms. The Department
   challenged the authenticity of the forms and the Student submitted a
   purported Receipt of Services from a medical group. The Student met
   with the Dean‚s Designate and admitted that she had forged, altered
   and/or otherwise falsified documents submitted in support of her
   Petitions.
   The ASF stated that the Student admitted to submitting Personal
   Statement with information the Student knew to be false, forged or
   altered University Verification of Student Illness or Injury Form, and
   forged or altered Receipts of Services. The Student also admitted to
   knowingly submitting the documents to obtain academic advantage.
   Based on the ASF and JBD the Panel accepted the guilty plea and made no
   finding as to the one charge under s. B.i.3(a) . The parties presented
   a Joint Submission on Penalty recommending a grade of zero in the
   courses; a four-year suspension; and a five-year notation on the
   Student‚s academic record and transcript. The University noted that
   there was a high threshold for rejecting a Joint Submission and this
   was not such a case that met the threshold. The Panel reviewed the Mr.
   C factors noting that the offence called the Student‚s character into
   question, the offences were serious and raised significant concerns.
   The Panel also noted the presence of mitigating factors including the
   Student‚s cooperation, full admission, medical and personal challenges,
   and status as a first time offender. The University agreed with the
   Student that its relationship with the Student could be rehabilitated.
   The JSP submitted that the mitigating factors warranted a four-year
   suspension instead of five.
   The Panel found the Student guilty of nine counts of forgery or
   falsifying documents contrary to s. B.i.1(a) of the Code and imposed
   penalty of a grade of zero in the courses, a four-year suspension; a
   five-year notation on her transcript; and a report be issued to the
   Provost.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12920
