Case No.: 1615
THE UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
IN THE MATTER OF charges of academic dishonesty filed on March 14, 2024,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters, 2019,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Act, 1971, S.O. 1971, c. 56 as am. S.O. 1978, c. 88

B E T W E E N:
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
- and Z

L

REASONS FOR DECISION
Hearing Date: July 10, 2024, via Zoom
Members of the Panel:
F. Paul Morrison, Chair
Professor Dionne Aleman, Faculty Panel Member
Laiba Butt, Student Panel Member
Appearances:
Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg Rothstein LLP
Sonia Patel, Co-Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg Rothstein LLP
Hearing Secretary:
Karen Bellinger, Associate Director, Office of Appeals, Discipline & Faculty Grievances
Not In Attendance:
Z
L

-21.

On July 10, 2024, this Panel of the University Tribunal held a hearing to consider
the Charges brought by the University of Toronto (the “University”) against
Z

L

(the “Student”) under the Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters,

2019 (the “Code”).
A.

PROCEEDING IN ABSENCE OF THE STUDENT

2.

Counsel for the University commenced the hearing by seeking an Order to
proceed in the absence of the Student. In support of such Order the Book of
Documents (Re: Notice/Service) was tendered and marked as Exhibit 2 at the
hearing.

3.

Exhibit 2 contained the affidavit of Natalia Botelho, a legal assistant at the law
firm Paliare Roland Rosenberg Rothstein LLP (“Paliare Roland”) and the affidavit
of Andrew Wagg, Manager, Incident Response at Information Security,
Information Technology Services at the University.

4.

The affidavit evidence of Ms. Botelho and Mr. Wagg substantiated that the
Student had received proper and sufficient notice of the hearing, including notice
that the hearing would proceed on July 10, 2024.

5.

In considering counsel’s request for the Order, the Panel was satisfied that notice
had been properly given to the Student in accordance with Rule 13(c) of the
Rules of Practice and Procedure of the Tribunal (the “Rules”) and that,
accordingly, the Panel was entitled to proceed in the absence of the Student in
accordance with Rule 21 of the Rules. The Panel was also satisfied that such
process was authorized by section 7(2) of the Statutory Powers Procedure Act of
Ontario.

6.

Accordingly, the Panel granted the Order that the hearing may proceed in the
absence of the Student.

B.

THE CHARGES AND PARTICULARS

7.

The Charges were as follows:

-3A. Charges relating to MGEB06H3
1.

On or about December 15, 2022, you knowingly used or possessed

an unauthorized aid or aids and/or obtained unauthorized assistance in
connection

with

Macroeconomic

the final
Theory

exam

and

you

Policy:

submitted in
A

MGEB06H3:

Mathematical

Approach

(“Macroeconomic Theory”), contrary to section B.I.1(b) of the Code.
2.

In the alternative, on or about December 15, 2022, you knowingly

engaged in a form of cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud
or misrepresentation not otherwise described in the Code in order to
obtain academic credit or other academic advantage of any kind in
connection with the final exam you submitted in Macroeconomic Theory,
contrary to section B.I.3(b) of the Code.
The particulars of charges 1 to 2 are as follows:
(a) At all material times, you were a student enrolled at the
University of Toronto Scarborough.
(b) In Fall 2022, you enrolled in Macroeconomic Theory.
(c) On or about December 15, 2022, you submitted the final
exam in Macroeconomic Theory, which was worth 50% of
your final grade in the course.
(d) The final exam was administered in person. Students were
required to complete the final exam independently. Students
were informed that they were not allowed to use outside
resources or assistance or possess any aids other than a
non-programmable calculator.
(e) You were in possession of a cell phone during the exam. You
used this cell phone to take photographs of the exam
questions and send them to a third party. The third party
provided answers to you in exchange for payment.

-4(f)

You knew that you were not permitted to possess or use a
cell phone during the exam. You knew that you were required
to complete the final exam independently. You knowingly
obtained unauthorized assistance in the final exam from a
third party.

(g) You knowingly submitted the final exam in Macroeconomic
Theory with the intention that the University of Toronto rely on
it as containing your own ideas or work in considering the
appropriate academic credit to be assigned to your work.
(h) You engaged in this conduct in order to obtain academic
credit and an academic advantage you did not earn.
B. Charges relating to MGEB02H3
3.

On or about July 21, 2023, you knowingly had someone personate

you during a term test in MGEB02H3: Price Theory: A Mathematical
Approach (“Price Theory”), contrary to section B.I.1(c) of the Code.
4.

In the alternative, on or about July 21, 2023, you knowingly engaged

in a form of cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or
misrepresentation not otherwise described in the Code in order to obtain
academic credit or other academic advantage of any kind in connection
with a test you submitted in Price Theory, contrary to section B.I.3(b) of
the Code.
The particulars of charges 3 to 4 are as follows:
(a) At all material times, you were a student enrolled at the
University of Toronto Scarborough.
(b) In Summer 2023, you enrolled in Price Theory.
(c) A term test for Price Theory took place on or about July 21,
2023. The test was worth 25% of the final grade in the course.
(d) The test took place in person.

-5(e) You knew that you were required to complete the term test
yourself and that you were not permitted to obtain the
assistance of anyone else.
(f)

You asked a third party to attend the test and write it on your
behalf in exchange for payment. This person did so.

(g) You knowingly had this person write the test in your name.
You provided your TCard to facilitate this. You did so in order
to obtain academic credit and an academic advantage you did
not earn.

8.

In tendering the Charges, counsel for the University advised that Charge 2 and
Charge 4 were relied upon in the alternative to Charge 1 and Charge 3. She
further undertook that if findings of guilt were entered with respect to Charges 1
and 3, the University would withdraw Charges 2 and 4.

C.

EVIDENCE

9.

The Charges were supported by the affidavit evidence of four witnesses tendered
by counsel for the University. The affidavits and exhibits thereto were contained
in the Book of Documents (Re: Finding of Offence), which was marked as Exhibit
3 at the hearing.

(i)

Affidavit of Karishma Punjabi

10.

Pertinent extracts of the affidavit evidence of Karishma Punjabi are as follows:
3.

On December 15, 2022, I was one of the invigilators for the final

exam for MGEB06H3 – Macroeconomic Theory and Policy: A
Mathematical Approach.
4.

The exam took place from 2-4 p.m. at the Instructional Centre at

UTSC in room IC130. IC130 is a lecture theatre style room, with rows of
long tables rather than individual desks.

-65.

At the start of the exam, the Chief Presiding Officer made the

standard announcement for all exams in which they reminded students
that electronic devices, such as cell phones, were prohibited and that
possessing or using one would be considered an academic offence.
Students were instructed to turn off their phones and place them in a bag
underneath their desk.
6.

Once the exam started, I began doing rounds to ensure that all

students had exams and no one had any questions. I was also monitoring
the room to ensure that students were not looking at each other’s exams.
7.

Z

L

(the “Student”) was seated in the far back right corner

of the room. I noticed that the Student was looking around the room a lot
and that every time I walked past them, they stopped writing.
8.

Eventually, I took up a standing position near the Student and stayed

there for 15-17 minutes. During this time, the Student wrote nothing on
their exam paper.
9.

I found this very unusual. After the 30-minute mark of the exam,

students who were finished writing were allowed to leave the exam. The
Student had opted to stay, but was not writing anything.
10. I spoke to another invigilator about my concerns, who suggested that
I ask the Student to move to another seat.
11. I asked the Student to move up to the front row. They complied, but
moved very slowly when standing up. As they were standing, I noticed a
phone under the Student’s leg, on their chair.
12. The phone was turned on and displayed a photo of a white page with
writing on it. When the Student saw me looking at the phone, they
immediately locked it and said that they did not know how this had
happened.

-713. I reminded the Student that we had announced that they were not
allowed to have phones. The Student said it was a mistake and I pointed
out that the Student had been hiding the phone.
14. As the course instructor had left to go to the accessibility room, I
called them and waited for them to return before speaking to the Student
further. Upon the instructor’s return, the Student told us that their girlfriend
needed to know where they were at all times and to be able to speak to
them, which is why they had their phone with them. They opened their
phone, which was still on the photo of notes. The instructor took photos of
the Student’s phone.

(ii)

Affidavit of Jack Parkinson

11.

Pertinent extracts of the affidavit evidence of Professor Jack Parkinson are as
follows:
A. Macroeconomic Theory
2.

In Fall 2022, I taught MGEB06H3 – Macroeconomic Theory and

Policy: A Mathematical Approach (“Macroeconomic Theory”).
3.

Z

L

(the “Student”) was a student in the Course.
...

B. Macroeconomic Theory Exam
5.

Students in Macroeconomic Theory were required to write a final

exam worth 50% of their final grade.
6.

The exam took place on Thursday, December 15, 2022, from 2-4

p.m., in person.
7. Before the start of the exam, all students were required to sign an
Examination Candidate Form. The form included a reminder that the
Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters (the “Code”) applied to all
students and prohibited academic dishonesty, including cheating,
plagiarism, and the use of unauthorized aids. Students were warned that

-8violating the Code may result in penalties up to and including suspension
or expulsion from the University. I have attached a copy of the Student’s
signed Examination Candidate Form to my affidavit as Exhibit B.
8.

I was present at the exam, but alternated my time between the main

exam room (where the Student was writing the exam) and the
accessibility room.
9.

At around 2:45 p.m., Karishma Punjabi, one of the exam invigilators

in the main exam room, notified me that a student had been found with a
phone, which was turned on.
10. I returned to the main exam room from the accessibility room and
spoke to Ms. Punjabi, who informed me that it was the Student who had
been found with a phone.
11. I spoke to the Student and looked at their phone, which was unlocked
and powered on. The Student’s phone was open on a WeChat
conversation in which the Student had sent photographs of several of the
Macroeconomic Theory final exam questions. The other person in the
WeChat conversation had sent back photographs of what appeared to be
handwritten responses to the exam questions, one typed response to a
question, and several other text messages in what I believe to be
Mandarin. I have attached a copy of the photographs that I took of the
WeChat conversation to my affidavit as Exhibit C.
12. After the exam, I showed the photos of the Student’s WeChat
conversation to the Chair of my department, Professor Iris Au. Professor
Au speaks Mandarin and translated the text messages for me. I have
attached a copy of Professor Au’s translations to my affidavit as Exhibit D.
13. The photos of the WeChat conversation on the Student’s phone were
later translated by All Languages, a professional translation company, to
ensure accuracy. I have attached a copy of the All Languages’ translation
to my affidavit as Exhibit E.
14. The All Languages translations show the following:

-9(a) On Sunday, the Student was invited to join a group chat with
“Meng” and “mgeb06” (i.e., the Macroeconomic Theory course
code);
(b) Meng stated that “the time” was December 16 between 3-5 a.m.,
which, if referring to the time in China, would be equivalent to
December 15 between 2-5 p.m. in Toronto (i.e., the date and
time for the Macroeconomic Theory exam);
(c) Meng sent several PDF documents that appeared from the file
names

to

include

sample

questions

and

solutions

for

Macroeconomic Theory;
(d) Meng stated: “The balance of 1,300” and that “supplementary
materials” would be posted in this group;
(e) On Monday, the Student sent a pdf titled “MGEB0506 Class 14”
with a note that these were “the review questions” and that it was
“best to use the formulae [taught] by parkinson”. The Student
clarified that by “Parkinson” he meant me;
(f)

Meng responded: “No problem. We are all [ghost] writers for the
international students. We all know how to write after reading
your materials” (the addition of [ghost] was provided by All
Languages);

(g) At 1:52 p.m. on an unknown date, the Student messaged: “I am
preparing to enter the exam centre. I am taking [photos of the
questions] later when I have the opportunity”;
(h) At 2:05 p.m., Meng replied: “Seven minutes passed, I am
worrying if you can finish writing on time” followed by an emoji of
a person covering their eyes while laughing;
(i)

The Student then sent a photograph of one of the pages of the
exam questions;

- 10 (j)

Meng initially instructed the Student to retake the photo because
it was illegible. However, at 2:16 p.m., Meng sent a photo of a
handwritten answer to question 1a. At 2:22 p.m., Meng sent a
typed answer to question 1b. At 2:41 p.m. and 2:53 p.m., Meng
sent two more photos of what appear to be handwritten exam
answers and a photo of another illegible text chain; and

(k) Meng asked the Student to retake the photo of question 3
several times because it was illegible, to which the Student
finally responded: “Um, please try your best to read Question 3
more carefully”, followed by a laughing crying emoji.
15. Based on the translated text messages, I concluded that the Student
appeared to have hired someone to provide them exam answers. The
reason that I believe this person was “hired” is because of the text
message from this individual in which they refer to an outstanding
“balance” of “1,300”.
16. I met with the Student later on December 15, 2022 to discuss the
events of the exam and the phone that they were found with.

(iii)

Affidavit of Adrian Chan

12.

Pertinent extracts of the evidence of Adrian Chan are as follows:
2.

In my time at the Office of the Registrar and as a Teaching Assistant

(“TA”) for various courses, I have invigilated over 100 exams. This
includes, among other responsibilities, setting up and collecting exam
packages, monitoring exams as students write, and checking students’
TCards and obtaining signatures for attendance purposes.
A. Price Theory
3.

In Summer 2023, I was a TA for MGEB02 – Price Theory: A

Mathematical Approach (“Price Theory”).
...

- 11 5.

Students in Price Theory were required to write a term test worth

25% of the grade in the course.
6.

The test took place on July 21, 2023, from 7-9 p.m. I attended the

test as a TA to invigilate the test.
7.

At the beginning of the test, the invigilating team read out an

announcement to remind students that this was a closed book test and
electronic devices were not permitted. Students were instructed to turn off
their cell phones and place them in a bag under their desk.
8.

Around 10 minutes into the exam, at approximately 7:10 p.m.,

another TA told me that they had seen something shiny under the seat of
Z

L

(the “Student”). I told her to continue keeping an eye on the

Student and said that I would do the same. During this time, I noticed that
the Student seemed to be looking under their desk.
9.

Around 7:23 p.m., I began doing attendance by walking through each

row, checking TCards, and recording students’ names. I looked at the
Student’s TCard and recorded his name.
10. I then asked the Student to move to the front of the room. While they
were packing up their things, I saw a cell phone on their chair. The phone
was turned on and open to a notes application.
11. I asked the Student to hand me their phone. He started to give me
the phone, and I grabbed on to it, but he did not let go. While still holding
the phone, he asked me what the consequences would be for this. I said
that I did not know, that it was not up to me, and that my job was just to
report the incident. I took a photo of the Student’s phone with my other
hand, while he was still holding it.
12. The Student suddenly grabbed his exam paper and the rest of his
belongings and ran out of the lecture hall. As I was still holding on to the
phone, I was brought along with him until we reached the connecting
lobby outside of the exam room.

- 12 13. In this lobby area, the Student used his elbow to hit me in the chest.
This caused me to release my hold on the phone and the Student
continued running out of the building. I called after the Student that we
had his name and he responded that he knew.
14. I waited a few minutes to catch my breath, as I was having trouble
breathing properly, before going back outside and taking photos of the
Student running away. I have attached a copy of the exam incident report
that I filed, along with these photos, to my affidavit as Exhibit B.

(iv)

Affidavit of Jack Pienczykowski

13.

Pertinent extracts from the Affidavit of Jack Pienczykowski, a Special Police
Constable with the University of Toronto Campus Police, are as follows:
A. Report of Incident in MGEB02 Exam
2.

Late on July 21, 2023, a Teaching Assistant named Adrian Chan

reported that during the exam for MGEB02 that had taken place earlier
that evening, a student who identified themselves as Z

L

had

been caught with a cell phone. Mr. Chan reported that this individual had
hit Mr. Chan very hard in the chest before running out of the exam room.
3.

Mr. Chan described Mr. L

as an Asian male in his 20s,

approximately 6 feet tall and 185 pounds, with a medium build, long black
hair in a ponytail, reading glasses, a green olive jacket, and black pants
and shoes. I have attached a copy of my report following my conversation
with Mr. Chan, dated July 22, 2023, to this affidavit as Exhibit A.
4.

On July 22, 2023, I reviewed the security footage outside of IC130,

the room where the exam had taken place. There are no cameras inside
IC130, but the footage from outside the room showed:
(a) Mr. Chan trying to stop the other individual outside of IC130;
(b) The individual running from the Military Trail sidewalk to the
walkway

between

the

Instructional

Centre

(IC)

and

- 13 Environmental Science and Chemistry Building (EV) and toward
the IC loading dock; and
(c) The individual walking from the loading dock area and entering
Lot J of the Centennial College parking lot.
5.

I could not get a clear picture of the individual from the security

footage, but he appeared to match the description provided by Mr. Chan.
I have attached a copy of the screenshots that I captured of the security
footage to my affidavit as Exhibit B.
B. Interview with the Student
6.

On July 22, 2023, at 9:55 p.m., Z

L

(the “Student”) attended

the Campus Security Office upon my request to him to do so. I provided
the Student with a caution before interviewing him in which I advised him
that he did not have to say anything and that anything he did say may be
used as evidence.
7.

At around 10:00 p.m., the Student stated that he had attended the

exam in IC130the day before at 7 p.m. He said that he had a phone with
him during the exam and that a TA saw it. He said he was “too scared”
and ran out of the classroom in a panic.
8.

I asked the Student what had happened to the exam papers and he

responded that he had taken them away, along with everything else. The
Student said the TA had tried to take his TCard and test from him.
9.

I asked the Student what he had been wearing. He responded that

he was wearing black jeans and a black t-shirt, but that he could not
remember the rest as he had many shoes.
10. I asked the Student where he had placed the exam papers and he
said he did not remember much because he was too scared. He said he
got home and destroyed the papers.

- 14 11. I asked the Student what car he was driving. He responded that it
was a red, four-door sedan BMW, 2019 530 series. He said he did not
remember the license plate number and that the car belonged to his
friend.
12. I asked the Student whether this friend attended school at the
University and to describe him. The Student said he did not go to the
same school and that he was 170 centimetres, medium build, and with
hair longer than the Student’s. The Student added that he had just gotten
a haircut.
13. I asked whether the Student’s friend had a ponytail and the Student
responded that he did not.
14. When asked for his friend’s name, the Student responded that it was
“Wang, Hao” and that he did not know his phone number. I summarized
that the Student had borrowed his friend’s BMW but did not know his
phone number. The Student said his friend had just changed his phone
number.
15. I asked if the Student had anything else he wished to say and he said
no.
16. At 10:44 p.m., the Student admitted that it was not him writing the
exam. He said that he had found someone online, through the TikTok
app, who said he could help the Student with the test. He did not know
this person’s name. They came to his apartment and asked for his TCard
so that he could write the exam on the Student’s behalf.
17. The Student further admitted that at around 11 p.m. the day before,
this individual had pulled up to the Student’s apartment building in a red
Porsche SUV with tinted windows. The Student described that this
individual wore glasses and had a ponytail. This description fits the
individual caught on the security footage.
18. The Student said that this individual told him that he had “failed” and
returned the Student’s TCard to him. He told the Student to drop the

- 15 course to avoid trouble and to delete all of their messages. He also said
that he had destroyed the exam papers and that the Student did not have
to pay him.
19. The Student stated that he was barely passing and having difficulty
boosting his GPA. He said that this was the first time that he had had
someone write a test for him, but that he had cheated once before with
his cell phone.

D.

DECISION

14.

The Panel received and carefully considered the submissions of counsel for the
University. In particular, counsel for the University characterized the evidence in
support of the Charges as “clear and convincing”. The Panel agreed with that
characterization and found that it applied to the evidence of the four witnesses
summarized above.

15.

With respect to Charges 1 and 2, the evidence clearly established that the
Student surreptitiously used his cell phone to receive messages as to the correct
answers on the exam from an outside third-party collaborator.

16.

With respect to Charges 3 and 4, the evidence clearly established that the
Student arranged for an outsider to impersonate him and to attend and write the
exam while impersonating the Student. Indeed, the Student admitted this to be
so.

17.

Accordingly, the Panel entered a finding of guilt with respect to Charge 1 and
Charge 3. In accordance with the University’s undertaking, counsel for the
University thereupon withdrew Charge 2 and Charge 4.

E.

SANCTION / PENALTY

18.

Counsel for the University sought a penalty of expulsion from the University. In
support of her submissions as to the penalty that should be imposed upon the

- 16 Student by reason of the findings of guilt cited above, counsel for the University
tendered a Book of Documents (Re: Sanction).
19.

The said Book of Documents categorized previously decided pertinent case law
as follows:
(i) “Personation” cases in which the penalty imposed was expulsion from the
University;
(ii) “Personation” cases in which the penalty imposed was one of suspension,
but not expulsion;
(iii) cases involving the use of “Unauthorized Aids / Assistance”.
The Panel carefully considered all of these cases and found the said Book to be
of considerable assistance in its deliberations. The Panel noted that the sanction
sought in this case was consistent with and justified by penalties imposed in
previously decided cases of similar nature.

20.

The Panel was also referred to and carefully considered the Provost’s Guidance
on Sanctions found as Appendix “C” to the Code of Behaviour on Academic
Matters. The Panel noted that the Provost’s Guidance included a provision that a
Tribunal would be requested to recommend that a student be expelled where,
inter alia, the student “personated” another student or had a student personate
that student in a test, exam, or other academic evaluation”. The Panel noted that
Charge 3 in this case was indeed one of “personation”.

21.

The Panel was referred to case law in which the penalty for personation was
expulsion of the student from the University even where there were mitigating
circumstances. In the instant case the Panel noted that the Student had neither
cooperated nor participated in the prosecution, such that the Panel was not
provided with personal circumstances of the Student or other considerations in
mitigation of the penalty although it had been open to the Student to participate
and cooperate. As a result, the Tribunal did not have before it personal

- 17 circumstances or mitigating factors that might otherwise affect the recommended
penalty of expulsion. Further, in this case the student has not only had someone
personate him, but also committed the offence of unauthorized aid 8 months
prior.
22.

The Panel, accordingly, issued an Order as to sanctions as requested by counsel
for the University.

F.

ORDER

23.

The Panel issued the following Order:
1.

The hearing may proceed in the absence of Z

2.

Z

L

L

;

is guilty of knowingly using or possessing an

unauthorized aid or aids or obtaining unauthorized assistance in
connection with the final exam in MGEB06H3, contrary to section B.I.1(b)
of the Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters;
3.

Z

L

is guilty of knowingly having someone personate them

during a term test in MGEB02H3, contrary to section B.I.1(c) of the Code
of Behaviour on Academic Matters;
4.

The following sanctions shall be imposed on Z

L

:

(a) the Tribunal recommends to the President of the University that
the President recommend to the Governing Council that Z
L
(b) Z

be expelled from the University;
L

shall be immediately suspended from the

University for a period of up to five years from the date of this
Order or until the Governing Council makes its decision on
expulsion, whichever comes first, and a corresponding notation
shall be placed on Z
transcript;

L

’s academic record and

- 18 (c) Z

L

shall receive a final grade of zero in MGEB06H3;

L

shall receive a final grade of zero in MGEB02H3.

and
(d) Z

5. This case shall be reported to the Provost for publication of a notice of
the decision of the Tribunal and the sanctions imposed, with the name of
the student withheld.

DATED at Toronto, this 27th day of September, 2024.

Original signed by:
_________________________________

F. Paul Morrison, Chair
On behalf of the Panel

