Case No.: 1216
THE UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
IN THE MATTER OF charges of academic misconduct filed on June 7, 2021,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters, 1995,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Act, 1971, S.O. 1971, c. 56 as am. S.O. 1978, c.
88
B E T W E E N:
UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO (the “University”)
- and –
J

P

(the “Student”)

REASONS FOR DECISION

Hearing Date: August 17, 2021, via Zoom
Members of the Panel:
Mr. Simon Clements, Chair
Professor Gabriele D’Eleuterio, Faculty Panel Member
Ms. Parsa Mahmud, Student Panel Member
Appearances:
Ms. Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg Rothstein LLP
Mr. Nick Di-Biase, Representative for the Student, Downtown Legal Services
Hearing Secretary:
Ms. Nadia Bruno, Special Projects Officer, Appeals, Discipline & Faculty Grievances
In Attendance:
The Student

2

1.

This panel of the University Tribunal held a hearing on August 17, 2021 to consider the charges

brought by the University against the Student under the Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters, 1995 (the
“Code”).
A.

The Charge and Particulars

2.

By letter dated June 8, 2021 the Student was informed of the charges against him and the particulars

of those charges.
Charges
1.

On or about January 12, 2021, you knowingly forged or in any other way altered or falsified a
document or evidence required by the University of Toronto, or uttered, circulated or made use
of such forged, altered or falsified document, namely a request for academic accommodation
or relief in PHY456H1F which you submitted in an email to Professor John Sipe, contrary to
Section B.I.1(a) of the Code.

2.

In the alternative to charge 1, on or about January 12, 2021, you knowingly engaged in a form
of cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or misrepresentation not otherwise
described in order to obtain academic credit or other academic advantage of any kind, by
submitting a request for academic accommodation or relief in PHY456H1F in an email to
Professor John Sipe which contained false information and misrepresentations, contrary to
Section B.I.3(b) of the Code.

3.

On or about January 12, 2021, you knowingly forged or in any other way altered or falsified a
document or evidence required by the University of Toronto, or uttered, circulated or made use
of such forged, altered or falsified document, namely a request for academic accommodation
or relief in PHY489H1F which you submitted in an email to Professor Michael Luke, contrary
to Section B.I.1(a) of the Code.

4.

In the alternative to charge 3, on or about January 12, 2021, you knowingly engaged in a form
of cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or misrepresentation not otherwise
described in order to obtain academic credit or other academic advantage of any kind, by
submitting a request for academic accommodation or relief in PHY489H1F in an email to
Professor Michael Luke which contained false information and misrepresentations, contrary to
Section B.I.3(b) of the Code.

3

Particulars
1.

At all material times you were a student registered in the University of Toronto Faculty of Arts
& Science.

(i) PHY456
2.

In Fall 2020, you enrolled in PHY456H1F: Quantum Mechanics II (the “456 Course”), which
was taught by Professor John Sipe.

3.

You completed the academic requirements for the 456 Course and received a failing grade of
26/100.

4.

You sent an email to Professor Sipe on January 12, 2021 in which you provided details of your
personal circumstances which you asked Professor Sipe to reconsider if there was any way that
you could pass the 456 Course [“Sipe Email”].

5.

You explained to Professor Sipe in the [Sipe Email] that your mother had contracted the Covid
virus and had not survived, that your father was hospitalized with the Covid virus; and that you
were responsible to arrange your mother’s funeral.

(ii) PHY489
6.

In Fall 2020 you enrolled in PHY489H1F: Introduction to High Energy Physics (the “489
Course”), which was taught by Professor Michael Luke.

7.

You completed the academic requirements for the 489 Course and received a failing grade of
32/100.

8.

You sent an email to Professor Luke on January 12, 2021 in which you provided details of your
personal circumstances which you asked Professor Luke to reconsider if there was any way that
you could pass the 489 Course [“Luke Email”].

9.

You explained to Professor Luke in the [Luke Email] that your mother had contracted the Covid
virus and had not survived, that your father was hospitalized with the Covid virus; and that you
were responsible to arrange your mother’s funeral.

4

(iii) False information
10.

The information that you provided to Professor Sipe in the [Sipe Email] and to Professor Luke
in the [Luke Email] was false and misrepresented your personal situation. Your mother did not
die while you were enrolled in the 456 Course and the 489 Course, your father was not
hospitalized with Covid, and you were not required to arrange your mother’s funeral. You made
that information up in an effort to obtain a passing grade in each of the 456 Course and the 489
Course.

11.

You knowingly submitted the falsified [Sipe Email] and the falsified [Luke Email] which each
fundamentally misrepresented your family circumstances:
(a)

understanding that the University of Toronto required legitimate and
compelling personal circumstances to be presented in order to obtain the
academic accommodation or relief you sought;

(b)

with the intention that the University of Toronto rely on each of the [Sipe
Email] and the [Luke Email] in considering whether or not to provide you
with the academic accommodation or relief you requested; and

(c)

in an attempt to obtain academic credit and/or other academic advantage.

B.

The Evidence

3.

The Student signed an Agreed Statement of Facts (“ASF”) on July30, 2021. In this ASF the Student

admitted attending a meeting with the Dean’s Designate, Graham Hurst, on May 11, 2021. Professor Hurst
administered the Dean’s warning pursuant to the requirement of the Code. The Student admitted that he
had fabricated the story of his mother’s death from Covid-19 in an effort to obtain passing marks in each
of the 456 Course and the 489 Course. He explained that he was experiencing stress at the time because his
father had lost his job, his mother had hepatitis, and the time zone difference between South Korea and
Toronto made it difficult to maintain healthy sleep patterns while attending class. The Student
acknowledged what he had done, and apologized.
4.

In the ASF, the Student admits that he knowingly: (a) fabricated and falsified the information about

his parents contracting Covid-19, his mother’s hospitalization and death, and the consequences of those
events for him personally, which information was entirely false; (b) submitted each of the Sipe Email and

5

the Luke Email containing the falsified information as a document or evidence required by the University
to support his request for academic accommodation in the 456 course and the 489 Course; (c) did so to
deceive each of Professor Sipe and Professor Luke into thinking that he had suffered serious personal loss
and stress from the impact of Covid-19 on his family so that they would be sympathetic to his requests to
increase his grades to permit him to pass their respective courses.
5.

The Student admits that he falsified a document and evidence required by the University in the

form of each of the Sipe Email and the Luke Email, and uttered, circulated and made use of each of these
falsified documents when he sent them to his course instructors in PHY456 and PHY489, contrary to section
B.I.1.(a) of the Code.
6.

The Student admits that he knowingly engaged in a form of cheating, academic dishonesty or

misconduct, fraud or misrepresentation not otherwise described in the Code in order to obtain academic
credit or other academic advantage of any kind in connection with the Sipe Email and the Luke Email,
contrary to section B.I.3(b) of the Code.
7.

The Student acknowledged that he signed the ASF freely and voluntarily, knowing of the potential

consequences he faced, and did so with the advice of counsel.

C.

Decision of the Tribunal

8.

The onus is on the University to establish on the balance of probabilities, using clear and

convincing evidence, that the academic offence charged has been committed by the Student.
9.

The Student was charged with offences under both Section B.I.1 (a) and Section B.I.3(b) of the

Code. Charges under Section B.I.1 (a) of Code relate to the use of a falsified document. Charges under
Section B.I.3(b) of the Code relate to conduct amounting to academic dishonesty or misrepresentation.
The Student has admitted that the two e-mails he sent to the Professors seeking accommodation were
falsified documents, and also that the sending of those false e-mails amounted to academic dishonesty
or misrepresentation.
10.

At the Hearing, Assistant Discipline Counsel advised that the Student pled guilty to charges 1

and 3 under Section B.I.1 (a) of the Code. The Tribunal asked whether the Student was also prepared

6

to plead guilty to charges 2 and 4 under Section B.I.3(b) of the Code given the admissions made in the
ASF. Counsel for the Student advised the Tribunal that the Student also pleads guilty to charges 2 and
4 under Section B.I.3(b) of the Code. The Tribunal was advised by Assistant Discipline Counsel that
the University preferred to proceed with the charges under Section B.I.1 (a) of the Code that the emails in question amounted to falsified documents. In support of this submission the Tribunal was
provided with cases, including The University of Toronto and M.H. (Case No. 600, November 3, 2010)
which concerned e-mails containing false statements and The University of Toronto and Y.F.L (Case
No. 639, February 14, 2012) in which the student sent a Personal Statement in support of petitions to
defer examinations and to withdraw from a course without penalty. In both cases the student pleaded
guilty to the charges under Section B.I.1 (a) of the Code.
11.

The Tribunal questioned whether it was necessary to construe an e-mail as a falsified document

under Section B.I.1 (a) of the Code when the e-mails clearly contained misrepresentations and sending
the e-mails in a fraudulent attempt to obtain an accommodation amounted to academic dishonesty,
which fit neatly within the academic offence set out in Section B.I.3(b) of the Code. Counsel for the
Student provided the Tribunal with the case of The University of Toronto and N.R. (Case No. 714,
October 11, 2013), another case in which a student had sent e-mails containing false information. The
Tribunal there had asked a similar question at paragraph 11 of the Reasons for Decision, noting that
“the documents themselves are not forged, altered or falsified. The information contained in the
documents is false, fraudulent and a misrepresentation, but the documents themselves are not falsified.”
Therefore, the question is which section of the Code is the more appropriate?
12.

Without having to decide whether an e-mail which contains misrepresentations meets the

definition of a falsified document under Section B.I.1 (a) of the Code, the Tribunal determined that the
conduct in this case fell squarely within that contemplated by Section B.I.3(b) of the Code.
13.

The Tribunal accordingly found that the Student knowingly engaged in a form of cheating,

academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or misrepresentation in order to obtain academic credit or
other academic advantage, by submitting a request for academic accommodation or relief in
PHY456H1F and PHY489H1F in emails which contained false information and misrepresentations,
contrary to Section B.I.3(b) of the Code. As a result of this finding on Charges 2 and 4, the University
agreed to withdraw Charges 1 and 3.

7

D.

Penalty

14.

The matter continued with a hearing on the appropriate sanctions.

15.

The parties submitted an Agreed Statement of Facts on Penalty as well as a Joint Submission

on Penalty (“JSP”). First, the Student admitted to a prior offence. In the Fall 2018 term, two years
prior to the subject offences, the Student was enrolled in PHY256, taught by Professor Steinberg. The
Student admitted at a meeting with Professor Steinberg that he had copied his answer on an assignment
from an internet source without attribution. The department imposed a sanction of a mark of 0 on the
assignment which was worth 3% of the course mark.
16.

Additionally, the parties agreed to mitigating circumstances, including that at the time the Student

committed the academic offences in question, the Student was under the stress of an impending conscription
into the South Korean military. The Student had postponed his conscription date numerous times in the
past, meaning that the Student knew he could not postpone the conscription date much longer.

17.

Further, the Student’s mother was experiencing medical complications at or around the time of

the offence. In particular, the Student’s mother was hospitalized on several occasions due to abdominal
issues. As a result, the Student’s mother underwent a procedure where a potentially cancerous
adenomatous polyp was removed.
18.

Lastly, at the time of the offence, the Student’s father lost his employment, causing the family

financial hardship.
19.

With respect to Penalty, the Provost and the Student made a joint submission, which outlined the

following:
1.

The Provost and the Student submit that the appropriate penalty in all the

circumstances of the case is that the University Tribunal impose the following sanctions
on the Student:
(i)

a final grade of zero in each of the courses PHY489H1F and PHY456H1F
in Fall 2020;

8

(ii)

a suspension from the University for 3 years from the day the Tribunal
makes its order; and

(iii)

a notation of the sanction on his academic record and transcript for 4 years
from the day the Tribunal makes its order.

2.

That this case shall be reported to the Provost for publication of a notice of the
decision of the Tribunal and the sanction or sanctions imposed, with the name of
the student withheld.

20.

Both Counsel made submissions on the high threshold required for a Tribunal to deviate from a

JSP. As set out in the Discipline Appeals Board decision in The University of Toronto and S.F. (Case No.
690,October 20, 2014), only truly unreasonable or "unconscionable" joint submissions should be rejected
(para 22).

21.

In support of the reasonableness of the JSP, the Tribunal was asked to consider the University of

Toronto and Mr. C. factors (Case No. 1976/77-3, November 5, 1976) long recognized as the leading
decision on sentencing principles. These factors are:

(a) the character of the person charged;
(b) the likelihood of repetition of the offence;
(c) the nature of the offence committed;
(d) any extenuating circumstances surrounding the commission of the offence;
(e) the detriment to the University by the offence; and
(f) the need to deter others from committing a similar offence.

22.

With respect to character, it was noted that the Student has taken full responsibility for his

conduct and has expressed his deep remorse. The Student admitted guilt at the Dean’s Meeting and has

9

cooperated throughout the discipline process. As a contrary factor, the Student committed three
offences and in so doing undermined the University’s accommodation process.
23.

Regarding repetition, the Student had a prior offence, and this hearing involved three separate

attempts at accommodation. However, the Student was near to graduation at the time, reducing the
likelihood of repetition.
24.

The nature of the offence is serious. By taking advantage of the University’s accommodation

process the Student potentially caused harm to other students who had legitimate need to take
advantage of an accommodation. In that regard factor (e) is also relevant, the University should be able
to trust students to take advantage of the accommodation process in good faith. The Student’s conduct
undermined that trust. Counsel for the Student acknowledged that the University has a legitimate
interest in sending a message that conduct such as this will not be tolerated.
25.

In terms of mitigating factors, the Student acknowledged his guilt, cooperated in the discipline

process, and expressed deep remorse for his conduct. Counsel for the Student also noted that in the
Fall of 2020, due to the COVID-19 Pandemic, learning at the University was entirely online. The
Student was unable to enter Canada and had to take his courses online from South Korea, which was
13 hours ahead of Toronto, causing the Student to have to attend class in the middle of the night.
Combined with the stress of his impending military conscription, his mother’s health and his father’s
unemployment, the Student was “not himself” at the time of committing these offences.
26.

ln the Tribunal’s view, the JSP in this case is reasonable. The authorities submitted by the

University and the Student show that there has been a broad range of sanctions in similar situations ranging
from a three-year suspension and four-year notation, up to expulsion. In particular, the Tribunal took into
consideration the seriousness of the offence; there was no truth to the stories the Student invented and there
was no basis for the Student to request that his marks be raised to a passing grade. Offences of this nature
compromise the integrity of the academic accommodation process. The Tribunal also considered that this
was not the Student's first offence. As reflected in the ASF, the Student had previously been sanctioned for
copying his answer on an assignment from an internet source without attribution.
27.

However, there were also mitigating factors to consider. The Student had cooperated in the

discipline process and had accepted responsibility for his conduct. The Student was experiencing a number

10

of stressors and, in the midst of the Pandemic, the Student was attempting to continue his studies by
attending classes online in the middle of the night from South Korea. In this case, a penalty on the lenient
end of the range is not unreasonable. It would not be against the public interest to give effect to the JSP.

E.

Conclusion

28.

The Tribunal deliberated and concluded that having regard to all the circumstances of this

offence,
1.

THAT [the Student] is guilty of two counts of the academic offence of cheating, academic

dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or misrepresentation in order to obtain academic credit or other
academic advantage, contrary to section B.I.3(b) of the Code,
2.

THAT the following sanctions shall be imposed on [the Student]:
(a)

a final grade of zero in each of the courses PHY489H1F and PHY456H1F in Fall
2020;

(b)

a suspension from the University for 3 years from the day the Tribunal makes its
order; and

(c)

a notation of the sanction on his academic record and transcript for 4 years from
the day the Tribunal makes its order.

3.

THAT this case shall be reported to the Provost for publication of a notice of the decision

of the Tribunal and the sanction or sanctions imposed, with the name of the student withheld.

Dated at Toronto this 2nd day of November 2021

11

Original signed by:
_________________________________________________
Simon Clements, Chair
On behalf of the Panel

