Case 1216

   DATE: November 2, 2021
   PARTIES: University of Toronto v. J.P. ("the Student")

   HEARING DATE: August 17, 2021, via Zoom

   Panel Members:
   Mr. Simon Clements, Chair
   Professor Gabriele D'Eleuterio, Faculty Panel Member
   Ms. Parsa Mahmud, Student Panel Member

   Appearances:
   Ms. Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg
   Rothstein LLP
   Mr. Nick Di-Biase, Representative for the Student, Downtown Legal
   Services
   The Student

   Hearing Secretary:
   Ms. Nadia Bruno, Special Projects Officer, Office of Appeals,
   Discipline and Faculty Grievances

   Theâ¯Studentâ¯was chargedÂ with two counts ofÂ knowingly forgingÂ or in
   any other way alteringÂ or falsifyingÂ a document or evidence required
   by the University of Toronto, or uttering, circulatingÂ orÂ makingÂ use
   of such forged, altered or falsified document,Â namely two
   emailsÂ thatÂ contained false information and misrepresentationsÂ in an
   attempt to obtain academic accommodationÂ or relief, contrary toÂ s.
   B.i.1(a)â¯of theâ¯Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters,
   1995â¯(theÂ âCodeâ).Â In the alternative, theâ¯Studentâ¯was charged
   under s.â¯B.i.3(b) of theâ¯Codeâ¯on the basis that
   theâ¯Studentâ¯knowingly engaged in a form of cheating, academic
   dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or misrepresentationâ¯in order
   toâ¯obtain academic credit or other academic advantageâ¯in
   connectionÂ two emails that containedÂ false information and
   misrepresentations in an attempt to obtain academic accommodation.

   The Student attended the hearing and was represented by counsel. The
   Student and the University submitted an Agreed Statement of Fact
   (âASFâ).Â The Panel noted that the ASF outlined that the Student
   admittedÂ attending a meeting with the Deanâs Designate at which time
   the Student admitted that heÂ hadÂ fabricated the
   informationÂ contained in the emails in an effort to obtain
   passingÂ gradesÂ inÂ theÂ two courses.Â The Student further
   acknowledged what he had done, and apologized.Â The ASF further
   outlined that the StudentÂ admitted that heÂ hadÂ fabricated,Â and
   falsified informationÂ contained in the emails, submitted the falsified
   informationÂ to support his request for accommodation,Â and did so to
   deceive the Professors so they wouldÂ be sympathetic to his requests to
   increase his grades to permit him to pass their respective courses.

   The Panel heard submissions from Assistant Discipline Counsel that the
   StudentÂ hadÂ pled guilty toÂ the two counts ofÂ knowingly forgingÂ or
   in any other way alteringÂ or falsifyingÂ a document or evidence
   required by the University of Toronto, or uttering, circulatingÂ or
   makingÂ use of such forged, altered or falsified document.Â However,
   the PanelÂ required clarification from the Student as to whether the
   StudentÂ was alsoÂ pleadingÂ guilty to theÂ offences under s. B.i.3(b)
   of the Code. The Studentâs counselÂ advised that the
   StudentÂ wasÂ alsoÂ pleadingÂ guilty to the charges under s.B.i.3(b) of
   the Code.Â The UniversityÂ advised the Panel that they preferred to
   proceed withÂ theÂ charges under s. B. i.1(a) of the CodeÂ becauseÂ the
   emails in question amounted to falsified documents.Â The Panel
   questionedÂ whether it was necessary to construe an email as a
   falsified document under s.B.i.1(a) of the Code when the emails clearly
   contained misrepresentations and sending the emails in a fraudulent
   attempt to obtain an accommodation amounted to dishonesty, which fits
   neatly within the academic offence set out in s. B.i.3(b) of the
   Code.Â Without having to decide whether an emailÂ which contained
   misrepresentations met the definition of a falsified document under
   s.B.i.1(a) of the Code, the PanelÂ determined that the conduct ofÂ the
   StudentÂ fell squarely within that which is contemplated by s.B.i.3(b)
   of the Code.Â Accordingly, the PanelÂ found theÂ Student guilty of two
   counts of knowinglyÂ engagingÂ in a form of cheating, academic
   dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or misrepresentation in order to obtain
   academic credit or other academic advantage.

   In determining sanction,â¯theâ¯PanelÂ consideredÂ an Agreed Statement
   of Facts on Penalty and a Joint Submission on Penalty (âJSPâ).Â The
   Agreed Statement of Facts on Penalty outlined that the Student had a
   prior offenceÂ of plagiarismÂ and thatÂ the parties agreed to the
   mitigating circumstancesÂ surrounding the commission of the
   offence.Â Both counselÂ provided submissions on the high threshold
   required for the Panel to deviate from a JSP. As set out by
   theÂ DisciplineÂ Appeals Board inÂ The University of Toronto and
   S.F.Â (Case No. 690, October 20, 2014), only truly unreasonable or
   âunconscionableâ joint submissions should be rejected (para. 22).Â In
   support ofÂ the reasonableness of the JSP, the Panel was asked to
   considerÂ University of Toronto and Mr. C.Â (Case No. 1976/77-3,
   November 5, 1976),Â which outlines factorsÂ to
   considerÂ atÂ sentencing.Â The Panel noted that the nature of the
   offenceÂ was seriousÂ asÂ it couldÂ haveÂ potentially caused harm to
   other students who hadÂ legitimate need to take advantage of an
   accommodationÂ and the University should be able to trust students to
   take advantage of the accommodation process in good faith.Â The
   Studentâs conduct undermined that trust. Offences of this nature
   compromise the integrity of the academic accommodation
   process.Â WithÂ respect toÂ mitigating factors, the Panel noted that
   the Student had taken full responsibility for his conduct,Â expressed
   deep remorse, and cooperated throughout the discipline
   process.Â Furthermore, the Student was unable to enter CanadaÂ and had
   to take his courses online from his home country due to the COVID-19
   pandemicÂ which forcedÂ the Student to have to attend classes in the
   middle of the night.Â ThisÂ combined withÂ all theÂ stressors from his
   personal life,Â theÂ Student was ânot himselfâ at the time in which he
   committed the offences.Â Having taken all of these factors into
   consideration, the Panel found that the JSP in this case was
   reasonableÂ and it would not be against the public interest to give
   effect to the JSP. The Panel imposed the following sanctions:Â final
   grade of zero in the courses; three-year suspension; four-year notation
   on transcript; and a report to the Provost for publication.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/30081
