Report 416

DATE:

   October 29, 2021

PARTIES:

   Mr. A.L. (the âStudentâ) v. Faculty of Medicine

HEARING DATE:

   June 22, 2021, via Zoom

Chair:

   Ms. Sara Faherty

Appearances:

For the Student Appellant:

   Mr. Faisal Bhabha, PooranLaw
   Ms. Madison Pearlman, PooranLaw
   The Student

For the Faculty of Medicine:

   Ms. Sari Springer, Litter Mendelson

   The Student requested a closed hearing because ofÂ âthe sensitive
   nature of some of the evidence that may be heard during the
   hearing.âÂ Since the FacultyÂ of Medicine (âFacultyâ)Â did not object
   to this request, the Chair of the Academic Appeal Committee (the
   âCommitteeâ) granted the request, and the Committee held a closed
   hearing.

   The Student appealed the decision of the Faculty of Medicine Academic
   Appeal Committee which affirmed the Board of Examinersâ decision to
   dismiss the Student from the General Surgery Residency Program.Â The
   StudentâsÂ first ground of appeal relatesÂ to whether the division
   followed its policies and procedures, the next two grounds focus
   onÂ theÂ reasonableness of the decision, and the remaining three
   grounds are framed by the Student asÂ violations under
   theÂ OntarioÂ Human Rights Code.

   Regarding the first ground of appeal, the Student argued that the
   Faculty did not provide him with written reasons for dismissing him
   from the program within a reasonable timeframe. The Student pointed to
   section 7.2 of the âGuidelines for the Assessment of Postgraduate
   Residents of the Faculty of Medicine at the University of Torontoâ
   (âGuidelinesâ), which notes that a resident must be informed in writing
   of the decision to dismiss them from the program. The Student argued
   that although the GuidelinesÂ doÂ not include an expressed deadline to
   communicate a decision about a dismissal,Â thisÂ implies that a
   decision must be provided within a reasonable amount of time. The
   Committee found that given the complexity of the case, the need for
   careful review, and the number of people involved in making this
   critical decision, the time frame was not unreasonable. Based on the
   foregoing, the Committee concluded that the Faculty followed its
   policiesÂ in regard toÂ the decision-making about the dismissal of the
   Student.

   In his second ground of appeal, the Student challenged the fairness and
   reasonableness of the Facultyâs decision in two ways. First, he
   asserted that the Faculty did notÂ take into accountÂ relevant evidence
   because it relied on the St. Michaelâs Hospital Report, which had
   serious deficiencies and was therefore unreliable. Second,Â he was
   convinced thatÂ the process in front of the General Surgery Residency
   Program and the Board of Examiners did not adequately note individual
   patient records, which the Student believed were necessaryÂ in order
   toÂ determine whether or not he had provided adequate care to his
   patients. The Committee noted that the decision from the Faculty of
   Medicine Academic Appeal Committee outlined that the Studentâs
   Statement of Appeal wasÂ consideredÂ as well as other
   documents,Â including the Facultyâs Response, and the St. Michaelâs
   Hospital Report. The Committee believed that the Resident Program
   Dismissal Report would have been a more complete document if it
   included a section summarizing the Studentâs counter arguments, but the
   Committee could not conclude that a lack thereof meantÂ that the
   Studentâs pointsÂ had not beenÂ considered.Â The Committee noted that
   the St. Michaelâs Hospital Report containedÂ a two-page synopsisÂ that
   outlined the Studentâs explanation for hisÂ behaviourÂ and
   therefore,Â itÂ wouldÂ notÂ beÂ accurate to indicate that the Studentâs
   responses were not included in the report.Â The Committee found that
   the decisions adequately considered the arguments made by the Student.
   Regarding the second challenge, the Student argued that the four
   medical files that were reviewed by the St. Michaelâs Hospital Report
   are critical evidence that show his medical decisions were not unsafe
   for patients, and that they are partly exculpatory because they
   contained evidence that other medical professionals working on the
   filesÂ alsoÂ made errors on those days. The Committee noted that the
   St. Michaelâs Hospital Report outlined the positive outcomes for the
   four patients by noting that due to the deliberate intervention of
   others, no harm was inflicted on the patients. The Committee found that
   the Student was not barred from presenting his arguments about
   individual outcomes of the patients he treated as part of his appeal of
   his dismissal.Â It concluded that the decision-makers were free to
   assign to the arguments about ultimate patient outcome as much or
   little weight as they deemed appropriate.

   The final three grounds of appeal touch on allegations that the
   Facultyâs dismissal violated the OntarioÂ Human Rights Code. The
   Committee discussed thisÂ groundÂ in four parts. First, the Committee
   considered whether the Studentâs disability was appropriately
   accommodated by the Faculty. The Committee reviewed four letters
   pertaining to the Studentâs disability, medication regimen, and
   accommodations. The Committee noted that the Studentâs academic
   accommodations consistently stressed his need for close mentorship and
   detailed feedback. The Student argued that he did not get this. The
   Student further suggested that if academic performance issues can be
   traced back to his disability, then the Faculty cannot act on
   thoseÂ issuesÂ because to do so is to discriminate against himÂ on the
   basis ofÂ his disability. The Committee remarked thatÂ the University
   has an obligation to put accommodations in place that allow students to
   meet academic standards, but it is not to disregard or waive those
   academic standards for students with disabilities.Â The Committee noted
   that based on the assurances outlined in theÂ StudentâsÂ documents, the
   Faculty provided the prescribed academic accommodations that were
   intended to allow the Student to perform up to the standards of the
   program. The Student took the position that the development of his
   accommodations should have been more collaborative. The Committee
   agreed that an ongoing collaboration with students is preferable to
   occasional points of connection that was outlined by the Faculty. The
   Committee observed that although the evidence presented by the Student
   and the Faculty did not present a closely collaborative narrative, it
   was not possible for the Committee to determine whether that was a
   possibility during the years the Student was at the Faculty. The
   Committee noted that the quantity and quality of feedback the Student
   received was copious as there were many In Training Evaluation Reports
   (âITERsâ) that document the detailed written feedback for the Student.
   Many comments outlined in the ITERs reference oral feedback as well.
   Furthermore, the comments in the ITERs created the impression that
   there was ongoing communication with the Student about his performance.
   Also, several specific comments made it clear that the authors of the
   ITERs were sharing their thoughts with the Student during his shifts.
   The Committee was of the view that the Faculty met the accommodations
   set forth in the Studentâs letters.

   Second, the Committee considered whether the Faculty should have
   provided a shorter on-call period for the Student and whether the
   Studentâs medication regime was optimized. The Student asserted that
   many of the problems identified in his performance were related to his
   disability. He further asserted that the demanding shift schedule
   negatively affected his performance. Furthermore,Â he argued thatÂ the
   irritability and lack of sleep due to the shift schedule were related
   to his disability and therefore, should have been accommodated. The
   Committee noted that the Student did not have an accommodation
   regarding shortened shifts or longer breaks between shifts.Â The
   Committee found that the argument related to the Studentâs shifts was
   not developed or documented, and it was not possible to find that he
   should have been given shorter on-call periods. Furthermore, the
   Committee believed that the other incidents, even without the one
   connected to irritability, could have supported the Facultyâs decision.
   Regarding the optimization of the Studentâs medication regime, the
   Committee noted that it is unable to rule on whether the Studentâs
   medication regime was optimized. It further noted thatÂ it can only be
   the responsibility of the Student to monitor his personal well-being
   and take steps to optimize medications.Â The same issues that led to
   the Studentâs removal from the program were identified for years and
   pointed out in multiple ITERs.Â If the Student believed these issues
   were related to his disability and could have been improved by
   adjustments to his treatment, then he was obligated to make those
   changes. It could not have been the duty of the Faculty to optimize his
   medical treatment.

   Third, the Committee reviewed whether the Faculty was obligated to
   provide the Student with a new referral to the Board of Medical
   Assessors. The Committee noted that there was not any ongoing
   discussion or communication concerning the Studentâs medication at the
   time of the incidents that occasioned the Studentâs dismissal.
   TheÂ post hocÂ assertion that the Student was not properly medicated
   was not persuasive to the Committee. The Committee noted that the
   Student was consistently underperforming in his rotations and receiving
   feedback about his failure to meet expectations. The Committee was of
   the view that requesting appropriate accommodation and adhering to an
   appropriate health-care regime was the responsibility of the Student.
   The Facultyâs obligation to connect students with appropriate resources
   was met by the Faculty when it referred the Student to Accessibility
   Services and Dr.Â Bilkey, and it could not have been responsible for
   monitoring the Studentâs medication regime. Lastly, the Committee
   considered whether the manner and timing of the Studentâs
   dismissalÂ wereÂ appropriate. Upon extended review and consideration of
   the evidence, the Committee found that the Studentâs dismissal was
   years in the making. The Student suggested that prejudice against him
   due to his disability led the Faculty to pretend to have patient safety
   concerns, but those concerns were not real or severe enough to warrant
   the dismissal. The Student asked the Committee to infer discrimination
   in the decision even though it may not be apparent in the phrasing or
   reasoning of the decision. The Committee noted that while it was
   mindful of the insidiousness of discrimination, it was not willing to
   make such an inference in these circumstances asÂ it can only make
   judgements based on evidence and clearly articulated standards. It
   further noted that the Student did not provide any evidence of
   prejudice or ill will against him. The Student further argued that the
   comments made in the ITERs and orally to the Student that he should
   consider changing medical fields was evidence of prejudice against him.
   The Committee noted that although it was aware that arguing that a
   candidate for a role is ânot a good fitâ can be a strategy to cover up
   bias, the evidence in this case supports a different interpretation
   because the remarks were never that he should leave the Faculty but
   rather that he might perform better in a different practice area. The
   Student finally argued that the criticism he received from other
   members of the medical team was a result of negative stereotyping. The
   Committee concluded that the medical professionals who voiced concerns
   about the Studentâs decisions andÂ behaviourÂ during the shifts in
   question could notÂ all have been motivated by stereotypical thinking,
   since the complainants were not aware of the Studentâs disability.
   Further, the Committee noted that this was not a sudden or peremptory
   dismissal since there were multiple failed rotations in his first year,
   another failed rotation in the second year, more failed rotations in
   the third year, and an abundance of specific negative feedback,
   outlining the same issues.

   The Student requested eight remedies: the first two ask the Committee
   to find that the Board of Examinersâ decision was unreasonable,
   breached procedural fairness, and was discriminatory. The Committee, in
   reviewing the Faculty of Medicineâs Appeal Committee decision, did not
   find it to be any of those. The next three requests are for the
   Committee to expunge records of the reports that recommended the
   Studentâs dismissal, expunge the St. Michaelâs HospitalÂ ReportÂ and
   expunge any negative evaluations of the Student. The Committee noted
   that it does not have the authority to expunge those reports and
   evaluations. The sixth request is for monetary damages, which the
   Committee cannot grant. The seventh request is for the Committee to
   direct members of the Faculty to undergo disability sensitivity
   training, including specific training on how to adapt residency
   requirements to meet the needs of residents with disabilities. The
   Committee commented that although it cannot âdirectâ such training, it
   would support it. Finally, the Student asked the Committee to order an
   external review to investigate and report on systemic barriers for
   persons with disabilities within the Faculty. The Committee noted that
   it does not have the authority to order such a review and did not find
   evidence to support the argument that such a review would need to be
   externalÂ in order toÂ be valid.

   TheÂ decision of theÂ FacultyÂ of Medicineâs FacultyÂ Council Appeals
   CommitteeÂ was a reasonable application of policies designed to
   safeguard patient safety, and there was no evidence of discrimination
   or bias in the application of these policies to the Student. Appeal
   dismissed.
   [1]View Report

References

   1. file:///media/30077
