Case #904

   DATE: October 5, 2017
   PARTIES: University of Toronto v. C.M.J. (âthe Studentâ)
   Hearing Date(s):Â  Â May 24 and July 10, 2017
   Panel Members:
   Ms. Sara Zborovski, Barrister and Solicitor, Chair
   Dr. Chris Koenig-Woodyard, Faculty Panel Member
   Ms. Ashley Barnes, Student Panel Member
   Appearances:
   Ms. Tina Lie, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland, Barristers
   Professor Eleanor Irwin, Deanâs Designate, University of Toronto
   Scarborough
   Mr. Terry Johnston, Associate Director, Office of Convocation (July 10,
   2017)
   In Attendance:
   Mr. Christopher Lang, Director, Office of the Appeals, Discipline and
   Faculty Grievances
   Mr. Sean Lourim, Technology Assistant, Office of the Governing Council
   Ms. Larissa Leong, Articling Student, Norton Rose Fulbright (May 24,
   2017)
   Not in Attendance:
   The Student
   Trial Division - s. B.i.3(a) â forged or falsifying documents â
   falsified degree used in a job application âÂ  hearing not attended âÂ
   reasonable notice provided â recommendation of expulsion, five-year
   suspension pending expulsion, permanent notation on transcript, report
   to the provost with the Studentâs name withheld.
   The Student was charged with falsifying or forging an academic record
   contrary to s. B.i.3(a) of the Code . The charge related to a degree
   that the Student provided to a prospective employer, who had asked the
   University to verify it.Â  The Student had not graduated from the
   University, the degree was a forgery.
   At the time of the first hearing date, the Panel heard evidence how
   over the course of nine months, the University had unsuccessfully
   attempted to serve the Student with the charges and the notice of
   hearing by email, courier, and by phone numbers that were associated
   with the Student on ROSI.Â  The Panel adjourned the hearing to give the
   Student time to respond to the most recent attempts at service. When
   the hearing resumed six weeks later, the Student had not responded to
   any of the Universityâs attempts to contact him.Â  The Panel referred
   to Rule 9 of the University of Toronto Rules of Practice and Procedure
   in finding that the University had provided the Student with notice by
   sending a copy of the document by courier to the studentâs mailing
   address in ROSI and by emailing a copy of the document to the studentâs
   email address in ROSI.Â  Together with the Universityâs Policy on
   Official Correspondence with Students , which places the responsibility
   on the Student for maintaining a current and valid postal and email
   addresses in ROSI, the Panel concluded that the Universityâs attempts
   to notify the Student of the charges and the hearing amounted to
   reasonable notice. The hearing proceeded without the Student.
   The Panel found the Student guilty of forging an academic record
   contrary to s. B.i.3(a) of the Code . The Panel referred to other cases
   that held that the forgery of an academic record is an offence of the
   utmost seriousness because such falsification both undermines the
   credibility of the University and of other students who have
   legitimately earned their degrees.Â  Additional considerations of the
   Panel included that the Studentâs conduct was premeditated and
   egregious, and that the Student did not respond to any of the
   Universityâs attempts to contact him. The Panel ordered: (a) a
   recommendation to the President of the University that the Student be
   expelled; (b) a suspension of a period of up to five years effective
   immediately pending expulsion; (c) a permanent notation on the
   Studentâs transcript; and (d) that the matter be reported to the
   Provost for publication.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12954
