Case 793

DATE:

   July 16, 2015

PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v X.F.W.

Hearing Date(s):

   June 11, 2015

Panel Members:

   Jeffrey S. Leon, Chair
   Michael Evans, Faculty Member
   Alice Zhu, Student Member

Appearances:

   Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel
   Lucy Gaspini, Manager, Academic Integrity and Affairs, University of
   Toronto Mississauga
   Marleen Rozemond, Professor of the Course

In Attendance:

   Virginia Fletcher, Law Clerk
   Natalie Ramtahal, Coordinator, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty
   Grievances
   Joanne Deboehmler, Observer, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances
   Student was charged with three offences under s. B.i.1(d) of the Code .
   The charges related to allegations of plagiarism for three separate
   assignments in the Course. The Student was not present at the hearing
   at the appointed time. The Panel waited for 30 minutes. The Panel
   concluded that the efforts made to contact the Student by phone, mail,
   and e-mail were reasonable as per the Code and the Statutory Powers
   Procedure Act . The Panel ordered that the Hearing proceed in the
   Studentâs absence.
   Student was found guilty of all three charges of plagiarism. The Panel
   took into account Turnitin reports and concluded that there was
   significant and intentional plagiarism. The extent and nature of the
   plagiarism precluded any possibility that the dishonest conduct was the
   result of a mere error or a simple lack of proper attribution. There
   was also no evidence to suggest that the conduct was a result of a
   failure on the Studentâs part to understand the English language with
   sufficient proficiency. The Panel noted that the changes made by the
   Student to the plagiarized quotes were sophisticated and well thought
   out. The Panel also noted that it could not determine whether there was
   any reason not to suspect that there would be a repetition of offences.
   The Panel took into account a number of aggravating factors; namely,
   that three plagiarized papers were submitted, that the conduct of the
   Student demonstrated a deliberate attempt to hide the plagiarism, that
   the Student disregarded the discipline process in its entirety and
   failed to respond throughout, and that the Student demonstrated no
   accountability and no remorse. The Panel emphasized the seriousness of
   the offence of plagiarism and noted the importance of denouncing and
   penalizing such dishonest conduct in a reasoned, principled, and
   consistent manner. The Panel imposed a grade assignment of zero in the
   Course; a 3-year suspension; the earlier of either a 4-year notation on
   the Studentâs academic record and transcript, or a notation until the
   Studentâs graduation from the University; and that the case be reported
   to the Provost for publication.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/13029
