Case 1275

DATE:

   August 16, 2022

PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v. Y.L. (‚the Student‚)

HEARING DATE:

   May 17, 2022, via Zoom

PANEL MEMBERS:

   Ms. Indira Stewart, Chair
   Professor Glen Jones, Faculty Panel Member
   Ms. Amal Shah, Student Panel Member

APPEARANCES:

   Ms. Tina Lie, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg
   Rothstein LLP

NOT IN ATTENDANCE:

   The Student

HEARING SECRETARY:

   Ms. Nadia Bruno, Special Projects Officer, Office of Appeals,
   Discipline and Faculty Grievances
   The Student was charged with knowingly obtaining unauthorized
   assistance in a quiz,¬ contrary to s. B.i.1(b) of the Code of Behaviour
   on Academic Matters , 1995 (the ‚ Code ‚ ). In the alternative, the
   Student was charged with knowingly representing as their own, an idea
   or expression of an idea or work of another in a quiz, contrary to s.
   B.i.1(b) of the Code. In the further alternative, the Student was
   charged with knowingly engaging in a form of cheating, academic
   dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or misrepresentation not otherwise
   described in the Code in order to obtain academic credit or other
   academic advantage, contrary to s. B. i.3(b) of the Code.

   The hearing was scheduled to commence at 1:45PM and the Panel waited
   until 2:00PM before commencing the hearing to allow the Student some
   additional time, but the Student did not appear. The Panel received
   submissions from Assistant Discipline Counsel (‚Counsel‚) on proceeding
   in the absence of the Student. Counsel submitted evidence with respect
   to service of the charges, the Notice of Electronic Hearing,
   disclosure, and various other communications sent to the Student. The
   Panel noted that s. 6 and 7 of the Statutory Powers Procedure Act
   (‚SPPA‚) and Rule 17 of the University Tribunal Rules of Practice and
   Procedure (‚Rules‚) outline that a tribunal may proceed in the absence
   of a party provided that reasonable notice of an oral hearing has been
   given to the party in accordance with the SPPA, and where a party does
   not attend the hearing and reasonable notice has been given, a party is
   not entitled to further notice. The Panel further noted that pursuant
   to Rule 9 of the Rules, a Notice of Hearing may be served on a Student
   by various means including emailing a copy of the document to the
   Student‚s email address as recorded in the Repository of Student
   Information (‚ROSI‚). The University‚s Policy on Official
   Correspondence with Students expressly states that students are
   responsible for maintaining a current and valid postal address and
   email account in ROSI, and they are expected to monitor and retrieve
   all mail, including emails, on a frequent and consistent basis. The
   Panel outlined that the onus of proof is on the University to
   demonstrate that it provided the Student with reasonable notice of the
   hearing. The Panel was satisfied that multiple attempts were made to
   provide notice to the Student, including at the mailing and permanent
   addresses provided by the Student in ROSI, via the Student‚s email
   address in ROSI, and via telephone. Therefore, the Panel concluded that
   the Student was given reasonable notice of the hearing in compliance
   with the notice requirements of the SPPA and the Rules. As such, the
   Panel proceeded to heat the matter on its merits in the absence of the
   Student.

   Regarding the charges under s. B.i.1(b) of the Code, the Panel received
   affidavit evidence of the Professor who taught the course in which the
   quiz in question was submitted. The Professor‚s affidavit was
   supplemented by oral evidence. The Panel noted that the Professor
   explained that the Student submitted a quiz worth 10% of their grade.
   Upon review of all of the quizzes in the course, the Professor noted
   that a group of fifteen students in the class submitted answers to a
   particular question that shared suspiciously similar characteristics;
   the Student was one of those fifteen. The Panel also received affidavit
   evidence of the former Dean‚s Designate which was also supplemented by
   oral evidence. The Dean‚s Designate met with the Student to discuss the
   allegations of academic dishonesty related to the quiz. In the course
   of that meeting, the Student denied communication with anyone else
   during the quiz and stated that the concepts contained within their
   answer were either taught by the instructor or they found the
   information on Google while studying for the quiz. Subsequent to the
   meeting, the then Dean‚s Designate listed to the recording of the
   Professor‚s lecture in relation to the question and noted that the
   shared concepts in the students‚ answers were not included in those
   materials. The Panel outlined that the onus is on the University to
   establish, on a balance of probabilities, using clear and convincing
   evidence, that the academic offence charges has been committed by the
   Student. The Panel reviewed the chart created by the Professor and
   noted that the similarities were striking. The Panel agreed with the
   submission of Counsel that it was very unlikely to be a coincidence
   that multiple students independently came up with answers that included
   these unique features, none of which were referenced in the course
   materials. Based on the evidence before it, the Panel found that the
   University discharged their onus. The Panel found the Student guilty of
   one count of knowingly using or possessing an unauthorized aid or aids
   or obtaining unauthorized assistance, contrary to s. B.i.1(b) of the
   Code. The University withdrew the charges made in the alternative and
   in the further alternative.

   In determining sanction, t he Panel received evidence of a prior
   conviction against the Student for unauthorized assistance. The Panel
   considered the factors and principles related to sanction outlined in
   University of Toronto and Mr. C. (Case No. 1976/77-3, November 5,
   1976). The Panel received a chart setting out the range of penalties
   imposed in previous Tribunal decisions involving similar charges,
   namely, unauthorized assistance and plagiarism. The Panel felt
   confident, upon review of the chart, that the penalty proposed by the
   University was in the appropriate range, given the factors related to
   sanction as outlined by Counsel, and in particular, given the Student‚s
   prior and related offence. The Panel imposed the following sanctions: a
   grade of zero in the course; a three-year suspension; a four-year
   notation on the transcript; and a report to the Provost for
   publication.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/30619
