Case No.: 1275
THE UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
IN THE MATTER OF charges of academic dishonesty made on October 12, 2021
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters,
1995,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Act, 1971, S.O. 1971, c. 56 as amended
S.O. 1978, c. 88

BETWEEN:
UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO

- and -

Y

L

REASONS FOR DECISION

Hearing Date: May 17, 2022, via Zoom
Members of the Panel:
Ms. Indira Stewart, Chair
Professor Glen Jones, Faculty Panel Member
Ms. Amal Shah, Student Panel Member
Appearances:
Ms. Tina Lie, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg Rothstein LLP
Hearing Secretary:
Ms. Nadia Bruno, Special Projects, Appeals, Discipline & Faculty Grievances
Not in Attendance:
Ms. Y
L

2

1.

This panel of the University Tribunal (the “Tribunal”) held a hearing on May 17, 2022 to

consider the charges brought by the University of Toronto (the “University”) against Ms. Y
L
2.

(the “Student”) under the Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters, 1995 (the “Code”).
The Student was enrolled in Course FAH281H5F at the University, entitled “Introduction

to Islamic Art and Architecture” (the “Course”). The charges alleged that the Student was part of
a group of approximately 15 students who obtained unauthorized assistance while completing an
online quiz for the Course.
A.

Preliminary Issue: Notice and Proceeding in the Absence of the Student

3.

The hearing was scheduled to begin at 1:45 p.m. Neither the Student nor a representative

of the Student attended. The parties recessed until approximately 2:00 p.m. to allow the Student
some additional time, but the Student never attended.
4.

Assistant Discipline Counsel, Ms. Lie, made submissions on proceeding with the hearing

in the absence of the Student. She filed affidavits sworn by (a) Samanthe Huang, Administrative
Assistant, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances, Office of the Governing Council, (b)
Kimberly Blake, Legal Assistant, Paliare Roland Rosenberg Rothstein LLP and (c) Andrew Wagg,
Incident Report Architect, Information Technology Services, University of Toronto. These
affidavits set out the following attempts that were made to provide notice of the charges and the
hearing to the Student:
i)

In March 2021, the Academic Integrity Unit (“AIU”), Office of the Dean at
the University of Toronto Mississauga (“UTM”) contacted the Student by
email regarding the allegation of academic misconduct in the present case.
The email address used was the one assigned to the Student by the
University (a utoronto.ca account). The address was provided by the
Student in the University’s Repository of Student Information (“ROSI”).
The Student met with the Dean’s Designate for Academic Integrity on
March 15, 2021.

3

ii)

On October 12, 2021, the Office of the Vice-Provost, Faculty and Academic
Life, served charges on the Student via email to the Student’s utoronto email
address.

iii)

On October 13, 2021, Ms. Huang, for the Office of Appeals, Discipline and
Faculty Grievances (the “ADFG Office”), University of Toronto, served the
Student with a letter regarding the charges that were filed against her. She
also included copies of the charges, the Code, the Rules of Practice and
Procedure and a pamphlet for Downtown Legal Services, a clinic that
provides pro bono legal representation to students. These documents were
served by email to the Student’s utoronto email address. Ms. Huang did not
receive a “bounce back” message to this email.

iv)

On October 15, 2021, Assistant Discipline Counsel sent the Student an
email introducing herself and advising that important documents and
correspondence would be forthcoming via the Student’s utoronto address.
She further sent the Student a disclosure letter, a disclosure brief and a copy
of the University’s Policy on Official Correspondence with Students to the
Student’s utoronto address on January 26, 2022.

v)

On March 28, 2022, Assistant Discipline Counsel emailed the Student at
her utoronto address about scheduling a hearing date. Assistant Discipline
Counsel advised that if she did not hear back by April 4, 2022, she would
request a hearing date be scheduled. The Student did not respond to this
email.

vi)

On April 5, 2022, Assistant Discipline Counsel emailed the Student
advising that she would request a hearing be scheduled for May 17, 2022 at
1:45 p.m. On this same date, Assistant Discipline Counsel emailed the
ADFG Office to request a hearing be scheduled for the above-noted date
and time. The Student was copied on this email at her utoronto address.

4

vii)

On April 6, 2022, the ADFG Office issued a Notice of Electronic Hearing
to take place via Zoom on May 17, 2022 at 1:45 p.m. The ADFG Office
served the Student, via email, with this Notice together with copies of the
October 13, 2021 letter including charges and enclosures. The Student was
advised that the hearing would be conducted via Zoom and information was
provided to access the hearing via videoconference. The email was again
sent to the Student’s utoronto address and, again, no “bounce back” message
was received.

viii)

On May 5, 6 and 10, 2022, Assistant Discipline Counsel emailed additional
disclosure to the Student at her utoronto address, in addition to copies of the
affidavits of the Provost’s witnesses.

ix)

On May 9, 2022, a courier, arranged by Assistant Discipline Counsel,
attempted to deliver a package to the Student. The package contained a
letter from Assistant Discipline Counsel and a cover email from the ADFG
Office with attached copies of the Notice of Electronic Hearing and charges
in this matter. The package was successfully delivered to the permanent
address listed in ROSI for the Student; at 1:16 p.m. the package was signed
for by what appeared to be the building’s concierge. A second attempt to
deliver the package to the Student’s mailing address, as listed in ROSI, was
unsuccessful as the location in question was a commercial rather than a
residential building.

x)

Also on May 9, 2022, Andrew Wagg of the University’s Information
Technology Services used the Microsoft 365 Exchange portal to determine
the Student’s utoronto email account was last accessed on March 31, 2022
at 5:05 a.m. Eastern Standard Time.

xi)

In addition to the above, efforts were made by an administrative assistant at
Assistant Discipline Counsel’s law firm to contact the Student via telephone
on May 6 and May 10, 2022. Those efforts were unsuccessful.

5

5.

As of May 11, 2022, in the case of the ADFG Office, and May 13, 2022, in the case of

Assistant Discipline Counsel, the Student had not responded to any of the above-noted
correspondence.
6.

Pursuant to sections 6 and 7 of the Statutory Powers Procedure Act (the “Act”) and Rule

17 of the Tribunal’s Rules of Practice and Procedure (the “Rules”), where reasonable notice of an
oral hearing has been given to a party in accordance with the Act and the party does not attend the
hearing, the Tribunal may proceed in the absence of the party and the party is not entitled to any
further notice of the proceeding.
7.

Pursuant to Rule 9 of the Rules, a Notice of Hearing may be served on a student by various

means, including by sending a copy of the document by courier to the student’s mailing address in
ROSI or by emailing a copy of the document to the student’s email address in ROSI.
8.

The onus of proof is on the University to demonstrate that it provided a student with

reasonable notice of the hearing. It is important to note that reasonable notice, rather than actual
notice is the requirement.
9.

The Tribunal was satisfied that multiple attempts were made to provide notice to the

Student, including at the mailing and permanent addresses provided by the Student in ROSI, via
the Student’s email address in ROSI, and via telephone. None of the various emails sent to the
Student by the ADFG Office and Assistant Discipline Counsel “bounced back” and they were,
therefore, assumed to be received.
10.

While the Student’s email account does not appear to have been accessed since March 31,

2022, the University’s Policy on Official Correspondence with Students expressly states that
students are responsible for maintaining a current and valid email account on ROSI. Students are
expected to monitor and retrieve all mail, including emails, on a frequent and consistent basis.
Furthermore, while an attempt to provide notice to the Student at her mailing address was
unsuccessful, students are likewise responsible for maintaining a current and valid mailing address
on ROSI.

6

11.

The Tribunal therefore concluded that the Student was given reasonable notice of the

hearing in compliance with the notice requirements of the Act and the Rules. Consequently, the
Tribunal agreed to hear the case on its merits in the absence of the Student, and the hearing
proceeded on the basis that the Student was deemed to deny the charges made against her.
B.

The Charges

12.

The charges were detailed in a letter to the Student dated October 12, 2021:
i)

On or about September 30, 2020, you knowingly obtained unauthorized assistance
in connection with a quiz in FAH281H5F (the “Course”), contrary to section
B.I.1(b) of the Code.

ii)

In the alternative, on or about September 30, 2020, you knowingly represented as
your own an idea or expression of an idea or work of another in a quiz in the
Course, contrary to section B.I.1(d) of the Code.

iii)

In the further alternative, on or about September 30, 2020, you knowingly engaged
in a form of cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or
misrepresentation not otherwise described in the Code in order to obtain academic
credit or other academic advantage of any kind in connection with a quiz in the
Course, contrary to section B.I.3(b) of the Code.

C.

The Evidence

13.

The Tribunal received affidavit evidence from two witnesses: Professor Ruba Kana’an

(affirmed on May 10, 2022) and Professor Charles Elkabas (affirmed on May 6, 2022). The
Tribunal also had the opportunity to question both witnesses at the hearing.
Evidence of Professor Kana’an
14.

Professor Kana’an is an Assistant Professor of Islamic Art and Architecture in the

Department of Visual Studies at UTM. In the Fall 2020 academic term, she taught the Course.
The Course explored famous architectural monuments and iconic works of Islamic art.

7

15.

Between 72 and 75 students were enrolled in the Course, including the Student. Due to the

COVID-19 pandemic, the Course was taught remotely.
16.

The Tribunal learned that students in the Course were made aware of the University’s

expectations with respect to academic integrity through the Course syllabus, which outlined
behaviours that constituted academic dishonesty. With respect to “tests and exams,” the syllabus
noted that these behaviours included “Using or possessing unauthorized aids, including notes or
answer guides provided by tutoring companies or shadow courses” and “Looking at someone
else’s answers during an exam or test.”
17.

The syllabus further noted “Potential academic offences in a digital context include, but

are not limited to:
1. Accessing unauthorized resources (search engines, chat rooms, Reddit, etc.) for
assessments.
2. Using technological aids (e.g. software) beyond what is listed as permitted in an
assessment.
3. Posting test, essay, or exam questions to message boards or social media.
4. Creating accessing, and sharing assessment questions and answers in virtual “course
groups.”
5. Working collaboratively, in-person or online, with others on assessments that are expected
to be completely individually.
[…]”

18.

On September 30, 2020, students in the Course wrote an online quiz worth 10% of their

final grade (the “Quiz”). The Quiz was administered through a system called Quercus. During
lectures leading up to the quiz and in email correspondence sent to students in advance of the Quiz,
Professor Kana’an made it clear that the Quiz was closed book. This meant that students were not
permitted to use any study aids while completing the Quiz, including readings, lecture recordings,
slides, class notes, or any grammar or translation supports. Professor Kana’an also advised

8

students that they were expected to complete the Quiz independently and that the Quiz would be
based only on information covered in the preceding three lectures and on the Course materials.
She explained to the Tribunal that she saw the Quiz as a way to get the students engaged in the
class materials.
19.

In Question 7 of the Quiz, students were asked to choose one of four images to “identify,

describe and discuss.” Both a “Checklist” and “Tips” accompanied Question 7 to assist students
in their response. The “Checklist” reminded students to “Use only your own words and maintain
rules of academic integrity” and the “Tips” reminded students to “…please make sure to only
include points that were studied in class and readings.”
20.

The Student selected Option C (“Question 7(C)”), a monument which, in the relevant

lecture, Professor Kana’an had referred to as Kirbet al-Mafjar’s Hisham’s palace in Jericho. On
her review of the Quiz answers, Professor Kana’an found that a group of 15 students in the class
submitted answers to Question 7(C) that shared suspiciously similar characteristics. This included
a similar paragraph structure and discussion points, and the inclusion of similar ideas that were not
addressed in lectures or in any of the assigned materials. The Student was part of that group.
21.

Professor Kana’an created a chart, summarizing the similarities between the Question 7(C)

answers submitted by the 15 students. She found the following aspects of the Student’s answer
particularly suspicious:
i)

In the opening sentences of their answers to Question 7(C), the Student, and
many of the others students, referred to the “crown prince” having built the
palace. However, according to Professor Kana’an, the “crown prince” was
never discussed in the Course and, in fact, there was no mention in class of
who built the palace.

ii)

In describing the palace’s “bathhouse”, the Student, and many of the others,
referred to the fact that the bathhouse was separate from the “toilets” and
that it came from the Greco-Roman tradition. Neither concept was
discussed in the Course.

9

iii)

The Student, and several other students, referred to the image of the palace’s
mosaic floor as being the largest in the “East Mediterranean”. In class,
however, the mosaic floor was described as being the largest in “the Late
Antique World” or in “Antiquity”. Again, there was no mention of the East
Mediterranean in the Course.

Evidence of Professor Elkabas
22.

Professor Elkabas is a Professor of French Studies, Language Teaching and Learning in

the Department of Language Studies at UTM. Until July 1, 2021 he served as a Dean’s Designate
for Academic Integrity with the Office of the Dean at UTM.
23.

In Fall 2020, the AIU received allegations from Professor Kana’an regarding the Student’s

Quiz and its similarity to the answers submitted by a group of 14 other students.
24.

On March 15, 2021, Professor Elkabas met with the Student (via Zoom) in his capacity as

Dean’s Designate for Academic Integrity to discuss the allegations of academic dishonesty related
to the Quiz. In the course of that meeting, the Student denied communicating with anyone else
during the Quiz. She stated that these concepts were either taught by the instructor in the Course
or she got the information from Google while studying for the Quiz.
25.

Professor Elkabas listened to a Zoom recording of Professor Kana’an’s lecture in relation

to the monument in question and reviewed her lecture slides regarding the topic. He confirmed
that the shared concepts in the students’ answers, noted above at paragraph 21, were not included
in those materials.
26.

Of the 14 other students alleged to have used an authorized aid on the Quiz, 13 admitted

guilt at the Departmental or Divisional level. The allegations against one of the students were
dismissed.
27.

Professor Elkabas advised the Tribunal that in his view, if the unusual answers in Question

7(C) had been submitted by one or two students, he may have considered it a coincidence.
However, in his view, when 15 students provide the same unusual answers, there is a clear pattern.

10

D.

Decision of the Tribunal

28.

The onus is on the University to establish, on a balance of probabilities, using clear and

convincing evidence, that the academic offence charged has been committed by the Student. The
Tribunal determined that the Provost met that standard.
29.

The evidence demonstrated that the Course instructor, Professor Kana’an, made it clear to

students, both in class and via email, that the Quiz in question was closed book. This meant that
no study aids of any kind were to be used during the Quiz. While Professor Kana’an did not
expressly forbid students from doing independent research, she explained that the Quiz would be
based solely on the lectures and Course materials and this was also made clear in the “Tips” section
directly on the Quiz itself. The University’s expectations for academic integrity were also
communicated to students through the Course syllabus and, again, directly on the Quiz.
30.

The Tribunal reviewed the chart created by Professor Kana’an, comparing the students’

Question 7(C) answers and considered her evidence on this issue. With the exception of one
student, whose case was ultimately dismissed, the similarities in the other 14 answers were
striking. In particular:
i)

The Student, and 8 other students, began by referring to the palace having
been built by the “crown prince”. However, according to Professor
Kana’an, this concept was never discussed in the Course and, in fact, there
was no mention in class of who built it.

ii)

In describing the palace’s “bathhouse,” the Student referred specifically to
the fact that the bathhouse was separate from the “toilets” and that it came
from the Greco-Roman tradition. Twelve other students also noted its
Greco-Roman origins, and 7 others referenced the separation from toilets.
Neither concept was discussed in class or included in the Course materials.

iii)

The Student referred to the image of the palace’s mosaic floor as being the
largest in the “East Mediterranean”. Six other students described it almost

11

identically. However, there was no mention of the “East Mediterranean” in
class. Instead, Professor Kana’an described the mosaic floor as being the
largest in “the Late Antique World” or in “Antiquity”.
31.

The Tribunal agreed with the submission of Assistant Discipline Counsel – and the

testimony of Professor Elkabas – that it is very unlikely to be a coincidence that multiple students
independently came up with answers that included these unique features, none of which were
referenced at any point in the Course lectures or materials.
32.

The Tribunal also noted that the common answers in Question 7(C) all had a strikingly

similar structures to each other, yet did not appear to follow a logical structure.
33.

Question 7 read:
Identify: What is it? Where? By Whom? For whom?
Describe: What does it look like (form, materials, techniques). How was it made
(technology, labour…)?
Discuss: Why is it relevant? What are the ‘big ideas’ (context, power relations, knowledge
transfer, social relations, gender relations, labour, environment, symbolic dimensions,…)?
What questions can it raise?
The 14 answers the Tribunal compared, all appeared to omit key information sought by the

question, including how the monument was made and why it was relevant, while including
irrelevant information, such as the separation of the “toilet.”
34.

The Tribunal further received evidence that 13 of the 15 students in question admitted guilt

in relation to the use of unauthorized study aids or unauthorized assistance on the Quiz. The
Tribunal had limited evidence before it regarding the specific circumstances of the other students’
cases, but it appeared that the students provided varying explanations for how the cheating
occurred.
35.

Assistant Discipline Counsel pointed the Tribunal to two cases on this issue, University of

Toronto v. S.R. (Case No. 708, June 6, 2014) and University of Toronto v. W.Z. (Case No. 1085,

12

April 20, 2021) (“W.Z.”). In both cases, the Student had not admitted responsibility, but the
Student’s accomplices had admitted to prohibited collaboration. The W.Z. case, in particular,
involved a similar fact scenario where a large group of students submitted the same or similar
answers to several questions, using the same unusual terms. The Panel in W.Z. considered the fact
that the 10 other students, whose answers mirrored the Student’s, admitted to obtaining
unauthorized assistance at the Departmental or Decanal levels. The Student in question was the
only remaining case. Assistant Discipline Counsel argued that, based on these cases, admissions
by co-conspirators can provide some evidence of corroboration. She fairly conceded, however,
that a finding of liability in the case at hand could not be based solely on such evidence.
36.

The Tribunal has considered the fact that almost all of the other students involved, many

of whom had answers that were strikingly similar to the Student’s answer, admitted to the use of
an unauthorized study aid in relation to the Quiz. The Tribunal agrees with Assistant Discipline
Counsel’s submission that this fact provides some evidence of corroboration, although it would
not be sufficient, on its own, to support a finding a guilt.
37.

The Tribunal was unable to determine exactly how the Student obtained unauthorized

assistance. There was some evidence that at least one of the other students had admitted to using
an online “cram school” or “shadow course” to seek answers to the Quiz questions. Based on the
commonality of the answers to Question 7(C), the Tribunal found a strong inference could be
drawn that the Student and others were either using a shared document during the Quiz or that they
were in communication with each other, either directly or through an online program. However,
this assessment was largely speculative and there was no evidence directly before us proving either
scenario in relation to the Student.
38.

In any event, as Assistant Discipline Counsel submitted, the Provost is not required to show

how the cheating occurred. Per the Tribunal’s decision in the University of Toronto v. S.K.(Case
No. 595, October 12, 2010), the test is whether the University has provided “clear and convincing
evidence that the student violated the Code in the manner described” (at paragraph 32). As stated,
the Tribunal found the Provost had satisfied this test.

13

39.

The Tribunal accordingly found the Student guilty of one count of knowingly using or

possessing an unauthorized aid or aids or obtaining unauthorized assistance in any academic
examination or term test or in connection with any other form of academic work, contrary to
section B.I.1.(b) of the Code.
40.

The Tribunal having made such a finding of guilt, the Provost withdrew the alternative

charges against the Student.
E.

Penalty

41.

The matter continued with a hearing on the appropriate sanction. Assistant Discipline

Counsel

sought

an

order

imposing

the

following

sanctions

on

the

Student:
i)

a final grade of zero in the course FAH281H5F in Fall 2020;

ii)

a suspension from the University of Toronto from the date of this order for a period
of 3 years, ending on May 16, 2025; and

iii)

a notation of the sanction on her academic record and transcript from the date of
this order for a period of 4 years, ending on May 16, 2026; and

iv)

that the case be reported to the Provost for publication of a notice of the decision
of the Tribunal and the sanction imposed, with the Student’s name withheld.

42.

The Tribunal was presented with evidence of a prior conviction for the Student through a

“Discipline Case Report.” The prior conviction was from November 2018 and was for the same
offence (unauthorized assistance). In that case, the Student received a grade of 0 on the assignment
in question.
43.

Assistant Discipline Counsel submitted that the Tribunal, in determining the appropriate

sanction in a given case, should consider the factors laid out in the foundational sentencing case,
University of Toronto and Mr. C. (Case # 1976/77-3, November 5, 1976): (a) the character of the

14

person charged; (b) the likelihood of a repetition of the offence; (c) the nature of the offence
committed; (d) any extenuating circumstances surrounding the commission of the offence; (e) the
detriment to the University occasioned by the offence; and (f) the need to deter others from
committing a similar offence.
44.

Given the Student did not participate in the hearing, there was no evidence before the

Tribunal of the Student’s character, or any extenuating circumstances surround the commission of
the offence.
45.

With respect to the likelihood of a repetition of the offence, Assistant Discipline Counsel

submitted that this is the Student’s second conviction for the same offence. She further noted that
the Student’s previous penalty of a grade of 0 did not deter the Student from re-offending.
46.

Finally, Assistant Discipline Counsel directed the Tribunal to authorities on factors (e) and

(f), namely the detriment to the University and the need for deterrence. The authorities highlighted
the seriousness of the offence in question, the detrimental impact on other students who “play by
the rules” and the need to send a clear message to the University community, particularly in the
current environment of online quizzes, tests and assignments, precipitated by the pandemic.
47.

Assistant Discipline Counsel also provided the Tribunal with a chart setting out the range

of penalties imposed in previous Tribunal decisions involving similar charges, namely,
unauthorized assistance and plagiarism. The Tribunal felt confident, upon review of the chart, that
the penalty proposed by the Provost was in the appropriate range, given the Mr. C factors as
outlined by Assistant Discipline Counsel and, in particular. given the Student’s prior and related
offence
48.

There was evidence before the Tribunal that the 13 other students, who all resolved their

matters at the Divisional level, received significantly less severe penalties than the one proposed.
However, the Code expressly provides for this discrepancy between more lenient penalties for
matters resolved at the Divisional (or Decanal) level, and harsher penalties for those that proceed
to the Tribunal. Assistant Discipline Counsel further directed the Tribunal to the Discipline

15

Appeals Board decision in University of Toronto and D.S. (Case No. 451, August 24, 2007) in
support of this point (at paragraphs 43-44):
…[D]ecanal sanctions must be viewed differently, than sanctions of the Tribunal. Procedures at
the decanal level are designed to foster early resolution of the issues, where possible, through a
relatively informal and speedy process. We agree that this is right in principle and that this policy
should be preserved. The potential for a lenient sanction, at that stage, encourages this resolution.
Such a sanction, however, can only be imposed where a Student admits misconduct.
…
Tribunal sanctions should be reviewed for consistency with other Tribunal sanctions.

49.

In light of the Code provisions and precedents, the Tribunal has limited its consideration

to Tribunal sanctions only and finds the penalty proposed by the Provost to be fit and appropriate.
F.

Conclusion

50.

The Tribunal finds the Student guilty of one count of knowingly using or possessing an

unauthorized aid or aids or obtaining unauthorized assistance in any academic examination or term
test or in connection with any other form of academic work, contrary to section B.I.1(b) of the
Code.
51.

Accordingly, the Tribunal orders that the following sanctions be imposed on the Student:
i)

a final grade of zero in the course FAH281H5F in Fall 2020;

ii)

a suspension from the University of Toronto from the date of this order for
a period of 3 years, ending on May 16, 2025; and

iii)

a notation of the sanction on her academic record and transcript from the
date of this order for a period of 4 years, ending on May 16, 2026; and

iv)

that the case be reported to the Provost for publication of a notice of this
decision and the sanctions imposed, with the name of the Student withheld.

16

Dated at Toronto this 16th day of August, 2022
Original signed by:
________________________________________________
Ms. Indira Stewart, Chair
On behalf of the Panel

