Case 841

   [1]Case 841 - Appeal

DATE:

   March 13, 2017

PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v. L.S. ("the Student")

Hearing Date(s):

   November 29, 2016

Panel Members:

   Mr. Shaun Laubman, Lawyer, Chair
   Professor Graeme Hirst, Faculty Panel Member
   Mr. Harvey Lim, Student Panel Member

Appearances:

   Ms. Tina Lie, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Barristers
   Ms. Lucy Gaspini, Manager, Academic Integrity and Affairs, University
   of Toronto - Mississauga
   Ms. Emma Planinc, Head Teaching Assistant for POL 200Y
   The Student

In Attendance:

   Ms. Tracey Gameiro, Associate Director, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty
   Grievances, University of Toronto
   Mr. Sean Lourim, Technology Assistant, Office of the Governing Council

   The Student was charged with one offence of plagiarism under s.
   B.i.1(d) of the Code, and alternatively, use of an unauthorized aid
   under s. B.i.1(b) of the Code, and alternatively, academic dishonesty
   under s. B.i.3(b) of the Code. The charges related to a final essay in
   a course. All students in the course were given the option of a peer
   review process in which other students reviewed and commented on a
   draft of their work. The University alleged that the Student changed
   their paper after reviewing a colleague's draft, plagiarising that
   draft's thesis, structure, and arguments. However, the Student argued
   that they changed their topic before seeing their colleague's draft,
   and that some other similarities were the result of following their
   colleague's suggestions from the peer review.

   The University was unable to show its case on clear and convincing
   evidence. The Tribunal engaged in a close reading of the Student's
   essay against their colleague's essay. While many similarities were
   found, some were the result of the typical structure and style of such
   essays, others were traced to the wording of the assignment, and others
   to the course readings. The Tribunal looked past superficial
   similarities of form, wording, and chosen citations, to determine that
   the Student had performed their own analysis. The Tribunal viewed such
   similarities against the overall context of each section in each paper.
   Moreover, there was limited evidence of the range of theses used in the
   class that could show that the Student's thesis was unusually similar
   to their colleague's. The Tribunal found that when a process is in
   place for peer review, it would be unfair to penalize a student for
   incorporating an idea arising from that process or to characterize it
   as unauthorized assistance.

   One member of the Tribunal dissented. They agreed that the similarity
   of thesis could be chance, and that the similarity of essay structure
   was innocuous. However, they found that the formal similarity could be
   an indicator of plagiarism combined with other evidence. The dissenter
   considered that it was more likely that specific quotations from a
   given source were pulled from the Student's colleague's draft rather
   than from that source because the draft was 10 pages long while the
   source was at least 75 pages long, and the quotations were not obvious
   choices. The dissenter thought that the majority wrongly focussed on
   differences instead of similarities. Thus the dissenter would have
   found the Student guilty of plagiarism and academic misconduct. The
   dissenter agreed with the majority that it would be unjust to punish
   the Student by finding a fruit of the peer review process to be an
   unauthorized aid.
   [2]View Case

References

   1. https://live-the-office-of-the-governing-council.pantheonsite.io/media/13043
   2. file:///media/12932
