Case No.: 841
THE UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
IN THE MATTER OF charges of academic dishonesty made on January 1 5, 20 1 6 ,
AND I N THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic

Matters, 1995,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the

University of Toronto Act, 1 971 , S.O. 1 97 1 , c. 56 as

amended S.O. 1 978, c. 88
B E T W E E N:
UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
- and -

--

L

S

REASONS FOR DECISION
Hearing Date:

November 29, 20 1 6

Members of the Panel:

Mr. Shaun Laubman , Lawyer, Chair
Professor Graeme Hirst, Faculty Panel Member
Mr. Harvey Lim, Student Panel Member
Appearances:

Ms. Tina Lie, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Barristers
Ms. Lucy Gaspini, Manager, Academic I ntegrity and Affairs, University of Toronto Mississauga
Ms. Emma Planinc, Head Teaching Assistant for POL 200Y
Ms. L
S
(the "Student")

--

In Attendance:

Ms. Tracey Gameiro, Associate Director, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty G rievances,
University of Toronto
Mr. Sean Lourim, Technology Assistant, Office of the Govern ing Council

1 . The Trial Division of the University Tribunal heard this matter on November 29,
20 1 6.
2. The Student was charged as follows:
a. On or about April 1 , 20 1 5, you knowingly represented as your own an idea
or expression of an idea or work of another in an essay that you submitted
in POL200Y5 (the "Cou rse") , contrary to section B . 1 . 1 (d) of the Code;
b. I n the alternative, on or about April 1 , 20 1 5, you knowingly obtained
unauthorized assistance in con nection with an essay that you submitted in
the Course, contrary to section B. 1 . 1 (b) of the Code;
c. I n the further alternative, on or about April 1 , 20 1 5, you knowingly engaged
in a form of cheating , academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or
misrepresentation not otherwise described in the Code in order to obtain
academic credit or other academic advantage of any kind in connection with
an essay that you submitted in the Course, contrary to section B . l .3(b) of
the Code. (the "Charges")
3. At the conclusion of the hearing, the Tribunal d ismissed the Charges against
the Student, find ing that the U niversity had failed to establish the Charges on a
balance of probabilities based on clear and convincing evidence. The decisions
with respect to the charges pursuant to section B. 1 . 1 (d) and B . l . 3(b) of the Code
were by majority, while the decision with respect to the charge pursuant to
section B. 1 . 1 (b) of the Code was unanimous.
4. These are the reasons for the Tribunal's decision.

Background
The Course

5. The Student was enrolled in the Course during the Fall/Winter 201 4-20 1 5
academic year. The Charges relate to the second essay assignment for the
Course, which was worth 30% of the final g rade.
6. For the second essay assignment, students in the Course were expected to write
an eight to ten page essay on one of three assigned topics. The essays were not
research papers and the students were expressly discouraged from relying on
sources other than the assigned texts for the Course.
7. Accord ing to the evidence of the U niversity's first witness, the Head Teaching
Assistant for the Cou rse, Emma Planinc, the second essay assignment was
designed to incorporate a peer review component where students would meet in
small g roups to review and comment on the drafts prepared by their peers.
Students were to submit their final paper for grading following the peer review
process.
8 . The original plan for the peer review process was a s follows:
a . Students were to email a complete first draft of their essay to their
teaching assistant by March 6th;
b . The teach ing assistants would assig n each student to a small g roup for
the peer review and then would distribute the draft essay to the peer
reviewers;
c. Students were to meet in tutorials on March 1 1 th for the peer review
process. Ms. Planinc was going to attend all of the tutorials to assist and
oversee the peer review process; and
d. Students were to use the comments received from their peers to prepare
and submit a final paper on April 1 st .

9. That was the plan. However, events did not proceed as planned .
1 0. Teaching assistants at the U niversity of Toronto went on strike during the
Winter 20 1 5 term . Accord ing to Ms. Planinc, the strike had a disruptive effect
on the Course and the plan for the second essay assignment.
1 1 . I nstead of being mandatory, the peer review process became optional for
students in the Course. If a student d id participate in the peer review process,
they received an extra grade of 5% . A further change was that Ms. Planinc
was no longer involved in coord inating and overseeing the peer review
process. Students were told to select their own peer review partners.
Students were expected to organize and exchange draft papers amongst
themselves.
The Student's Essay

1 2 . The evidence submitted at the Hearing established that the Student submitted
her first draft paper to Ms. Plan inc by email on March 1 3th . This was the
revised dead line for subm itting draft papers.
1 3 . The Student's initial draft paper was based on the following essay topic
("Topic A"):
a . Aristotle claims that man is a political animal. Aq uinas claims that he is a
"social and political" animal. What is meant by each , and is the change
sig nificant? Why or why not?
1 4 . Ms. Planinc testified that while she received the Student's draft paper, she d id
not review it at that time.
1 5. On March 2 1 st , the Course instructor, Professor Bejan, emailed students
enrolled in the Course to advise that the planned peer review process had
been cancelled due to the ongoing strike but that there was a new optional
process for students to take advantage of.

1 6 . The Student elected to participate in the peer review process and partnered
with two other students.
1 7. The evidence showed that the Student elected to change her Essay topic
before her final paper was submitted . The exact time that she elected to
change topics was not clearly established in the evidence, although it appears
to have happened sometime between March 1 3th , when she submitted the
first d raft to Ms. Planinc, and March 3 1 st, the day before the final papers were
d ue.
1 8 . The Student changed her Essay topic to the following topic ("Topic B"):
b . Both Aquinas and Mach iavelli argue that one m ust study "nature" in order
to understand politics - but with very different results. Explain their
different understandings of nature and what it teaches the student of
political science. Whom do you find more persuasive?
1 9 .0n March 3Pt , the Student emailed Ms. Planinc to advise that she had
changed topics from Aristotle to the topic comparing Aquinas and Machiavelli.
She attached a draft of her new Essay to the email and informed Ms. Planinc
that the new draft was being peer reviewed . Ms. Planinc responded soon
after to say "no problem" and "thanks for letting me know."
20. It so happened that one of the students (whose initials are "S. D .") that the
Student partnered with for the peer review process wrote her paper on the
same essay topic, comparing Aquinas' and Machiavelli's understandings of
nature. This is significant because the Charges were premised on the
allegation that the Student plagiarized from S. D.'s essay.
2 1 . The evidence established that S . D . selected the topic comparing Aq uinas and
Machiavelli prior to submitting the first draft of her paper to Ms. Plan inc. The
evidence also established that S . D . then sent a d raft of her paper to the
Student and the third student involved in peer review process on March 29th .

22. The Tribunal was provided with the original d raft that the Student emailed to
Planinc on March 1 3th , the revised paper that she submitted for peer review
on March 31 st and the final paper that she submitted for grading on April 1 st .
The final version included the peer review sheets with the comments that S . D.
and the th ird student made on the Student's revised paper.
23. The Tribunal was also provided with the original d raft of S. D.'s paper and the
version that S . D . gave to the Student for peer review. S . D . emailed her d raft
paper to the Student for the peer review on March 28, 20 1 5. This draft and
the copy of the Student's revised submitted paper had been annotated by Ms.
Plan inc with a highlighter to ind icate the parts of the two essays that she
believed to be similar. These were marked as exhibits 1 2 and 1 0
respectively.
Conflicting Evidence

24. The University's theory was that the Student decided to change her essay
topic after reviewing S. D.'s paper. Then, on or about March 31 st , the Student
changed topics to the same one as S . D . and submitted her revised paper,
which the University alleged bore significant similarities to S.D.'s paper.
25. The evidence regard ing similarities between the Student's and S . D .'s papers
was led th rough Ms. Plan inc. Ms. Planinc testified that after grading both
papers, she was struck by the similarities. She stated that she noticed that
the use of subject head ings and the flow of arg ument were similar.
26. Accord ing to Ms. Planinc, the theses and use of quotes from the texts were
similar between the Student's and S. D.'s papers. Ms. Planinc testified that of
the eighty papers that she marked (out of a class of approximately two
hundred students), no other paper had a similar thesis. She said that the
thesis was unique and therefore, she found it un usual that the two papers
shared it in common.

27. Ms. Planinc also noted that the use of section head ings in both papers stood
out to her as generally students did not use subject head ings in the papers
she g raded .
28. Ms. Planinc testified that she reviewed the draft prepared by S . D . and
compared it to the final paper submitted by the Student and concluded that
the Student had copied from S . D . work. During her testimony, she gave
several examples from S.D.'s draft paper and the Student's final paper that
she claimed supported her conclusion.
29. The Student also testified at the hearing. She gave very different evidence
regarding the similarities between her paper and S. D.'s compared to Ms.
Plan inc.
30. The Student stated that she decided to switch topics from Aristotle to the topic
comparing Aq uinas and Machiavelli prior to reviewing S. D.'s paper. She
explained that as an English major, she reads assigned works closely and
selected the quotes used in her paper from a close reading of the assigned
texts.
3 1 . She acknowledged that while her paper and S . D . 's did quote several similar
passages from the texts, she explained that she used the quotes and took
them in a different direction than d id S.D . . She said the use of some similar
quotes from the texts was merely a coincidence.
32. During the Student's testimony, she reviewed her final paper and S . D . 's draft
paper and identified a number of differences between them .
33. With respect to her use of subject headings in her final paper, which were
absent from her earlier drafts, the Student said that S . D . had suggested she
use them during the peer review process to add more space to her paper. I n
draft form , the Student's paper was shorter than the min imum page count.

34. The Student also testified that S . D . d id not raise any concern regarding the
content of her paper when she reviewed it or suggest that it was copied from
her own .
35. S.D. was not a witness at the hearing. Nor was the other student who
participated in the peer review process and reviewed both S . D . 's and the
Student's papers.
Burden of Proof

36. The Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters places the onus of proof in
discipline matters on the prosecutor. To secure a conviction, the U niversity
must show on clear and convincing evidence that the student has committed
the alleged offence. For a recent d iscussion of the burden of proof see
University of Toronto v S.H.L. , (March 24, 2016, Case #786 (paras. 69 75) .
-

Decision of the Tribunal

37. The evidence against the Student was entirely circumstantial in our view.
The Tribunal carefu lly and thoroughly reviewed the various versions of the
Student's Essay that were in evidence as well as the draft of S . D. 's paper that
the Student was alleged to have plagiarized from. The Tribunal also reviewed
the evidence pertaining to the timing of when the draft and final essays were
prepared .
38. The University arg ued that there were three primary areas of similarity
between the Student's and S . D . 's papers:
a. The introductions and theses of the papers;
b. The overall structure of the papers, in particular, the use of subject
head ings; and
c. The conclusions had similar concepts.

39. There were undeniably some similarities between the papers. In her
evidence, the Student did not deny that there were some similarities but
explained that they were coincidental and not surprising given the assigned
essay topic and the fact the students were drawing from the same source
material.
40. A comparison of the papers also revealed significant differences between the
papers.
4 1 . The only evidence to rebut the Student's testimony that her Essay was the
product of a close read of the assigned texts, her independent work , and the
input of her peers via the peer review process was Ms. Planinc's testimony.
42 . However, at times during her testimony, it appeared that Ms. Planinc was
trying to convince the Tribunal of the Student's guilt rather than giving purely
objective evidence. At one point, she testified that it was her assessment the
Student had merely replicated S . D . 's paper. A comparison of the papers, and
the d ifferences between them, showed sufficient differences and unique
content to belie the suggestion that the Student's paper was merely
plag iarized from S . D . 's.
43. We were left with the impression that Ms. Planinc saw herself as part of the
prosecution. During her evidence, she emphasized similarities between the
papers, however minor they were , and downplayed or ignored significant
d ifferences. As a result, we have difficulty with her subjective assessment
that the Student's Essay was the product of plagiarism.
The Alleged Similarities

44. The Un iversity alleged that there were eight broad sections of the Student's
Essay that were similar enough to S . D . 's paper to constitute plagiarism.
These sections were those featuring highlighting by Ms. Planinc from her
review of the two papers.

45. The first section was the two introductory parag raphs of the Student's Essay,
which were said to be similar to the two introd uctory paragraphs of S.D.'s
paper. The relevant paragraphs of the Student's Essay read as follows
(where underlining ind icates Ms. Planinc's highlighting):
I n the Oxford Dictionaries, the term 'nature' is defined a s "the innate o r essential qualities
or character of a person or animal". This definition can be seen incorporated in
numerous political theorists' view of 'nature'. In Thomas Aquinas' On Kingship and The

Treatise on Law in St. Thomas on Politics and Ethics, one is given Aquinas' perspective
on what the term, 'nature', consists of. Niccolo Machiavelli has also taken the chance to
demonstrate his understanding of 'nature' in his writings The Prince and The Discourses.
While both Aquinas and Machiavelli argue that one must study "nature'' to comprehend

politics, their results can be found to be dissimilar. Aquinas' "nature'' focuses more so on
order whereas Machiavelli finds nature to be chaotic.
In this paper, Aquinas and Machiavelli' [sic] understanding of nature will be discussed
in detail, including what their interpretations of nature teaches [sic] students of political
science and how Machiavelli's "nature" can be seen as more persuasive due to it being
more relatable to modern society.

S . D . 's introductory paragraphs read as follows:
''Nature" can be broadly defined as the inherent characteristics of the universe, and of all
of the things in the universe, that influence the way in which the universe operates. The

way in which political theorists understand "nature" can provide the foundation for their
political views. Specifically, Thomas Aquinas presents his understanding of "nature" and
how the universe is governed in his works On Kingship and On Politics and Ethics,
providing the foundation for his political views. Similarly, Niccolo Machiavelli presents his
understanding of "nature" and the political implications that follow in his works, The

Prince and The The [sic] Discourses. Although both Aquinas and Machiavelli suggest
that one must study "nature" in order to understand politics and human action, this paper

argues that Aquinas conceptualizes nature as ordered, and directed toward some end
whereas Machiavelli conceptualizes nature as chaotic, and governed. in part, by fate.
Aquinas and Machiavelli's differing ideas on nature are reflected in their views on the
appropriate actions of rulers, and the relationship between state and religion.
This paper will begin with a section briefly outlining and contrasting Aquinas and
Machiavelli's views on "nature", followed by a section discussing how each theorist's

understanding of nature is reflected in their political teachings. Finally, the paper will
conclude with a section discussing which set of political views is more compelling.

46. Although there are some similarities between the paragraphs, we observe
that these similarities are likely the result of the fact that both papers use the
typical structure of an introd uction, in which the key term is defined , the thesis

of the paper is summarized , and the structure of the paper is outlined.
Moreover, the definitions of "nature" that are given are quite different from one
another, and, unlike S . D . , the Student has drawn upon the Oxford [English]
Dictionary.

47. In the second introductory paragraph, Ms. Planinc highlig hted as similar the
phrase "more persuasive" (the Student) and "more compelling" (S. D. ); but this
idea is drawn straight from the assigned topic, which asks "Whom do you find
more persuasive?" Given the topic, there is nothing surprising about the use
of these terms. Ms. Planinc also highlighted "understanding of natu re" and
"what their interpretations of nature teaches students of political science" (the
Student) and "each theorist's understanding of nature is reflected in their
political teachings" (S. D . ) . Again, these ideas are d rawn directly from the
assigned essay topic: "Explain their different understand ings of nature and
what it teaches the student of political science". The "similarities" highlighted
by Ms. Planinc also included the parag raph introductions "[ In] this paper" (the
Student) , and "This paper [will)" (S . D.). However, we view these as standard
and obvious ways to begin a paragraph summarizing the paper.
48. For these reasons, we do not see the highlig hted language in the introd uctory
paragraphs for the two papers as constituting persuasive evidence of
plagiarism .
49. The second alleged similarity between the papers concerned text appearing
on pages 2 and 5 of S.D.'s paper and page 6 of the Student's Essay, where
both add ress Aquinas' discussion of the purpose and duty of kings in On
Kingship. The relevant sentences of the Student's Essay read as follows:
Thomas Aquinas has stated that whatever was in concord with nature was the best way
to govern, but it was found that in nature one man rule always dominated (Aquinas On

Kingship 17). [. . ,-i] Aquinas has also stated that if it were possible to get to the final end
.

through the power of human nature, then it was the duty of kings to direct their men
towards that end (Aquinas On Kingship 27). The king Is also expected to rule over all

existing human offices and direct them by utilizing his ruling power (Aquinas On Kingship
28). The aforesaid could be compared to the following situation: "the navigator who is

responsible for
· piloting the ship directs the shipbuilder as to the most suitable type of ship
to construct and the citizen who bears arms tells the blacksmith what kind of weapons to
make" (Aquinas On Kingship 27). Similar to how a navigator has to direct a shipbuilder
and blacksmith on what to do so nothing goes wrong during the journey, a king has to
direct his subjects so that they properly reach the final end.

The relevant sentences of S.D.'s paper read as follows:
[Page 2] In order to achieve this ultimate end, Aquinas holds that men should be
governed by a single monarch (Aquinas On Kingship 171c
[Page 5] Specifically, in modelling their rule after the rule of God, Aquinas suggests that
the monarch should seek to promote the common good, so that their subjects may be
able to live virtuously (Aquinas On Kingship 16). In describing the actions of a monarch,

Aquinas compares a monarch to the pilot of a ship (Aquinas On Kingship 27). Aquinas
suggests that in the same way that the crew have different responsibi lities and work
towards achieving different ends, people in society have d iffe re n t individual ends
(Aquinas On Kingship 26). According to Aquinas, it is the role of the monarch to act as
the ship's navigator, and to steer society toward its flhal· end, which is beyond the private
and worldly ends of men, and entails the common good (Aquinas On Kingship 26).
Aquinas states that "if a thing is ordered to an end beyond itself, as a ship to its port, it is
the duty of one who directs it not only to keep it safe but to bring it to the goal which is
beyond it" (Aquinas On Kingship 26). Aquinas asserts that, because nature is ordered
and directed at some end determined by God's divine plan, it is the role of the monarch to
help individuals fulfill their end of living virtuously to be with God. [ffi By using the analogy
of the monarch as a pilot of a ship, Aquinas suggests that the monarch can exert some
influence on nature, and on the direction of men. The monarch is an active force

"steering" men towards their end, as opposed to a passive recipient of what happens in
nature.

50. We observe that the Student's Essay contains ideas that, although
highlighted , are unique and do not appear in S. D.'s essay. These include the
idea that the King is expected to rule over all offices and the use of a direct
quotation from Aq uinas making an analogy about the relationships between a
navigator and a sh ipbuilder and between a citizen and a blacksmith . (S. D .
also uses a navigator analogy, but quite a d ifferent one; for her, the navigator
is navigating, not specifying the construction of the ship) . Although both
essays discuss the same section of Aq uinas' On Kingship, it is clear from the
different analysis that the Student has read and interpreted this material
herself and has not merely paraphrased S . D. 's material as alleged .

5 1 . The th ird alleged sim ilarity concerned text appearing on pages 2-3 of S.D .'s
paper and page 4 of the Student's Essay, where both discuss Machiavelli's
view of nature as chaotic. The relevant sentences of the Student's Essay
read as follows:
In comparison to Aquinas, Machiavelli considers nature to be chaotic as it is fortune that
guides it. In The Prince, Machiavelli compares fortune to "torrential rivers" (Machiavelli

74) in that no individual can resist its "attacks", but still can be "safely kept ... or at least
... not be so unregulated and destructive" (Machiavelli Prince 74-75). He further states
how fortune "determines one half of our actions" but "leaves us to control the other half'
(Machiavelli Prince 74). The above demonstrates how nature can be chaotic because
fortune is shown to be unpredictable and it is said to control half of an individual's actions
as well, which thus, leaves half of our actions with the potential to destroy our lives.

The relevant excerpts of S . D.'s paper read as follows:
In contrast to Aquinas's understanding of nature as ordered, and aimed at some end,
Machiavelli understands nature as chaotic, and governed, at least in part, by fate.
Machiavelli states that "fortune determines one half of our actions" (Machiavelli The

Prince 74). This suggests that, at least in part, nature is chaotic as half of human actions
_
_____b-y,____
_ _ _ _u~n~d~e~r~st~a_n_d_in-g_
_
are_
dictated
chance (Machiavelli The Prince 74~)._Machiavelli's
of _
nature
as chaotic is emphasized when he compares fortune to "torrential rivers" (Machiavelli The
Prince 74) that are "unregulated and destructive" {Machiavelli The Prince 75), highlighting
the random nature of fortune. [1I] That being said, although Machiavelli states that fortune

governs half of human action , he also states that "she leaves us to control the other half'
{Machiavelli The Prince 74) . Thus humans are able to take action to guard against the
chaos of nature. In order to control against the "torrential rivers" of fortune, Machiavelli
suggests that men can build "banks and barriers" (Machiavelli The Prince 75).

52. The mutual citation and analysis of the "torrential rivers" quote was
emphasized by Ms. Planinc and the U niversity as evidence of the Student's
plagiarism. However, while there are similarities between the two excerpts,
we observe that the Student's Essay contains elements that, although
highlig hted , express ideas that do not appear in S. D.'s essay. These include
the use of a longer direct quotation about fortune's control of half our actions
(S. D. merely paraphrased it closely); and the use of an add itional direct
quotation ("safely kept . . . ") Moreover, the Student uses the quotation about
.

"torrential rivers" to make a different point from S . D . 's. S . D . uses it to
high light the "random nature of fortu ne", whereas the Student j uxtaposes it

with the "safely kept . . . " quotation to highlig ht the limitations of fortune's
destructive nature.
53. Importantly, since both papers add ress the same essay topic, it is not
remarkable that both papers cite key relevant excerpts from the assig ned
read ings in certain lim ited instances. The U niversity did not establish , on
clear and convincing evidence, that the common use of "torrential rivers" was
the product of the Student's plagiarism as opposed to merely being an
expected by-prod uct of the common assig ned readings and lim ited scope of
the essay topic add ressed by both papers
54 . The fourth alleged similarity concerned material appearing on page 7 of S. D.'s
paper and page 7 of the Student's Essay, which discuss Machiavelli's idea
that rulers shou ld seek to expand their territory. The relevant sentences of
the Student's Essay read as follows:
In addition, Machiavelli stresses the need for rulers to expand their territory (Machiavelli

Discourses 100). Machiavelli asserts that "it is perfectly natural and normal to want to
acquire new territory; and whenever men do what will succeed towards this end, they will
be praised" (Machiavelli Prince 13). This indicates how Machiavelli believes that man can
do whatever he needs in order to attain novel territory because man is "by nature
envious" (Machiavelli Discourses 82), which explains why man desires to obtain others'
territory in addition to his.

The relevant section of S . D.'s paper read as follows:
/
Also reflecting his view that nature is chaotic and inconstant, Machiavelli
asserts that

rulers should seek territorial expansion (Machiavelli The Discourses 100). The reason for
this assertion is that Machiavelli believes that "in life nothing stands still" and that things
"must be either rising or falling" (Machiavelli The Discourses 101). By suggesting that
things are constantly "rising or falling", Machiavelli is describing how circumstances are
constantly changing, and how nothing is stable (Machiavelli The Discourses 101)

.

Accordingly, Machiavelli advises that rulers should "aim high" so that "if circumstances
force [expansion] it will be able to hold on to what it has acquired" (Machiavelli The

Discourses 101). Thus, Machiavelli holds that rulers should be prepared for
circumstances to change, as nature is chaotic and governed, in part, by fortune. In order
to overcome fortune, one must anticipate the worst, and erect barriers so that changing
circumstances do not destroy the state.

55. Except for some minor passing similarity in the first sentence of the kind that
would be expected in a sentence introducing this topic (even the word
"Machiavelli" and the citation to his work have been highlighted as if these
wou ld be expected to d iffer), the two paragraphs present quite different
analyses and conclusions. This is not persuasive, let alone clear and
convincing, evidence of plagiarism .
56. The fifth alleged similarity concerned material appearing o n page 8 of S . D .'s
paper and page 3 of the Student's Essay, concerning Aquinas on natural and
eternal law. The relevant sentences of the Student's Essay read as follows:
In addition, so far one has merely seen how God is the only one to create order in nature,
but this does not mean that humans cannot aid in producing order for themselves. For
example, Aquinas states human beings as [sic] rational creatures tha t partake in eternal
reason, as they have a natural propensity towards their proper actions and ends. He
considers this involvement by rational creatures in eternal law as natural law (Aquinas
The Treatise 46).

The relevant sentences of S . D . 's paper read as follows:
All other forms of law discussed by Aquinas stem from eternal law (Aquinas On Politics

and Ethics 48). Divine law involves the laws given by God, through his prophets (Aquinas
On Politics and Ethics 47). Natural law involves the extent to which humans can
participate in eternal law through their reason (Aquinas On Politics and Ethics 47).
Aquinas suggests that natural law is "imprinted upon [humans] through their respective
inclinations to their proper actions and ends" (Aquinas On Politics and Ethics 46). What is
natural to humans as a part of their ends, such as reproducing, stems from eternal law,
and is a part of
· natural law (Aquinas On Politics and Ethics 50).

57. The discussions in the two papers contain qu ite d ifferent analyses, and the
Student's Essay contains an element that, although highlig hted, expresses an
idea that does not appear in S . D .'s essay, namely Aq uinas's idea of human
beings as rational creatures.
58. The sixth alleged similarity concerned material appearing on page 1 0 of
S . D .'s paper and page 8 of the Student's Essay, in which the use of examples
in the study texts is d iscussed . The relevant sentences of the Student's
Essay read as follows:

After all, there is a famous saying that states that if one wishes to understand the
present, then they must understand the past. Machiavelli is seen to repeatedly utllize
historical examples to further his perspective on nature. This not only aids his readers in
better understanding his writings, but it is also beneficial for political science students,
who can use the historical examples provided to see how politics has evolved over the
years.

The relevant sentences in S . D.'s paper read as follows:
By drawing upon real world examples. Machiavelli presents a compelling perspective. [1l]
In contrast to Machiavelli, Aquinas does not use historical examples to illustrate his
claims.

59. However, once again, the Student's use of Machiavelli's "historical examples"
makes a quite d ifferent point from that of S. D.'s description of "real world
examples" .
60. The seventh alleged similarity concerned material appearing on page 1 0 of
S . D .'s paper and page 9 of the Student's Essay. The relevant sentence of the
Student's Essay read as follows:
Therefore, if one presented Aquinas' outlook on nature to an individual in today's time,
then they may have a hard time finding Aquinas' arguments to be convincing, as they do
not consider themselves to be a religious individual and Aquinas· view of nature is mainly

theological.

The relevant text from S . D . 's paper read as follows:
Aquinas's claim that the end of humans is to be with God, reflecting his view that nature
is ordered, appears to be based more on theological premises, than on the conditions of
the material world.

6 1 . The sentences in the different papers make d ifferent points, and the only
similarity is the use of the word "theological", which is hardly a surprising word
in the context of Aquinas's view of the world .
62. The eig hth alleged similarity concerned text appearing on page 1 0 of S . D.'s
paper and page 9 of the Student's Essay, in the concluding summary. The
relevant sentences of the Student's Essay read as follows:

Overall, even though both Aquinas and Machiavelli wrote on the notion of nature, they
were found to have different perspectives on what the term "nature" entails. Aquinas
believed that nature was orderly and that only God was truly capable of creating the order
that could be found in nature.

He thought that human beings were incapable of

independently creating order in nature. In contrast Machiavelli believed that nature was
chaotic and it was this way because of fortune. To Machiavelli, fate was unpredictable,
which made nature chaotic as half of man's actions were dependent upon fortune and
man's capability to control the other half of his actions was unprofitable, as fate was
considered stronger by Machiavelli. Nonetheless, in general, a political science student
could learn from the aforesaid arguments that Aquinas viewed nature in a more religious

manner, while Machiavelli saw nature in a more irreligious manner.

The relevant sentences in S . D .'s paper read as follows:
Although both Aquinas and Machiavelli suggested one must study "nature" in order to
understand politics, Aquinas conceptualizes nature as ordered, and directed towards
some end, whereas Machiavelli conceptualizes nature as chaotic, and governed, in part,
by fate. The differing views of these philosophers are reflected in their views on the
appropriate actions of rulers. and the relationship between the state and religion. Where
Aquinas holds that rulers must seek to help their subjects realize their final end of being
with God, Machiavelli assets that rulers must work to guard against fortune so that they
may hold onto their positions, and build lasting institutions.

63. Given that the two papers address the same topic and draw from the same
assigned texts and with a similar overall thesis, it is not surprising that the
concluding summaries of the paper would have some similarities. However,
we again note that the Student's Essay contains elements that, although
highlighted , express ideas that do not appear in S . D .'s paper. These include
Aq uinas's view that only God could have created the order found in nature
and that humans could not have done so; a recapitulation of Machiavelli's
idea of man's limited control of fortune; and the idea that Aquinas views
nature in "a more religious manner" (S . D .'s text uses the word "religion" in
quite a different context). When viewed in the overall context of the sections
and the papers, the highlighted words and sentences are not clear and
convincing evidence of breaches of the University of Toronto Code of
Behaviour on Academic Matters, 1995.

Absence of Clear and Convincing Evidence of Plagiarism

64. Since the assig ned texts were not in evidence, the Tribunal had no way of
determining how p robable it was that more than one student could use
particular quotes from the texts given the focus of the assigned question.
65. Ms. Planinc testified that it was improbable; however, she also conceded that
she did not review all, or even a majority, of the papers that were submitted in
the Course. This limited her assertions that the quotes and theses of the
Student's and S . D . 's papers were unique and could only be the result of
plagiarism .
66 . The Un iversity's allegation that the theses of the papers were unique was not
supported by any evidence other than Ms. Planinc's assertion. The Tribunal
was not presented any independent evidence of the range of theses in the
papers written on Topic B, nor any quantification of the possibility that at least
one pair of students in a large class mig ht independently hit upon similar
theses.
67. Furthermore , wh ile neither S . D . nor the other student in the peer review group
were called as witnesses at the hearing , the Tribunal had the benefit of their
written comments on the peer review sheets. Both were complimentary of the
Student's d raft Essay and neither identified or ind icated any surprise or
concern regard ing the sim ilarities between the Student's and S. D.'s papers.
68. If the theses and selected quotes were as unique or strikingly sim ilar as the
University alleges then one would have reasonably expected S . D . to have
raised an issue with the Student at some stage. That did not happen.
69. The dissenting opinion suggests that this evidence should be disregarded
since the other students were not called as witnesses. However, there was
no suggestion that the other students were unavailable and could not have
been called by the University if they had contrad ictory evidence.

70. There was also direct evidence that S.D. saw no issue with the Student's
Essay. The Student testified that S . D . never commented or indicated that her
Essay was problematic or strikingly similar to S . D. 's paper. That evidence
was left unchallenged at the Hearing. Moreover, as described above, the
Student's evidence was corroborated by the peer review sheets.
7 1 . We see no basis to d isregard the evidence of the peer reviewers' lack of
concern regarding the Student's Essay and it is a relevant consideration that
weighs against the assessment and evidence of Ms. Planinc that the
similarities between the papers were likely the prod uct of plagiarism.
72. Similarly, the University's reliance on the Student's use of subject headings in
her final Essay was not persuasive evidence of plagiarism . The evidence
demonstrated that the Student's add ition of subject headings was the product
of comments made by the peer reviewers that the Essay required both more
structu re and more space. The subject headings were only added by the
Student to the final version of the Essay after she had received feedback and
comments from her peers. The simple use of a suggestion by another
student that subject head ings can be used to effectively expand the size of an
essay does not constitute plagiarism , the representation of another's idea as
one's own , or any kind of academic dishonesty.
73. The very point of the peer review process was that students would
incorporate the comments and suggestions of their peers in order to improve
their papers. When the course assignment encourages students to share
ideas and suggestions, it would be unfair to criticize a student for
incorporating an idea arising from the peer review or to characterize the
p rocess as unauthorized assistance.
74. U nfortu nately, the teaching assistants strike prevented the peer review
process from proceeding in the organized fashion that was orig inally intended .
It also prevented Ms. Planinc from participating and overseeing the process
accord ing to the original plan. As a result, there was not clear and convincing

evidence presented to the Tribunal that the Student had plagiarized from
S . D.'s paper.
75. While the Un iversity attempted to attack the Student's credibility and her
evidence that she d id not plagiarize from S . D.'s paper, these attacks did not
u ndermine the substance of the Student's evidence or compensate for the
lack of direct evidence in the U n iversity's case. The evidence established that
the Student's explanation for why she changed topics and how she prepared
the Essay has been consistent since when she was first confronted with the
U niversity's allegations at a meeting with the Dean's designate in the summer
of 20 1 5.
76 . The U niversity relied on the email that the Student sent to Ms. Plan inc,
inform ing her of the decision to change essay topics, as evidence of the
Student's dishonesty. In the email, which was marked as exhibit 8, the
Student informs Ms. Planinc that the paper had already been sent to the peer
reviewers for review. In the version of the email marked as exhibit 8, the time
stamp shows the email as sent at 6 pm on March 3 1 , 20 1 5. The University
contended that the Student d id not actually send the draft paper to the peer
reviewers until almost 1 0 pm, fou r hours later.
77. However, the same email was included in the email chain marked as exhibit
9. That version of the email shows the email as sent at 9 pm. Exhibit 9 also
shows Ms. Planinc respond ing at 6:28 pm. It is obvious that the emails at
exhibits 8 or 9 use various time zone settings. It was never established when
the Student's email was actually sent.
78. Ultimately, whether the Student sent her email to Ms. Plan inc at 6 pm , 9 pm
or some other time, the fact that she may have sent the draft paper to the
peer reviewers shortly thereafter, despite what the email indicated, is not
evidence of plagiarism . It is also too tangential and innocuous to rely on this
as a basis to discred it the Student's evidence at the hearing.

79. After careful and thorough consideration of the documentary and oral
evidence presented during the hearing, a majority of the Tribunal determined
that the University had not met the requisite burden of proof. We could not
say that it was more likely than not that the Student had knowingly
represented as her own ideas or expressions taken from S.D.'s paper.
80. The Tribunal could not say that the similarities that existed between the
Student's and S.D.'s papers were more likely the product of the Student
knowingly representing S.D.'s ideas as her own rather than the natural
product of the fact the students were writing on the same essay topic and
relying on the same source material. The fact that the peer review process
encouraged students to incorporate comments from their peers also made it
impossible to conclude on a balance of probabilities that the Student had
obtained unauthorized assistance with her Essay.
81. None of this is to say that the Tribunal concluded with certainty that the
Student did not commit plagiarism. Like University of Toronto v. R.D. and
K.U., Case #00-01-02, April 25, 2001 (see paras. 19-21), this was a case
determined on the burden of proof. Since the burden lies with the University,
we are required to carefully consider the evidence before us and whether it is
sufficient to establish the Charges. In this case, we were unable to
confidently say that the University had proven the Charges and satisfied its
burden. Accordingly, we must dismiss the Charges.
Dated at Toronto, this I� day of March, 2017

an, Co-Chair

Professor Graeme

DISSENT

The following is the d issenting opinion written by the student panel member, Harvey
Lim.
I : INTRODUCTION

82.

I've had the opportun ity to review the decision of the majority, and respectfully,
I d isagree on their conclusion. Taking into consideration the totality of the
evidence, I am satisfied that the University d ischarged its burden in establishing
the Student's guilt on two of the three Charges.

II: FINDINGS

A. Similarities Between the Two Essays

The thesis topic

83.

Of the three essay topics that students in POL200Y5Y could choose from for
their second essay assignment, the Student and S . D . both submitted their final
essays on Topic B. Topic B is reproduced as follows:

Both Aquinas and Machiavelli arg ue that one must study "nature" in
order to understand politics - but with very different results. Explain
their different u nderstanding of nature and what it teaches the student
of political science. Whom do you find more persuasive?
84.

Ms. Planinc testified that the essay topics assigned , including Topic B, were
sufficiently broad in scope such that students were free to choose from a range
of theses within each essay topic. While I can appreciate how Topic B, in and
of itself, does not define the thesis, I don't think that the scope of Topic B is
overly broad as suggested . Topic B required students to narrow their discussion
to 1 ) a comparison of Aquinas and Machiavelli's views of nature, 2) how these

views inform a political science student, and 3) a finding of whose view is more
persuasive.

85.

The specificity of Topic B is important in this case because not only d id the
Student and S.D. choose the same essay topic, but within this chosen essay
topic, they chose the same thesis topic as well. I n light of the somewhat limited
scope of Topic B, I agree with the majority that it is entirely possible that the
convergence of the two thesis topics occurred by chance.

86.

Ms. Planinc further testified that upon reading the Student's final essay, she
thoug ht that the thesis was creative. Without undermining Ms. Planinc's
opinion, I have some difficulty accepting the creativity of the thesis topic in the
absence of clear and convincing evidence. To Ms. Planinc's cred it, Ms. Planinc
d id not want, nor did I think it was necessary, to turn the trial process into a
lecture on the political theories of Aq uinas a nd Machiavelli. Notwithstanding, a
sample of the d iversity of the thesis topics subm itted for Topic B would have
been helpful in appreciating the apparent creativity and uniqueness of the
Student and S. D.'s chosen thesis.

87.

Based on the evidence, I am not convinced that the mere fact that the Student's
thesis is the same as S . D. 's is a product of plagiarism . I find that there is some
but lim ited flexibility in Topic B such that the Student and S . D. 's idea for this
particular thesis topic could well have arisen independently.

88.

While I accept that the arrival at the same thesis topic might have been
coincidental, I do not accept that having the same thesis topic or d rawing on
the same sou rce material adeq uately explains the similarity in the overall
content of the two essays.

The essay structure

89.

The University highlig hted the similarity in the structure of the two essays,
namely the use of head ings and the method of going back and forth between
"X" and "Y" as a way to contrast Aq uinas and Machiavelli. They further noted

that both these structural features were absent in the Student's first essay draft
where she had chosen to write on Topic A. Accord ing to Ms. Planinc, the use
of head ings was uncommon in the context of the essay that was assig ned to
the students.

90.

I n response to the add ition of head ings in the Student's final essay, the Student
testified that her draft essay was too short and she used the head ings as a way
to extend the page count. I find this to be a completely legitimate explanation.
I ndeed , the need to increase the page numbers was noted in S . D.'s feedback
and peer evaluation of the Student's final draft essay. The Student did what
was expected of her from the peer-review process, to improve her essay
through the comments that she received .

91 .

Even if the Student was inspired to use headings from reviewing S . D.'s draft
essay, I have a hard time seeing the wrong in this. Headings serve a functional
purpose. I am not convinced that the "idea" expressed in section 8 . 1 . 1 (d) of the
Code captures the idea to use headings. I also have difficu lty accepting that

the idea to use head ings belonged to S . D . , a necessary element in order to
make out the plagiarism offence.

92 .

With respect to the method used to compare Aq uinas and Machiavelli, I also
fail to see the wrong in the Student's application of this methodology, even if
the idea was derived from S . D.'s essay. Again , I would hesitate to characterize
th is comparison technique as an "idea" within the meaning of section B . 1 . 1 (d) .
Even if it could b e considered an "idea", i t i s one that i s commonly applied and
again, not one that I th ink belonged to S . D .

93.

I think that the University highlighted the similar use of head ings and
comparison technique not as examples of alleged plagiarism per se, but to
support an inference that many elements of the Student's final essay were
drawn from S . D . 's essay. If so, I would agree.

94 .

The similar use of headings and comparison tech nique has resulted in the two
essays having a high degree of similarity in their form. Notwithstanding my
opinion that this is insufficient to constitute plagiarism, I do think that the
similarity in overall form is a relevant consideration in evaluating where other
elements of the essay, which could potentially have been plag iarized , may be
derived from. More specifically, I th ink that the similarity in overall form between
two essays may be an ind icator that the allegedly plag iarized elements from
the Student's essay were plag iarized from S.D .'s essay.

The selection of quotes

95.

Ms. Planinc directed the Panel's attention to one particular paragraph in the
Student's final essay where a number of highly selective and short quotes were
used . Many of these same quotes were also found concentrated in a particu lar
section of S . D. 's draft essay. This similarity corresponds to the third alleged
similarity outlined by the majority. Ms. Plan inc further testified that the Student's
final essay showed a creative use of sources and more specifically, that the
short quotes used were not obvious choices.

96 .

I n response, the Student repeated ly testified that she is an English major, and
thus has "an eye for words". In my opinion, her emphasis that she identified the
quotes because of the fact that she is an English major actually bolsters Ms.
Planinc's assertion that the quotes selected were indeed non-obvious choices
to the average student.

97.

However, I find the suggestion that the Student is trained to pay close attention
to words to be an inadequate explanation for why the quotes she selected
turned out to be the same as S . D .'s. Even with "an eye for words", it does not
necessarily mean that the Student picked those words out from the original text
- the Student could just have come across those same words in S.D.'s d raft
essay.

98.

I n my opinion , I find it more likely than not that the quotes were derived from
S . D . 's essay. On cross-examination of the Student, it was revealed that the text
used as the original reference was at least 75 pages long. This is in comparison
to S . D . 's essay which was only 1 0 pages long , double-spaced , and perhaps
most notably, precisely on topic. Thus, if all else is equal, it is more probable
that the quotes were pulled from S . D .'s essay than the original text.

99.

I am mindful of the fact that with in any literary work, there will be texts that are
more commonly quoted . However, as discussed above, the evidence does not
support that this is the case here as the quotes selected appear to have been
non-obvious choices. What also appears to be non-obvious is how some
quotes (i.e. "torrential rivers") were taken out of context from the original text,
then used in the same context in both essays.

1 00. The Student, who was unrepresented , d id not assert, as a defence, that quotes
are not ideas or expression of ideas that belonged to S . D. (as they belong to
the original author) and as such , could not be the subject of plagiarism so long
as they have been properly referenced . If such an assertion had been made, I
m ig ht have agreed but only to the extent of individual quotes. Notwithstanding,
I think that the selection of particular quotes to articulate an idea, even if that
idea is unoriginal, can collectively represent an original expression of that idea.
In this case, the same idea was similarly expressed by using the same set of
highly selective quotes.

Other "ideas" or "expression of ideas"

1 0 1 . The University also provided evidence of other examples throughout the
Student's final essay that were mirrored in S.D.'s draft essay. These alleged
similarities include those that have been outlined by the majority. Upon reading
the two essays, I find that there is indeed a striking parallel between the two
essays. Many of the same ideas are found in the two essays or similarly
expressed includ ing the use of the exact same examples (i.e. piloting a ship).
Further, for some parts, the level of detail expressed does not appear to
necessarily follow from the thesis topic, yet the details are the same (i.e.
d iscussion on eternal and natural law) . I simply cannot accept that this striking
similarity arose by chance.

The ''persuasive" section

1 02 . As part of the instructions for Topic B, students were req uired to discuss whose
view of nature, Aq uinas or Machiavelli, they found more persuasive. Both the
Student and S . D . found Machiavelli's view to be more persuasive. The alleged
similarities here are featured as sixth and seventh on the majority's list.

1 03. I don't th ink this agreement on Machiavelli's view as being more persuasive is,
in and of itself, problematic. After all, the choice was either Aquinas or
Machiavelli. I, however, take issue with the reasons provided for selecting
Machiavelli.

1 04. I n the Student's final essay, she reasoned that Mach iavelli's view of nature was
more persuasive because Machiavelli utilizes "historical" and "realistic"
examples. These reasons were also reflected in S . D . 's draft essay. After
completely read ing through the Student's final essay, I do not find that this
rationale logically follows from the rest of the essay. In other words, the opinion
formed in the "persuasive" section of the essay does not appear to be intimately

linked to the thesis. Yet, both the Student and S . D . arrived at the same rationale
for their conclusions.

1 05. I would think that there may be many reasons why Machiavelli's view of nature
is more persuasive just as there may be many reasons for why Aquinas's view
is more persuasive. The fact that both the Student and S.D. arrived at the exact
same opinion is an understandable concern .

1 06 . I n S. D.'s "persuasive" section, one citation was used to provide an example of
the historical examples used by Machiavelli. Other than that, no other
references were cited to support this opin ion that Machiavelli's view is more
persuasive. In the Student's "persuasive" section, no references were cited at
all and no examples were provided. Thus, it does not appear that the rationale
for why Machiavelli's view is more persuasive was derived directly from an
external reference. Together with evidence of the surrounding circumstances
d iscussed below, I am inclined to believe that S . D . first formu lated this common
opinion.

The "conclusion" section

1 07. Another similarity that the University directed the Panel's attention to was the
"conclusion" section of the two essays. The similarity is duly noted . However,
considering the Student and S.D. had chosen the same thesis topic, I think that
a certain degree of similarity is to be expected in how each will conclude their
essays.

B. Differences Between the Two Essays

1 08. During the Student's testimony, she attempted to distinguish her essay from
S . D .'s essay by pointing out a few d ifferences between the two. With respect, I
am not persuaded that this changes how similar I find the two essays to be. I
accept that there are notable differences between the two essays, but these
differences do not make those parts of the essay that are similar any less
similar. Further, minor difference in the expression of the same idea is still
expression of that particu lar idea.

1 09. I do not doubt that the Student made independent contributions to her own
essay. I ndeed , there are parts of the Student's essays that are not found in
S . D. 's essay. Likewise, there are parts of S . D. 's essay that are not reflected in
the Student's essay. However, for the purpose of determining whether the
charges laid against the Student have been made out, I think the analysis
should p rimarily focus on where there is overlap. This is not to say that the
differences are irrelevant, but as cou nsel for the University pointed out, even if
5% of the work has been copied , this may be sufficient for a plagiarism
conviction.

1 1 0. I n my respectful view, in dismissing the similarities between the two essays, the
majority undertook an analysis that focused on the differences. This narrow
focus on what elements of the Student's essay do not appear in S.D.'s
overlooks the similarities that exist between the two. Even if the Student and
S . D . diverged in their ideas, this is not incompatible with the same idea being
used as the foundation . The same idea can be elaborated on to introduce a
new idea or make a different point, but it does not change the fact that the
orig inal idea was the same.

C. Access to S.D. 's Essay

1 1 1 . As part of the Un iversity's allegations, the Student is alleged to have plagiarized
from S . D . If so, then it follows that at some point prior to the submission of the
Student's final essay, she m ust have had access to S . D.'s essay. The
U niversity provided clear and convincing evidence that the Student obtained a
copy of S. D.'s essay prior to the final essay submission dead line.

1 1 2 . The U niversity add uced evidence of email correspondence between the
Student, S.D. and another student where it was revealed that S . D . sent a copy
of her essay to the Student on March 28th , 20 1 5, as part of the peer-review
process. This essay draft that the Student received was largely similar to the
draft S . D . submitted to Ms. Planinc on March 1 2 , 20 1 5. Thus, it is clear that
S . D . expressed the ideas in her final essay as early as March 1 2, 201 5.
1 1 3. It was not until the evening of March 3 1 st , 20 1 5 that the Student sent her draft
essay on Topic B to Ms. Planinc and her peer-reviewers. Thus, the Student
retained a copy of S. D.'s draft essay three days before anyone had seen her
own essay on Topic B and fou r days before the essay was due. Based on the
comments the Student made in S . D . 's essay document and her peer-review
evaluation form , it is clear that the Student reviewed S. D.'s essay in its entirety.

1 1 4. U nder cross-examination , the Student admitted that she had not sent out her
draft essay on Topic B to anyone p rior to receiving S . D . 's essay. In the absence
of evidence showing that the Student came up with the elements of her essay
alleged to have been plagiarized before receiving S.D.'s essay, I find it more
likely than not that S. D.'s essay was the source of the alleged plagiarism .

D. Surrounding Circumstances

The uncovering of the similarity

1 1 5. Ms. Plan inc testified that she first g raded the Student's essay before S. D .'s
essay. Upon reading S . D. 's essay, she was struck by the familiarity of many of
the quotes used as well as how the arguments moved in a way similar to an
essay that she had read before. She then discovered that this essay that she
had read before was the Student's essay. Ms. Planinc further testified that she
made this finding before knowing that the Student and S.D. were peer­
reviewers of each other's papers. I find this evidence of Ms. Planinc's first
impression of read ing each of the two essays to be compelling. The similarity
appears to have been discovered without a pre-j udgment either based on the
peer-review process or a turnitin.com output report.

The topic change

1 1 6 . Prior to the submission of the final essay, students in POL200Y5Y were
required to submit a d raft essay to their TAs. The Student subm itted an
electronic copy of this draft essay to Ms. Planinc on March 1 3, 20 1 5. At that
time, she had chosen to write on Topic A. On March 3 1 , 20 1 5 , the day before
the final essay was due, the Student informed Ms. Planinc via email that she
had decided to change her essay topic from Topic A to Topic B.

1 1 7. The U niversity accepts that, in and of itself, there is nothing inherently wrong
with students changing their essay topic as they were not prohibited from doing
so. However, they point to this last minute announcement of her intention to
change topics as being highly suspect especially in light of the fact that this
announcement came after reviewing S . D.'s essay. I agree.

1 1 8 . Considering the timeline and the fact that the Student already had an essay
that was more or less complete on March 1 3, 20 1 5, I find this decision to

change essay topics supports the inference that it was only after seeing S . D . 's
essay wh ich motivated the Student to change essay topics.

The rough work

1 1 9. The Student testified that she had considered both essay Topics A and B at the
time that she had written and subm itted her draft essay on Topic A. At the
Dean's Designate meeting , the Student was asked if she was able to provide
copies of her rough work for her two essays. The Student only provided her
rough notes that she made for Topic A.

1 20 . At trial, the Student testified that she had made rough notes with respect to
Topic B, which she had emailed to herself, but claimed that this email has since
been deleted .

1 2 1 . In my respectful view, this proposed explanation for why she is unable to
prod uce her rough work for Topic B lacks cred ibility for three reasons. First, by
retaining and prod ucing a copy of her rough work for Topic A, the Student has
demonstrated at least a lim ited interest in keeping her rough work. This is in
contrast to a claim or a tendency to never keep rough work. I find it questionable
that she is able to prod uce the rough work for the essay that is not in doubt, but
not the essay that is alleged ly plag iarized . Further, since Topic B was ultimately
the final essay that was submitted for cred it, I would think that the Student
would have a g reater interest in keeping her rough work for Topic B as
compared to Topic A.

1 22 . Secondly, even if the email that the Student sent to herself was deleted , a copy
of that email should presumably have been reproduced in her "sent folder". The
Student provided no compelling reasons why both the received and sent copies
of this supposed email were deleted .

1 23. Lastly, based on the email correspondences, the Student was found to be
untruthful on at least one occasion regarding emails that she had supposedly
sent out. In an email sent to Ms. Planinc on March 31 , 20 1 5 at approximately
6:00 PM, she informed Ms. Planinc that she had already sent her new essay
draft with the changed essay topic to her peer-reviewers. However, in a
separate email the Student later sent to her peer-reviewers, it was revealed
that the Student had not yet sent out her draft essay to her peer-reviewers.
Contrary to what the Student told Ms. Planinc, the Student sent her draft essay
to her peer-reviewers approximately 4 hours after informing Ms. Planinc that
her draft was already sent.

The reaction of the peer-reviewers

1 24. I n their written reasons, the majority d raws an inference from the two peer­
reviewers' lack of surprise or concern regard ing the similarities between the two
essays. I do not hold the same view.

1 25. The Student's testimony that her peer-reviewers did not raise any concerns
with her is unreliable evidence of the fact that there were no concerns. The
essays were exchanged over email, not in person , so the Student d id not have
the opportun ity to witness the reactions of her peer-reviewers upon read ing her
essay. Therefore , the fact that no concerns were brought to her attention is no
ind ication that there were no concerns at first read .

1 26. It's also worth noting that there was very limited opportun ity for the two peer­
reviewers to bring any concerns that they m ig ht have had . The Student emailed
her essay to her peer-reviewers the night before it was due, after a courtesy
request by one of the peer-reviewers . Once received , they still had to review it
and provide comments. At that point, raising any concerns would have put
additional responsibilities on themselves to explain what their concerns were something that they may not have been prepared to undertake in the late hours

of the night. Further, any concerns raised would have been a suggestion to the
Student that she should make substantial changes to her essay - an awkward
position to put the Student in given that the essay was due the next day.

1 27. The only other evidence on the potential viewpoints of S . D . and the other
student was limited to email correspondence and the peer-review evaluation
forms. It is also not at all surprising that there were no concerns raised in the
physical evidence. I would th ink that students who wanted to express their
concerns over plagiarism - a serious allegation - would be considerate in their
choice of forum . Students may feel uncomfortable in expressing their concerns
over email or in a peer-review evaluation form that they know would likely be
reviewed by the course admin istrators. The nature of the forum also explains
why the feedback from the peer-review evaluation form was generally positive.

1 28. There may be other reasons why concerns were not brought forward includ ing
the nature of the students' relationship with each other, and the desire to avoid
conflicts or getting involved . The probative value of this evidence is g reatly
diminished by the many unknown variables surrounding this issue.

1 29. Absence of any expressed concerns should not be taken as meaning that there
were no actual concerns. We should also be careful in not equating the
absence of any expressed concerns as the students affirming that they had no
concerns.

1 30. Since S . D . and the other student were not available to testify and were not
cross-examined, I will reserve making any factual findings or drawing any
inferences on what their reactions might have been.

E. The "Knowing" Element

1 3 1 . On a number of occasions throughout the POL200Y5Y course, students were
informed about the University's policy on plagiarism. A warning on plagiarism

is fou nd in the course syllabus wherein Professor Bejan explicitly expressed
her "dim" view on plagiarism. On the last page of the syllabus, the policy was
stated again in further detail. Ms. Planinc further testified that Professor Bejan
reiterated the plagiarism policy in class and at the beginning of each
assig nment. Accord ing to Ms. Planinc, the policy was brought up regularly.

1 32 . Additionally, students were required to submit their essays to turn itin.com.
Thus, students ought to have known what plagiarism entails and how to avoid
submitting plagiarized work.

1 33. The Student did not assert that she was uninformed of the plagiarism policy. I
am satisfied that the Student knew, or at least ought to have known , about the
academic offence of plagiarism .

Ill: DISPOSITION

Charge #1 (section 8. 1. 1 (d) of the Code)

1 34. With respect to the first charge laid against the Student, I find the Student guilty.
The University has proven , on a balance of probability, that there were
plagiarized elements in the Student's essay on clear and convincing evidence.

1 35. I find the two essays to be too strikingly similar to have arisen by chance or as
a product of the chosen essay topic. Further, the University clearly and
convincingly showed that the Student retained a copy of the very essay that
she is alleged to have copied from. Taking into consideration the surrounding
circumstances, I find it more likely than not that the similarity arose from the
Student's reference to S . D.'s essay. I cannot reconcile the facts of this case
a nd arrive at a conclusion that the similarity was purely coincidental.

1 36 . Although I don't think all the similarities identified between the two essays
amount to plagiarism, I do think that there are ideas or expression of ideas that
nonetheless belonged to S . D . and were represented as the Student's.
Specifically, I find the section with highly selective quotes, certain ideas
expressed throug hout the essay, and the "persuasive" section to be
plagiarized .

Charge #2 (section B. I. 1 (b) of the Code)

1 37. Section

8 . 1 . 1 (b)

makes it an academic offence for a student to obtain

unauthorized assistance. I simply cannot find that the assistance the Student
received from S . D . was unauthorized . Not only did the Un iversity sanction the
peer-review process, but students were incentivized to participate in it by
receiving extra credit. I think it would be unjust to p unish the Student for taking
part in the peer-review process which facilitated the assistance she received .

Charge #3 (section B. l. 3(b) of the Code)

1 38. For the same reasons as Charge #1 , I find the Student g uilty of Charge #3.

Dated at Toronto, this 13 day of March , 20 1 7

