Case 922

DATE:

   August 1, 2017

PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v. Y.Z. ("the Student")

Hearing Date(s):

   May 10, 2017

Panel Members:

   Mr. Christopher Wirth, Barrister and Solicitor, Chair
   Professor Ato Quayson, Faculty Panel Member
   Mr. Andrey Lapin, Student Panel Member

Appearances:

   Ms. Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland
   Barristers

In Attendance:

   Professor Eleanor Irwin, Dean's Designate, University of Toronto
   Scarborough
   Mr. Christopher Lang, Director, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty
   Grievances
   Mr. Sean Lourim, Technology Assistant, Office of the Governing Council

Not in Attendance:

   The Student

   The Student was charged with plagiarism under s. B.i.1(d) of the Code,
   and alternatively, academic dishonesty under s. B.i.3(b) of the Code .
   The charges related to a paper that featured several lengthy passages
   identical to text found online, without any attribution.

   The Student did not attend the hearing. The Tribunal found that the
   University had discharged its obligation to provide the Student proper
   notice of the hearing. The Tribunal found the Student guilty of the
   plagiarism charge and the University then withdrew the academic
   dishonesty charge. The Student received a grade of zero in the course,
   a two year suspension, and a three year notation, and publication of
   the decision with the name of the Student withheld. In determining the
   penalty, the Tribunal noted that this was a first offence.

   The course referred to in the charges differed from that referred to in
   the evidence, and the Tribunal sought submissions on this issue. The
   Tribunal concluded that this was a clerical error, and that the course
   as stated in the evidence was correct. The Tribunal was satisfied that
   the Student had not been prejudiced in any way by this error as they
   were aware of the course in question. As such, it exercised its
   discretion under s. 21.1 of the S tatutory Powers and Procedure Act to
   correct the error in the charges.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12950
