THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
TRIAL DIVISION
IN THE MATTER OF charges of academic dishonesty filed on January 24, 2012,
Al~D IN THE MATTER OF the Universizy of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic
Matters, 1995,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Act, l971, S.O. 1971, c. 56 as
amended S.0. 1978, c. 88

BETWEEN:
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO

-AND-

REASONS FOR DECISION

Hearing Date: June 14, 2012

Members of the Panel:
Ms. Sarah Kraicer, Banister and Solicitor, Chair
Professor Biuno Magliocchetti> Department of Italian Studies, Faculty Panel Member
Ms. Melvin Sert, Student Panel Member
Appearances:
Ms. Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Banisters
Ms. Sierra Robart, Legal Case Worker for the Student, Dmvntown Legal Services

In Attendance:

SIi ~

'

Ms.
the Student
Professor Sam Solecki, Dean's Designate, Faculty of Arts and Sc_ie~ce
Ms. Natalie Ramtahal, Coordinator, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances

2
REASONS FOR DECISION

1.

Trial Division of the University Tribunal was convened on June 14, 2012 to

consider.charges brought by the University of Toronto (the "University") against ~ (the "Student") under the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on

Acat:lemic Matters, 1995 (the "Code").

The Charges

2.

The charges against the Student were as follows:

1.
On or about March 30, 2011, you knowingly represented the ideas or the
expressions of the ideas of another as your own work in an essay entitled "Review
Essay: The Rise & Fall of a .Palestinian dynasty, Ilan Pappe" ("Essay") submitted
in the University of Toronto course NMC378HI ("Course"), contrary to section
B.f. l(d) of the Code.

2.
On or about March 30, 2011, you knowingly submitted the Essay
containing purported references to sources that had been concocted to obtain
academic credit in the Course, contrary to section B.I.J(f) of the Code.
In the alternative, by submitting the Essay in the Course, you knowingly
engaged in a form of cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or
3.

misrepresentation not otherwise described in the Code in order to obtain academic
credit or other academic advantage of any kind, contrary to section B.I.3(b) of the
Code.

The Plea
3.

The Student attended the hearing, was represented by a law student from

Downtown Legal Services, and entered a plea of guilty to Chru·ge 1 and Charge 2. The
University agreed that if the Tti.bunal were to convict the Student on Charges 1 and 2, the
University would withdraw Charge 3.

3
The Agreed Statement of Facts

4.

The Tribunal was advised at the outset of the hearing that the University and the

Student had entered into an Agreed Statement of Facts, which is attached as Appendix
"A" to these reasons.

The Tribunal also received into evidence, on consent, a Joint

Book of Documents containing documents refetTed to in the Agreed Statement of Facts.
5.

The facts giving rise to the charges are set out in detail in the Agreed Statement of

Facts and Joint Book of Documents. Assistant Discipline counsel provided an overview
of the facts and documents suppotiing the charges. The key facts are summarized below.
6.

The Student first registered as a student at the University of Toronto in the

Faculty of Arts & Science in Fall 2007. At all material times, the Student remained
enrolled at the University.
7.

In the 2011 Winter tenn, the Student was enrolled in NMC 378H1S - Themes in

Modem Arab Histo1y, taught by Professor James Reilly. In the course syllabus, students
were reminded to: "Pay careful attention to the plagiarism handout available via the
course website."
8.

One of the course requirements required students to submit a book essay, Wotih

30% of the course mark. Students were given a handout desctibing the requirements for
the book essay. Students were instructed to write an essay on one of the books on the
additional reading list, and th.at they were not expected to use additional sources other
than the book chosen. The Student chose a book by Ilan Pappe - The Rise and Faff of a
Palestinian Dynasty: The Husaynis, 1700-1948 ("Pappe Book"). The handout contained a

box at the bottom which read, in pati, "Important notice: Carefully heed the university
policy on plagiarism and advice on best practices. See the relevant handout on the course
website, or access it directly at [website address J ... "
9.

The Student submitted a paper entitled "Review Essay: The Rise & Fall of a

Palestinian Dynasty, Ilan Pappe", on March 30, 2011 The Essay referenced the Pappe

4
Book throughout, but contained no other references. Nonetheless, the Essay reproduced
verbatim or nearly verbatim passages from several articles and a blog, without attribution
of any kind. In addition, the Essay quoted passages from the Pappe Book which were not
cited in the Essay; and cited numerous pages from the Pappe Book which did not
conespond to the passage quoted. The Essay did not use quotation marks to indicate
direct quotes from the Pappe Book or any of the other unattributed sources.
10.

The Student met with the Dean's Designate for Academic Integrity on December

15, 2011, to discuss the offence of plagiarism in the Essay. The Student admitted at the
Dean's meeting that the Essay was plagiarized.
11.

The Student admits that she knowingly:
(a)

included verbatim and nearly verbatim excerpts from secondary sources,
including, but not limited to:
(i)

Ilan Pappe's book "The Rise and Fall ofa Palestinian Dynasty"

(ii)

Illan Pappe, "The Rise and Fall of the Husaynis, 1840-1922 (part

1)", Jerusalem Quarterly, Autumn 2000, pp. 27-38 ("Jerusalem
Quarterly A1iicle")
(iii) online article "The Liar as Hero", posted March 22, 2011 ("Benny
Mon-is Blog") and
(iv) online aiiicle "The Rise and Fall of a Palestinian Dynasty: the

Husaynis 1700-1948", posted December 9, 2010 (''New Statesman
Article");
(b)

failed to attribute those excerpts appropriately using quotation marks;

(c)

failed to attribute the true source of many of the excerpts through accurate
references or footnotes;

5
(d)

represented as her own an idea or expression of an idea or work of
another;

(e)

committed the academic offence of plagiarism with respect to the Essay
contrary to section B.I.1.(d) of the Code, as set out in charge #1 of the
Charges

(f)

concocted references that she included in the Essay, contrary to section
B.I.1.(f) of the Code, as set out in charge #2 of the Charges

Decision of the Tribunal on Charges
12.

After reviewing the facts set out m the Agreed Statement of Facts and the

documents contained in the Joint Book of Documents, the Tribunal concluded that the
facts proven established the charges to which the Student had entered a plea of guilty.
The Tribunal accepted the Student's guilty plea on Charge I and Charge 2 and entered a
finding of guilt with respect to those Charges. The University withdrew Charge 3.

Sanction
13.

The University and the Student provided the T1ibunal with an Agreed Statement

of Facts for Sanction, attached to these reasons as Appendix "B", containing additional
facts and documents that they wished the Tribunal to consider in relation to its
determination of sanction. These facts are as follows:
(a) The Student has committed the following previous offences under the Code:

(i) In the Fall 2007 term she admitted to having submitted an assignment
for credit in ENGll0YIY worth 15% which contained material taken
from various sources without appropriate acknowledgement.

She

admitted to having committed plagiarism at a Dean's meeting, and was
given a mark of zero for the assigrnnent together with a fmiher reduction

6

of her final grade in the course of 15 marks, together with a notation on
her transc1ipt for 2 years to November 30, 2009. The student explained
that she made a "very stupid move", "gave in to the pressure and didn't
bother to do fmiher research". When asked if anything happening in her

life had affected her judgment she said that "anything happening in your
life doesn't really relate to the paper, in my opinion, the essay I hand in
should be from my own thoughts", and "I guess I just got lazy''. She
further explained that "she got scared writing her own thoughts".
The Dean's Designate's letter to the Student summarizing the meeting and
the penalty stated, "You said that you knew that what you had done was
wrong, were very sorry, and would not act similarly in future ... while I
hope that you have learned from this experience, I must warn you that a
second offence will be treated more severely."
(ii) In the summer term of 2009 the Student admitted to having submitted
an assignment for credit in POL201YIY worth 25% of the course mark
that was plagiarized, with concocted references. The Student described
family issues which took her mind off school. She was given a mark of
zero in the course, a 12 month suspension from September I, 2009 to
August 31, 2010, and a notation on her transcript from July 16, 2009 to
graduation.
The Dean's Designate's letter to the Student summarizing their meeting
and penalty indicated, "You stated that serious personal circumstances had
distracted you from your schoolwork, and that you had hurriedly
composed the paper in question only the night before it was due .... I hope
that you have learned from this experience, but must wam you that a
further offence will be treated more severely."
(iii) Subsequently, while serving her suspension, the Student also admitted
to having plagiarized the work of another student in POL200Yl in the
same 2009 Summer te1m, with a 96% match identified by Tumitin.com.

7
The Student submitted the paper in issue before she had met with the
course instructor for the concurrent offence described in paragraph
13(a){ii) above. The Student was given a mark of zero in the course.
The Dean's Designate e-mail correspondence to the Student on this matter
indicated that the Student waived the opportunity to meet to discuss the
matter and accepted the sanction proposed. That correspondence included
the following warning: "Finally, while I am confident that you have
learned from this and other experiences and will stringently follow the
rules and regulations of the University in the future, I must warn you that
any further offence will be dealt with much more severely.,,
(b) The Student was involved in a car accident on May 31, 2010, in which she
suffered minor injuries. The litigation arising from that accident has caused tµe
Student emotional and financial stress.

14.

The University and the Student made a Joint Submission on Penalty to the

Tribunal.

The Joint Submission is attached as Appendix "C".

It proposed that the

appropriate sanction in all the circumstances is as follows:
( a)

a final grade of zero in NMC 378H 1S in the 2011 \Vinter term;

(b)

a suspension from the University to commence June 14, 2012 and to end
June 13, 2017;

(c)

a notation of the sanction on her academic record and transcript from the
date of the Order until the earlier of her graduation from the University or
June 13, 2019.

15.

The Joint Submission further stated that it would be appropriate for the Tribunal

to repm1 this case to the Provost for publication of a notice of the decision of the Tribunal
and the sanction or sanctions imposed in the University newspapers, with the name of the
student withheld.

8

16.

In oral submissions, counsel for the University submitted that the penalties

proposed in the Joint Submission were appropriate in all of the circumstances, and were
generally consistent with prior Tribunal decisions in similar circumstances. This was the
Student's fourth offence related to plagiaiism. The conduct in question took place after
the Student had been sanctioned and warned on three previous occasions for plagiarismrelated conduct. The University pointed out that the Student had engaged in the conduct
in question in the Winter Te1m of 2011, after only one term had elapsed since serving a
12 month suspension for earlier plagiarism that ran until August 2010.

The University

submitted that there were no mitigating circumstances to be considered: the Student was
stressed but simply cut comers and was lazy about completing work, and the agreed facts
regm·ding the car accident were not sufficiently temporally or causally linked to the
conduct to be considered a mitigating factor.

The University did note the Student's

cooperation and participation throughout the discipline process.

18.

The Student's representative also made oral submissions in support of the Joint

Submission.

She indicated that the Student accepted responsibility from the first

opp01iunity, did not mislead the University, and has admitted fault in these proceedings.
While this was the fourth incident of plagiarism, the second and third offences were
addressed concmrently by the University. The Student does not rely on the car accident
and resulting emotional and financial stress as an excuse for her behaviour or a mitigating
circumstance, but as part of the context for her actions. A five year suspension will have
a severe impact on the Student and a strongly deterrent effect on other students. The
Student submits that expulsion is not warranted in the circumstances, and would not be in
keeping with the sanctions ordered by the Tribunal in other similar cases.

Decision of the Tribunal on Sanction

19.

There is a high threshold that must be met for the tribunal to reject a joint

submission. Only where the Tribunal is of the view that accepting the joint submission

9

would bring the administration of justice into disrepute should it substitute its own
sanction.

20.

The Tribunal has concluded that the Joint Submission sets out reasonable

sanctions in the circumstances, and accepts the joint submission.

21.

The T1ibu11al considered the factors that govern its decision on sanction as set out

in The University a/Toronto and Afr. C, dated November 5, 1976 at pp. 12 (file no.
1976/77-3). The Student has repeatedly, and despite warnings and progressive discipline
sanctions, committed plagiarism. Significant po1iions of the Essay in question were
plagiarized and references concocted. These are serious academic offences that
undennine the trust between University and student, threaten the integrity of grades
issued by the University, and constitute unfairness to other students who comply with the
Code. The Ttibunal has also taken into account the Student's cooperation with the
University throughout, and that she has indicated acceptance of responsibility for her
conduct by appearing at the hearing, agreeing to the relevant facts and pleading guilty to
the charges.

22.

The Tribunal also notes that the Joint Submission is broadly consistent with the

range of sanctions imposed by the Tribunal in similar cases. In Re

Al the panel ordered

a 5 year suspension for a fourth offence of plagiarism. In R e ~ ' the panel ordered
a 4 year suspension for a third offence. In Re.-, the panel ordered a 4 year 4
month suspension for a fourth offence of plagiarism, but noted that as the student had
voluntarily chosen not to register at the University for the year previous to the date the
suspension commenced, so the impact of the suspension was for 5 and one half years.

Order

23.

The Tribunal accepts the Joint Submission on penalty and orders:

10
(a)

THAT the Student is guilty of one count of plagiarism, contrary to section
B.I.l(d) and one count of concocted sources contrary to section B.I(l)(f) of the
Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters;

(b)

THAT the Student receive a final grade of zero in NMC 378HIS;

(c)

THAT the Student be suspended from the University for a period of five years,
commencing on June 14, 2012 and ending on June 13,2017;

(d)

THAT the sanction be recorded on the Student's academic record and transcript to
the effect that she was sanctioned for academic misconduct, for a period of seven
years from the date of the Order to June 13, 2019, or until her graduation from the
University, whichever is earlier;

(e)

THAT this case shall be reported to the Provost for publication of a notice of the
decision of the Tribunal and the sanctions imposed, with the name of the student
withheld.

Dated this

1Th day of (1.,.Ju yY' , 2012

Sarah Kraic~o-Chair

APPENDIX A

THE UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL

THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
IN THE MATTER OF charges of ,:l~emic dishonestyinade on January 24,
2012,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic
Matters, 1995,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Te,onto Act, 1971, S.O. 1971, c. 56
as amended S.O. 1978, c. 88
BETWEEN:
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
~ and-

AGREED STATEMENT OF FACTS

1.

For the purposes of this hearing under the Code of Behaviour on Academic

Matters ("Code"), the Provost of the University of Toronto (the "Provost") and •
~ ("Ms. ~ ) have· prepared this Agreed Statement of Facts

("ASF") and a joint book of documents ("JB0").

The Provost and Ms. ~

agree that:
(a)

each document contained in the JBD may be admitted into evidence
before the Tribunal for all purposes, including for the truth of the
document's contents, without further need to prove the document; and

(b)

if a document indicates that it was sent or received by someone, that is
prima facie proof that the document was sent and received as indicated.

2

Charges and Guilty Plea
2.

This hearing arises out of charges of academic misconduct filed by the Provost

under the Code. Charges were filed against M s . ~ on January 24, 2012. A
copy of the Charges is included in the JBD at Tab 1. Ms. P - acknowledges
that she received copies of the Charges.

3.

Ms. ~ waives the reading of the Charges. Ms. ~ hereby

pleads guilty to Charge #1 and #2.
4.

The Notice of Hearing into the Charges is included in the JBD at Tab 2. Ms.

P - acknowledges that she has received reasonable notice of this hearing.

5.

The Provost agrees that if the Tribunal convicts Ms. ~ on Charge #1

and #2, the Provost will withdraw Charge #3 .

6.

Ms. ~ first registered

as a student at the University of Toronto in the

Faculty of Arts & Science in Fall 2007. At all material times, M s . ~ remained
enrolled at the University. A copy of Ms. ~ • s academic record dated June 1,
2012 is included in the JBD at Tab 3.

7.

In the 2011 Winter term Ms. P - was enrolled in NMC 378H1S -

Themes in Modern Arab History, taught by Professor James Reilly,

In the course

syllabus, students were reminded to: "Pay careful attention to the plagia rism handout
available via the course website." A copy of the course syllabus ("Syllabus") is included
in the JBD at Tab 4.

8.

One of the course req1;1irements requ ired students to submit a book essay, worth

30% of the course mark. Students were given a handout describing the requirements
for the book essay. Students were instructed to write an essay on one of the books on
the additional reading list, and that they were not expected to use additional sources

other than the book chosen. Ms. ~ chose a book by llan Pappe - The Rise

3

and Fall of a Palestinian Dynasy: The Husaynis, 1700-1948 ("Pappe Book"). The
handout contained a box at the bottom which read, in part, "Important notice: Carefully
heed the university policy on plagiarism and advice on best practices. See the relevant
handout on the course website, or access it directly at [website address) ... ". A copy of
the instructions for the book essay are included in the JBD at Tab 5.

9.

Ms. P - submitted a paper entitled "Review Essay: The Rise & Fall of a

Palestinian Dynasty, llan Pappe", on March 30, 2011 ("Essay''). A copy of the Essay is
included in the JBD at Tab 6.

10.

The Essay referenced the Pappe Book throughout, but contained no other

references. Nonetheless, the Essay reproduced verbatim or nearly verbatim passages
from several articles and a blog, without attribution of any kind. In addition, the Essay
quoted passages from the Pappe Book which were not cited in the Essay; and cited
numerous pages from the Pappe Book which did not correspond to the passage quoted .
The Essay did not use quotation marks to indicate direct quotes from the Pappe Book or
any of the other unattributed sources.

11.

A copy of the Essay, highlighted and coded to match the source material, is

included in the JBD at Tab 7. The unattributed and/or inadequately referenced source
documents are included in the JBD at Tabs 8 to 11.

12.

None of the reproduced passages were identified through the use of quotation

marks or any other method of indicating that they were verbatim or nearly verbatim
quotes.

13.

Ms. ~ met with the Dean's Designate for Academic Integrity on

December 15, 2011, to discuss the offence of plagiarism in the Essay.
~ admitted at the Dean's meeting that the Essay was plagiarized.

14.

Ms. ~ admits that she knowingly:

Ms.

4

(a)

lndy:J,qd v~;rbs,.:tfrn i~nd nearly verbatim excerpts from secondary sources,

hidu~i,nfh buf-noHwrmed to:
(i)

!Ian Pappe's book "The Rise and Fall of a Palestinian Dynasty''
("Pappe Book") (Tab 8);

(ii)

lllan Pappe, "The Rise and Fall of the Husaynis, 1840-1922 (part 1)",

Jerusalem Qua11erly, Autumn 2000, pp. 27-38 ("Jersusalem Quarterly
Article") (Tab 9);
(iii) Online article "The Liar as Hero", posted March 22, 2011 ("Benny
Morris Blog") (Tab 10); and
(iv) online article "The Rise and Fall of a Palestinian Dynasty: the

Husaynis 1700-1948", posted December 9, 2010 ("New Statesman
Article") (Tab 11);
(b)

failed to attribute those excerpts appropriately using quotation marks;

{c)

failed to attribute the true source of many of the excerpts through accurate
references or footnotes;

(d)

represented as her own

an idea or expression of an idea or work of

another;
(e}

committed the academic offence of plagiarism with respect to the Essay
contrary to section B. 1.1.(d) of the Code, as set out in charge #1 of the
. Charges (at Tab 1);

(f)

concocted references that she included in the Essay, contrary to section
B.1.1.(f) of the Code, as set out in charge #2 of the Charges (at Tab 1).

15.

Ms. ~ acknowledges that:

5

(a)

The Provost of the University has advised Ms.

P-

of her right to

obtain legal counsel and that Ms. ~ has done so; and
(b)

She is signing this ASF freely and voluntarily, knowing of the potential
consequences she faces, and does so with the advice of counsel.

Signed on June 14, 2012.

· Signed on June 14, 2012.
'-·

Lily Harme
Assistant Discipline Counsel
University of Toronto
826297_ 1.DOC

APPENDIXB

THE UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
THE UNIV.ERSITY OF TORONTO

-~
.j

IN THE MATTER OF charges of academic dishonesty made on January
24, 2012,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on
Academic Matters, 1995,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Act, 1971, S.O.
1971, c. 56 as amended S.O. 1978, c. 88
B ETWE.E N:
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO

d

..l

- and-

AGREED STATEMENT OF FACTS FOR SANCTION

,l
.,J
1.

Ms. ~ has committed the following previous offences under the

Code:

·!.,
'

(a)

In the Fall 2007 term she admitted to having submitted an
assignment for credit in ENG110Y1Y worth 15% which contained
material

taken

from

various

sources

without

appropriate

acknowledgement. She admitted to having committed plagiarism at
a dean's meeting, and was given a mark of zero for the assignment
together with a further reduction. of her final grade in the course of
15 marks, together with a notation on her transcript for 2 years to
November 30, 2009. The student explained that she made a "very
stupid move", "gave in to the pressure and didn't bother to do

~ l '.·•"Z"'"f..•\; 'J:--.- - - - - - - - ~ - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -~

<
J
-~~

2

further research". When asked if anything happening in her life had
affected her judgment she said that "anything happening in your life
doesn't really relate to the paper, in my opinion, the essay I hand in
should be from my own thoughts", and "I guess I just got lazy". She
further explained that "she got scared writing her own thoughts". A

letter to Ms. P - from the Dean's Designate dated

d
. ii

February 4 , 2008 is attached at Tab 1.
(b)

In the summer term of 2009 Ms. ~ admitted to havirf.l.
submitted an assignment for credit in POL201Y1Y worth 25% of the
course mark that was plagiarized, with concocted references. Ms.
~ described family issues which took her mind off

school. She was given a mark of zero in the course, a 12 month
suspension from September 1, 2009 to August 31 , 2010, and a

P-

notation on her transcript from July 16, 2009 to graduation. A letter

.·,

to Ms.

d

from the Dean's Designate dated September

18, 2009 is attached at Tab 2.
(c)

Subsequently, while serving ~er suspension, Ms. P - also
admitted to having plagiarized the work of another student in
POL200Y1 in the same 2009 Summer term, with a 96% match
identified by Turnitin.com. M s . ~ submitted the paper in
issue before she had met with the course instructor for the
concurrent offence described in paragraph 1(b) above.

Ms.

P - was given a mark of zero in the course. A copy of a
letter dated March 10, 2010 from the Dean's Designate is attached

at Tab 3.

2.

Ms. ~ was involved in a car accident on May 31, 2010, in

which she suffered minor injuries. The litigation arising from that accident has
caused Ms. ~ emotional and financial stress.

3.

Ms. ~ acknowledges that:

827949-1

3
{

!I

(a)

The Provost of the University has advised Ms. ' = - of her
right to obtain legal counsel and that Ms. ' = - has done

~

I

so;and

l

(b)

She is signing this ASF freely and voluntarily, l<nowing of the
potential consequences she faces, and does so with the advice of
counsel.

Signed on June 14, 2012.

j

Signed on June 14, 2012.

~d,~U}/4/

L.'1lyHarmr

Assistant Discipline Counsel
University of Toronto

j
.f

-I
' a

827949-1

APPENDIXC

THE UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
IN THE MATTER OF charges of academic dishonesty made on January

24, 2012,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on
Academic Matters, 1995,
.
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Act, 1971, S.O.
1971, c . .56 as amended S.O. 1978, c. 88
BETWEEN:

. THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
- and-

JOINT SUBMISSION ON PENALTY
1.

For the purposes of the sanction phase of this hearing under the Code of

P-

Behaviour on Academic Matters ("_Code"), the University of Toronto (the
"University") and Penalty.

2.

have prepared this Joint Submission on

The Provost and Ms. ~ submit that the appropriate penalty in

all the circumstances of the case is that the University Tribunal impose the
following sanctions on Ms. ~ :

(a)

a final grade of zero in NMC 378H1 S in the 2011 Winter term;

(b)

a suspension from the University to commence June 14, 2012 and
to end June 13, 2017;

(c)

a notation of the sanction on her academic record and transcript
from the date of the Order until the earlier of her graduation from
the University or June 13, 201 9.

2

3.

The Parties further submit that it is appropriate for the Tribunal to report

this case to the Provost for publication of a notice of the decision of the Tribunal
and the sanction or sanctions imposed in the University newspapers, with the
name of the student withheld.

Signed on June 14, 2012.

Signed on June 14, 2012.

0

THE UNIVERSJTV TRIBUNAL

ur~IVERSITY OF TO~ONTO
AND

....r.w~..... .E~h:f/111111··········
U1e ••, •·:u.l\J.,\!f.1ff1."J.Y. .......................... .
1

this

1-4 J,1. day of ,.1Uf\'f:::

, 20.. I.~ .

......~IIJ.............
828200-1

