Case #654

   DATE: August 9, 2012
   PARTIES: University of Toronto v. S.P.
   Hearing Date(s): June 14, 2012
   Panel Members:
   Ms. Sarah Kraicer, Chair
   Prof. Bruno Magliocchetti, Faculty Member
   Ms. Melvin Sert, Student Member
   Appearances:
   Ms. Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel for the University
   Ms. Sierra Robart, DLS for the Student
   In Attendance:
   Ms. S.P., the Student
   Prof. Sam Solecki, Dean's Designate
   Ms. Natalie Ramtahal, Coordinator, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty
   Grievances

   Trial Division â s. B.i.1(d) and s. B.i.1(f) of Code â plagiarism and
   concoction â passages from essay taken verbatim from internet sources
   and references concocted â prior plagiarism offences â Agreed Statement
   of Facts â guilty plea â finding of guilt â Joint Submission on Penalty
   â Student repeatedly committed plagiarism despite warnings â Panel
   stressed the seriousness of plagiarism offences â Student cooperated
   and indicated acceptance of responsibility â Joint Submission
   consistent with the range of sanctions imposed in similar cases â grade
   assignment of zero for course; five-year suspension; seven-year
   notation on transcript; report to Provost

   Student charged under s. B.i.1(d) and s. B.i.1(f) of the Code . The
   charges related to allegations that the Student submitted an essay
   containing passages taken verbatim from internet sources and concocted
   references. The Student had three prior plagiarism offences, two of
   which were concurrent offences. The parties submitted an Agreed
   Statement of Facts, and the Student pleaded guilty to the charges. The
   Panel found the Student guilty under s. B.i.1(d) and s. B.i.1(f) . The
   parties also submitted a Joint Submission on Penalty. The Panel
   recognized that a high threshold must be met for the tribunal to reject
   a joint submission. In assessing the character, the Panel found that
   the Student had repeatedly committed plagiarism despite warnings and
   progressive discipline sanctions. The Panel found the plagiarism
   offences to be of serious nature. Finally, the Panel had taken into
   account the Studentâs cooperation with the University and that she had
   indicated acceptance of responsibility for her conduct by appearing at
   the hearing, agreeing to the relevant facts and pleading guilty to the
   charges. The Panel also considered precedents and found the Joint
   Submission consistent with the range of sanctions imposed in similar
   cases. The Panel accepted the Joint Submission and imposed a grade
   assignment of zero in the course; a five-year suspension; a seven-year
   notation on the Studentâs transcript; and a report be issued to the
   Provost.

   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12787
