Case 440

DATE:

   April 6, 2006

PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v. The Student

Hearing Date(s):

   November 15, 2005 and November 16, 2005

Panel Members:

   Ms Julie Hannaford, Chair
   Professor Markus Bussmann, Faculty Panel Member
   Ms Saimah Aleem, Student Panel Member

Appearances:

   Ms Linda Rothstein, for the University
   Mr. Robert Centa, for the University
   Ms Emily Lawrence, for the University
   The Student
   Mr. Rob Wakulat, for the Student

   Student charged under s. B.i.1(d) and s. B.i.1(b) of the Code. The
   charges related to allegations that the Student submitted plagiarized
   course work, including two term papers and a term test in two courses,
   which she had purchased from a commercial provider of academic essays.
   The Student admitted to having to committed the offences set out in s.
   B.i.1(d) and s. B.i.1(b) of the Code. The Parties agreed on the facts
   relating to the offences. The Panel considered the partiesâ submissions
   and accepted the Studentâs guilty plea. The Panel considered the nature
   of the offence, the detriment that was occasioned and the need to deter
   others from committing a similar offence and found that the offence of
   cheating, when compounded by the fact that it came about through a
   commercial transaction, demeans the pursuit of original thought and
   debases the integrity of the Code and the attempts to protect learning
   in a fair and honest environment. The Panel found that the failure to
   recognize the âenterpriseâ of purchasing work for submission threatens
   the integrity and respect necessary to maintain the University
   community and that the failure to recognize the severity of the threat
   would be punitive to honest member of that community. The Panel
   observed that the difficulty of detecting the offence made it
   imperative that sanctions have an import that sent a message to the
   community about the severity of the offence, and the commitment of the
   University community to its eradication. The Panel found that the fact
   that punishing the product of the cheating enterprise did not curtail
   the commercial providers of essays was not a reason to diminish the
   severity of the sanction. The Panel considered the serial nature of the
   Studentâs offences, the Studentâs initial denial and subsequent excuses
   offered to the University, and the Studentâs explanation for committing
   the offences and found that the Student had not acquired a genuine
   understanding of the severity of the offences. The Panel found that the
   adverse medical and personal circumstances encountered by the Student
   were not sufficiently connected to the occurrence of the offence nor
   was that adversity sufficient in kind to reasonably give rise to the
   suspension of otherwise sound judgment. The Panel imposed a grade of
   zero in the two courses; a recommendation to the President, further to
   s. C.ii.(b)(i) of the Code, that the Student be expelled; and that a
   report be issued to the Provost.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/28432
