Case 521

DATE:

   January 12, 2009

PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v. Mr. M.H.H.

Hearing Date(s):

   December 9, 2008

Panel Members:

   Mr. Clifford Lax, Chair
   Professor Ron Smyth, Faculty Panel Member
   Ms. Melany Bleue, Student Panel Member

Appearances:

   Ms. Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Palaire Roland
   Ms. Betty-Ann Campbell, Law Clerk, Paliare Roland
   Professor Eleanor Irwin, Deanâs Designate
   The Student, did not attend

   The Student was charged with two offences under s. B.i.1(d), and
   alternatively, s. B.i.3(b) of the Code. The charges related to
   allegations that the Student submitted two plagiarized essays in two
   courses. The Student did not attend the hearing. The Panel considered
   submissions with respect to the Universityâs request to proceed in the
   absence of the Student and found that the Student received notice of
   the hearing, either via mail, email or courier, and that it was
   appropriate to proceed in the absence of the Student, without further
   notice of the proceeding. During the hearing the Student emailed the
   Judicial Affairs Officer indicating he would not be attending due to
   lack of notice. The Panel did not become aware of the email until after
   it had concluded its deliberations but found that the email confirmed
   that the Student had received notice of the hearing. With respect to
   the first essay, the Panel considered the testimony of the course
   professor and found that the extent of the plagiarism found in the
   essay precluded any possibility that it was a result of error or a lack
   of proper attribution and that the Student had made obvious use of
   another studentâs paper and submitted the other studentâs ideas and
   text as though they were his own.Â  With respect to the second essay,
   the Panel considered the evidence from the course professor and found
   that the Student quoted from texts without using quotation marks to
   delineate the words of the source materials. The Panel found the
   Student guilty on the charged under s. B.i.1(b) of the Code. The
   University filed a Book of Authorities regarding sanctions in similar
   cases of plagiarism. The Panel considered the University of Toronto v.
   S.B. and Re: University of Toronto v. A.K. and found that a two year
   suspension was the usual threshold for a first time offence but that a
   three year suspension was warranted due to the Student having been
   found guilty of a second count of plagiarism.Â  The Panel imposed a
   three-year suspension; a grade of zero in the two courses; a four-year
   notation on the Studentâs academic record and transcript (or until
   graduation, whichever was to occur first); and that a report be issued
   to the Provost.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/13061
