THE UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO

IN THE MATTER OF charges of academic dishonesty made on September 6, 2007 and July 8,
2008;
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour 011 Academic
Matters, 1995;
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University ofToro11to Act, 1971, S.O. 1971, c. 56 as amended
S.Q. 1978, C. 88

BETWEEN:

THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO

- and Mr.M.H.H.

REASONS FOR DECISION

Members of the Panel:
Mr. Clifford Lax, Chair
Professor Ron Smyth, Faculty Panel Member
Ms. Melany Bleue, Student Panel Member
Appearances:
Ms. Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland
Ms. Betty-Ann Campbell, Law Clerk, Paliare Roland
Professor Eleanor Irwin, Dean's Designate

Mr. M. H. H., the Student, did not attend

Preliminary

[I]

The Trial Division of the University Tribunal was convened on December 9, 2008 to
consider charges under the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour 011 Academic
Matters, 1995 (the "Code") laid against the Student by letters dated September 6, 2007
and July 8, 2008 from Professor Edith Hillan, Vice-Provost, Academic.

[2]

Thirty minutes after the time at which the hearing was scheduled to begin, the Student
had not appeared. Discipline counsel for the University proposed to proceed in the
Student's absence.

[3]

The Tribunal heard submissions with respect to the University's request to proceed in the
absence of the Student.

[4]

The affidavit of Betty-Ann Campbell (Exhibit 2) sets out in great detail the efforts made
by the University Discipline Council to provide notice to the Student of the charges, the
particulars of the charges and the hearing date.

[5]

In June, 2007 the Student met with Professor Eleanor Irwin acting as the Dean's
designate with respect to the University's concerns regarding alleged acts of plagiarism
contained in his essay "The Electoral System and Democracy in Canada". The Student
did not admit to having engaged in plagiarism at that meeting but was aware that the
University's concerns were not answered by the explanation he offered.

[6]

Professor Irwin's attempts to schedule a second meeting concerning allegations of
plagiarism in a subsequent essay entitled "Democratic Deficit in Contempora1y Canadian
Politics: Evidences on Consultation, Deliberation and Decision Making of the
Government" were unsuccessful. The Student did not respond to her request for a
meeting.

[7]

The Tribunal is satisfied that the Student received notice of this hearing for the following
reasons:

[8]

(a)

The evidence that mail sent to the address listed in the Student's ROSI record was
collected and forwarded on to the Student by the then residents;

(b)

The evidence that the Student's hotmail account was current and active
tluoughout the period from September 6, 2007 until the heaiing date on December
9, 2008.

(c)

The evidence that delive1y by courier was accepted by the Student who signed the
delive1y manifest after identifying himself to the comier as "H".

As indicated above, the Tribunal delayed commencement of the proceeding on December
9, 2008 for approximately 30 minutes. When the Student failed to appear, the
proceedings commenced at approximately 6:00 p.m. that evening. The Tribunal was

2

unaware that at 5:47 p.m. that evening, the Student had sent Nancy Smart, the Judicial
Affairs Officer the following email:

"Hi Nancy, I have received your letter which was couriered to my place.
Unfortunately I am sony to say that I will not be attending the hearing as this
was the first time I heard J,-0111 you. I also saw the copies of the mails
attached, which were sent to my old address but I had updated all my
information 011 Rosi when my parents moved back to Pakistan and I moved to
Scarborough. It will be ve1y difficult for me to gel any representation in such
short notice as ii is advised to have one. I alone will not be able lo take
pressure nor be able to represent my selfproperly and eve1J1/hing I had to say
I had told my professors when I had the meetings (which were recorded). I
am again really sor,y and please let me know if there is anything I can still
do?"

Neither the panel nor Ms. Smart was aware of the existence of this email until after the
panel had concluded its deliberations.
[9)

In any event, the email confitms that the Student had in fact received notice of these
proceedings as a result of the courier delivery refell'ed to above. It was therefore, not by
happenstance, that the Student waited until the hearing was in progress before sending his
email requesting an adjournment.

[10)

If the Student had attended and requested an adjournment, such a request would have

been considered and rnled upon by the Tribunal. He chose, however, neither to appear
nor to make his request in writing or by email at any time following December 2, 2008
and prior to the commencement of the hearing.
[11]

Based upon the evidence adduced at the hearing, the panel concluded that the Student did
in fact receive reasonable notice of the hearing and in accordance with the provisions of
the Code and of the Statu/01y Powers Procedure Act. Furthe1more, the panel concludes
that it was appropriate for the Tribunal to proceed in the absence of the Student without
further notice of the proceeding.

Hearing on the Facts

[13]

The charges dated September 6, 2007 are as follows:

I. On or about March 15, 2007, you knowingly represented as your own an idea or
expression of an idea or work of another in connection with your essay entitled "The
Electoral System and Democracy in Canada", submitted for academic credit in
POLA51A3, contrary to Section B.I.l.(d) of the Code.
2. In the alternative, on or about March 15, 2007, you knowingly engaged in a fonn of
cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or misrepresentation not

3

otherwise described in the Code in order to obtain academic credit or other academic
advantage of any kind, in connection with your essay entitled "The Electoral System
and Democracy in Canada", submitted for academic credit in POLA51A3, contrary to
Section B.I.3.(b) of the Code.
[14]

Particulars of the charges dated September 6, 2007 are as follows:
3. You were, at all material times, a student in POLA5 l A3 taught by Professor Joerg
Wittenbrinck.
4. On or about March 15, 2007, you submitted an essay entitled "The Electoral System
and Democracy in Canada" that contained excerpts and passages that were not wiitten
by you, but were copied without attribution from the work of another student, Mr. M.

[ 15]

The charges dated July 8, 2008 are as follows:
I. On or about June 19, 2007, you knowingly represented as your own an idea or
expression of an idea or work of another in connection with your essay entitled
"Democratic Deficit in Contempormy Canadian Politics: Evidences from
Consultation, Deliberation and Decision-making of the Government", submitted for
academic credit in POL214, contra1y to Section B.I.1.(d) of the Code.
2. In the alternative, on or about June 19, 2007, you knowingly engaged in a form of
cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or misrepresentation not
otherwise described in the Code in order to obtain academic credit or other academic
advantage of any kind, in connection with your essay entitled "Democratic Deficit in
Contemporary Canadian Politics: Evidences from Consultation, Deliberation and
Decision-making of the Governn1ent", submitted for academic credit in POL214,
contrary to Section B.I.3.(b) of the Code.

[16]

Particulars of the charges dated July 8, 2008 are as follows:
3. You were, at all mateiial times, a student in POL214 taught by Professor Tone
Careless.
4. On or about June 19, 2007, you submitted an essay entitled "Democratic Deficit in
Contemporaty Canadian Politics: Evidences from Consultation, Deliberation and
Decision-making of the Government" that contained excerpts and passages that were
not written by you, but were copied without attribution, or without quotation marks,
from other sources.

The Essay Submitted March 15, 2007

[17]

With respect to the essay submitted on March 15, 2007 entitled "The Electoral System
and Democracy in Canada", the University called as its witness Professor Joerg
Wittenbrinck. He reviewed the impugned essay (Exhibit 7) in detail and noted the

4

similarities between it and another essay previously submitted by another student.
Professor Wittenbrinck's testimony concerning Exhibits 8, 9, I0(a) and I0(b) clearly
established that significant portions of the Student's essay were not in fact written by the
Student but were copied from the work of another student. Indeed, those portions copied
retained precisely the same spelling, grammatical and punctuation errors found in the
original essay. Furthern1ore, many of the references cited in the original essay were
simply repeated in the Student's version.
(18)

Professor Wittenb1inck confirn1ed that the written materials he handed out to students
warned of the danger of dishonest academic practices including plagiarism (see Exhibit
5). His teaching assistants conducted seminars to assist the students to better understand
issues of academic dishonesty and it would appear that the Student attended one of these
seminars on January 25, 2007.

[19)

The panel is satisfied that the extent of the plagiarism found in the Student's essay
precluded any possibility that this dishonest practice was the result of error or a simple
lack of proper attribution. Rather, the panel is satisfied that the Student had made
obvious use of another student's paper and submitted the other student's ideas and text as
though they were his own. Therefore, the University has proven count #I of the charges
dated September 6, 2007.

The Essay submitted on June 19. 2007

[20)

With respect to the charges dated July 8, 2008, the panel heard evidence from Professor
Tone Careless. The outline for that course (Exhibit 12) explicitly indicates that course
essays will be reviewed for the detection of possible plagiarism and warned the students
of the consequences of such a serious academic offence, should they be found to have
engaged in plagiarism.

[21)

The alleged examples of plagiarized content in this essay exhibit somewhat different
characteristics from those in the first essay submitted. In the former case, the copied
portions were extensive and obvious. In this essay (Democratic Deficit in Contempormy
Canadian Politics: Evidences from Consultation, Deliberation Decision Making of the
Government), the panel is satisfied that the portions of the Student's essay (Exhibit 13)
which appear in bold type, were not the Student's work but were taken from another
source.
An example of this can be found on page 2 of the impugned essay. The second to last
paragraph (commencing "Canadians generally ... ) appears to be the Student's work,
while the last paragraph on page 2 (continued at the top of page 3) is both by tone and
content obviously an academic work, properly referenced and lucidly written. The
contrast between these two paragraphs alone, leads to no other conclusion but that of
plagiarism.

[22]

The essay contains references to the work of Cross and Cody, but they are not simply
references to research sources, but in fact reflect the actual text or a slightly paraphrased
version of those texts. Notwithstanding the fact that the Student actually quoted from

5

these texts, quotation marks were not used to delineate the words of the source materials
from those of his own.
(23]

Professor Careless in his testimony drew the panel's attention to po1tions of this paper
(other than the highlighted portions) which in style and analysis display a measure of
sophistication, suggesting that they were in fact written by someone else. While the
Tribunal shares Professor Careless' doubts regarding the originality of the essay as a
whole, the decision to find the Student guilty is based not on scepticism but on the
evidence of Professor Careless which clearly establishes at least three sources from which
the Student essentially copied the words of others. The similarity between the essay as
submitted and the actual texts of Cross, Cody and co-authors Johnston, Kralm and
HaITison leads to no other conclusion but that count # I of the charges dated July 8, 2008
has been proven overwhelmingly.

Decision of the Tribunal
(24]

The Student is guilty on Charge #1 dated September 6, 2007 and Charge #I dated July 8,
2008.

Sanction
[25]

Once the panel concluded that the Student was guilty on the first count of both sets of
charges, it received submissions on the appropriate penalty to be imposed.

[26]

The University filed a Book of Auth01ities to assist the panel in determining what other
panels of this Tribunal had decided in similar cases of plagimism.

[27]

Without the evidence of the Student, this panel was unable to consider relevant factors
which might influence the approp1iate sanction including the character of the person
charged, any extenuating circumstances suITotmding the conunission of the offence and
the likelihood ofrepetition of this offence.

[28]

This panel therefore had to consider the following factors:

[29]

(a)

that the Student had been convicted of not one, but two counts of plagiarism;

(b)

that the Student had shown no remorse nor any acceptance ofresponsibility when
he met with the Dean's designate;

(c)

the detriment to the University occasioned by the offence; and

(d)

the need to deter others from committing a similar offence.

Other panels have noted that the seriousness of the offence of plagialism is that it
undermines the relationship of trust which must exist between the University and its
students. As was stated in the U11iversity o.fToro11to a11d S.B. (November 14, 2007) "It
hardly needs to be said that the credibility and academic mission of the University, and
6

the degrees which it awards to students, can be gravely harmed by the commission of
offences such as plagiarism and concoction."
(30)

As stated in Re: University of Toronto and A.K. (November 9, 2007) " ... it appears in the
modern era, particularly as plagiarism has increasingly become the bread and butter of
this Tribunal, the Tribunal tlu-ough a number of cases has established virtually a threshold
penalty for those convicted of plagiarism - the two year suspension. The suspension may
increase, depending on particular factors and particular cases, including the nature of the
plagiarism, the response of the student to the allegations, the conduct of the student
throughout the proceeding, whether the charges represented a first or repeated offence,
the passage of time since the incident occmTed and who contributed to any delay, the
expression of remorse, a plea of guilty, or not, any specific extenuating circumstances
and other factors. But the consistent minimum penalty appears to be a two year
suspension".

[31]

We agree that a two year suspension appears to be the threshold for a first time offence
but in this particular instance, we have concluded that a three year suspension is
wall'anted having regard to the Student having been found guilty of a second count of
plagiarism.

[32)

Fmther, the Student should not be entitled to a grade other than zero in the two courses in
which acts of academic misconduct were committed, viz., POLA51A3 and POL214.

[33]

Additionally, there should be a notation of this penalty on the St11dent' s academic record
and on his transcript for a period of four years (or until graduation, whichever occurs
first) sta1ting on Januaiy l, 2009.

(34]

Finally, this panel refers this decision to the Provost with the recommendation that the
Provost publish the outcome of our decision with The Student's name withheld.

Date: Januaiy 12, 2009

7

