Case 1229

   DATE: December 16, 2021
   PARTIES: University of Toronto v. M.K. ("the Student")

   HEARING DATE: September 24, 2021, via Zoom

   Panel Members:
   Ms. Michelle S. Henry, Chair
   Professor Joseph Clarke, Faculty Panel Member
   Mr. Branden Cave, Student Panel Member

   Appearances:
   Mr. Robert Centa, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland
   Rosenberg Rothstein LLP
   Mr. Ahmed Elahi, Articling Student,Â PaliareÂ Roland Rosenberg
   Rothstein LLP

   Not in Attendance:
   The Student

   Hearing Secretary:
   Ms. Nadia Bruno, Special Projects Officer, Office of Appeals,
   Discipline and Faculty Grievances

   The Student was charged under s. B.i.1(e) of theâ¯Code
   ofÂ BehaviourÂ on Academic Matters, 1995â¯(theÂ âCodeâ) on the basis
   that the Student knowingly submitted, without the knowledge and
   approval of the instructor to whom it was submitted, an essay for which
   credit had previously been obtainedÂ in another courseÂ at the
   University. The Student was also charged under s. B.i.1(d) of the Code
   on the basis that the Student knowingly represented as their own an
   idea or expression of an idea, and/or the work of another in an essay.
   In the alternative to each of these charges, the Student was charged
   under s. B.i.3(b) of the Code on the basis that the Student knowingly
   engaged in a form of cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud
   or misrepresentation not otherwise described in the Code in order to
   obtain academic credit or other academic advantage.

   The hearing was scheduled to commence atÂ 9:45 a.m. and the Panel
   waited until 10:00 a.m. before commencing the hearing. The Student did
   notÂ appear atÂ the hearing. Counsel for the UniversityÂ requested that
   the Panel proceed with the hearing in the absence of the Student.Â The
   Panel noted that pursuant to ss. 6 and 7 of theÂ Statutory Powers
   Procedure ActÂ (âSPPAâ), and rule 17 of the University TribunalÂ Rules
   of Practice and ProcedureÂ (âRulesâ), where reasonable notice of a
   hearing was given to a party in accordance with theÂ SPPA andÂ the
   party does not attend, the Tribunal may proceed in theÂ absence of the
   party, and the party is not entitled to any further notice of the
   proceeding.Â Regarding service, the Panel noted that pursuant to rule 9
   of theÂ Rules, a noticeÂ of hearing may be served on a student by
   various means, including sending a copy of the document
   toÂ theÂ studentâs mailing address contained in the Repository of
   Student Information (âROSIâ); or emailing a copy of the document
   toÂ theÂ studentâs email address contained in ROSI.Â Further, the
   UniversityâsÂ Policy on Official Correspondence with
   StudentsÂ (âPolicyâ)Â indicatesÂ that students are responsible for
   maintaining a current and valid postal address
   andÂ aÂ University-issued email account in ROSI.Â  The Policy makes it
   clear that students are expected to monitor and retrieve their mail,
   including electronic messaging accounts issued to them by the
   University, on a frequent and consistent basis. The Panel noted that in
   this case, the University provided evidence that the Student was served
   with the charges and the notice of electronic hearingÂ via email to the
   email addressÂ of the Student containedÂ in ROSI.Â Â The Panel also
   received evidence that the charges, a disclosure letter, andÂ the
   notice of electronic hearing were sentÂ via regular mail to the
   Studentâs mailing address contained in ROSI.Â Based on the evidence and
   submissions ofÂ counselÂ for the University,Â the Panel concluded that
   the Student was given reasonable notice of the hearing in accordance
   with the notice requirement set out in the SPPA and the Rules. The
   Panel proceeded to hear the case on its merits in the absence of the
   Student.

   Regarding the charge laid under s. B.i.1(e) of the Code,Â the
   PanelÂ received affidavit evidenceÂ from the ProfessorÂ who taught the
   course in which the essay in question was submitted.Â The Professorâs
   affidavit outlined that all students were required to submitÂ their
   essay through Turnitin.com. TheÂ StudentâsÂ essay returnedÂ a
   similarity index of 71%Â which outlined that the source of the similar
   test was another assignment submitted by the StudentÂ to another course
   at the University.Â The ProfessorâsÂ affidavit further outlined that as
   a result of the similarity index, the ProfessorÂ discovered that the
   Student previously submitted the essay for academic credit in GGR 101.
   The Panel noted that it was the Professorâs evidence that the Student
   never asked permission to submitÂ the previous assignment, in whole or
   in part, inÂ her courseÂ and that she never provided the Student
   permission to do so.Â Â Based on theÂ foregoing,Â the Panel found the
   StudentÂ guilty of one count of the academic offence of resubmission of
   an essay for which credit had previously been obtained in another
   course at the University, contrary to section B.i.1(e) of the
   Code.Â Given this finding, the University withdrew the charges under
   ss. B.i.1(d) and B.i.3(b) of the Code.

   In determining sanction,Â the Panel heardÂ submissionsÂ regarding the
   appropriate penalty, reviewedÂ relevant past decisionsÂ of the
   Tribunal, and consideredÂ the factors set out inÂ University of
   TorontoÂ andÂ C. (CaseÂ 1976/77-3; dated November 5, 1976).Â The Panel
   noted thatÂ since the Student did not participate in the
   proceeding,Â there was no evidenceÂ regarding the Studentâs
   characterÂ or mitigating or extenuating circumstances.Â Regarding the
   likelihood of a repetition of the offence, the Panel noted thatÂ it was
   unable to make any findings regarding the likelihood of offence because
   the Student did not attend the Deanâs meeting or the hearing.Â The
   Panel considered the serious and deliberate nature of the offence and
   the detriment to the University.Â The Panel noted that the Student
   resubmitted their own work which,Â arguably,Â was not as egregious as
   submitting the work of another person as their own.
   However,Â resubmission of an essay for which credit had previously been
   obtained is a serious offence that is expressly noted in the Code.Â The
   Student was required to seek permission of their Professor prior to
   resubmitting their own work.Â The Panel noted that general deterrence
   is an important factor in these casesÂ and that a strong message must
   be sent to other students that such misconduct is considered a serious
   offence.Â Regarding past decisions submitted by the University, the
   Panel noted thatÂ none of the cases were factually similar, in that
   none of the cases related to charges where the Student had resubmitted
   his own work.Â However, the Panel noted that the actions of the Student
   constitute plagiarism.Â Having regardÂ toÂ the submissions of the
   University and the relevant factors, the Panel agreed that the proposed
   sanction is appropriate.Â The PanelÂ imposedÂ the following
   sanctions:Â a final grade of zero in the
   course;Â aÂ two-yearÂ suspension;Â aÂ three-yearÂ notation on
   transcript; andÂ aÂ report to the Provost for publication.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/30155
