Case 6

THE ·nNIY--:ERSITY OF TORONTO .

THE GOV'"E:Ri~lNG COUNCIL
REPORT# 332 OF THE ACADEJY.ITC APPEALS CO:M::MITTEE

Tuesday April 14, 2009
Your Cornm..rttee reports that it held a hearing on Friday, March 27, 2009, and fr.r.r-Lb.er met in
camera on Tuesday, April 7, 2009. The following members were present:
Professor Emeritus Ralph Scane (Senior Chair)
Profo,sor Jan Angus
· Mr. Kenneth Davy
Dr. Joel Kirsh
Professor Elizabeth Smy~i.h
Secretary: Ms Mette Mai

In Attendance:
For the Student Appellant:
L(the Student)

For the University of Toronto at ¥.Lississan.ga:
Professor G--ordon Anderson
Tnis is an appeal from the Decision of the Academic Appeals Board of The University of
Toronto at Mississauga (UTM), elated September 26, 2006, which dismissed an appeal from the
Cornmitr.ee on Standing at UTh{, dated April 26, 2006. The latter decision dismissed a petition
for an extension of time to complete the term work for the course POL340Yl Y, taken in the FaU
and Winter terms of 2005 and 2006.
The Academic Backgrozmd
The St-L1derrt first ewolled at Eri..ndale College in 1991-92. Following his first term., he was placed
on academic probation. His results in the 1992-93 year were also unsatisfactory, and he received
a one year suspension. On returning to classes in 1994-.95, he took three .courses, but on
receiving an insufficient GPA, was s1,1spended for three years. On returning in the 1998-99
academic year,· he took three courses, achieving an annual GP A of 3 .2, and was allowed to.

50651

2

Case 6

continue on academic probation. However, in the 1999-2000 academic year, his annual GPA
dropped to 1.0, largely due to a failure in POL340Yl, and he was refused further registration.
After petitioning, he was permitted to re-register on academic probation. In the 2005-06
academic year, he enrolled in one course, POL340Yl. He did not submit the second assigned
term paper, but did write the final examination. On receiving a grade of F in the course, he was
again denied further registration.
Before your Committee, the Student raised a major ground of appeal which had not been placed
before any of the appeal levels below, namely his apprehension during the relevant period. of
being charged with a major criminal offence, and the effect of this on his performance and
judgment in his dealings, or lack of them, with the University with respect to his academic
problems in that year. This is not the first time your Committee has encountered a similar
situation. Past panels have noted the waste of time of the reviewing agencies below, who might
have made an appeal to your Committee unnecessary had they been aware of the additional
arguments now being advanced, and have warned that there is no certainty that your Committee
will hear such new arguments. However, your Committee has said that it will not raise the
extremely high bar that appellate courts raise against the attempted introduction of new evidence
at the appellate level, as students are frequently appearing here and below without legal advice.
Your Committee will try ~ balance the competing goals of efficiency in the appeals process, and
arriving at a decision on all the evidence now available on the facts of each case. In this case,
after deliberation, your Committee decided to receive the new evidence, which will be discussed
more fully in the next section of this decision.

The Personal Background
'When the Student enrolled in the 2005-06 academic year, he was fully employed in the internal
audit division of a major_ Canadian bank. In his one course taken in that academic year,
POL340Yl, he ·wrote a mid-term examination in December, 2005, and states that he received a
mark of 75%, and that this examination carried a 25% weight in the total course grade. He also
wrote the final examination in the course in early May, which he states was weighted at 40% of
the total grade, and in which he received a mark of 66%. As mentioned above, he received no
mark for the paper not submitted, and consequently failed the course.
The paper in question was due March 3, 2006. The "drop date" for the course was February 19,
2006. On February 21, 2006, major l_egislation came into effect in the U.S.A., which seriously
affected many of the employer's clients, and consequently greatly increased the immediate work
load of the division in which the Student was working. The Student was advised that he would
have to work in the London, England office for a two week period commencing March 7, 2006,
to assist with these problems in that office. The Student, dealing with his increased workload
even before going overseas, did not complete and submit the paper on time, but felt that even
allowing for a lateness penalty, he could submit it soon enough that the penalty would not affect
his succ.ess in the course. He did not discuss
situation with the course instructor or any_ other
officials at UTM. However, once in England, he not only found that the volume of work was
keeping him from completing the paper, but his time in England was being incrementally
extended by his employer, two or three days at a time. Eventually, he was kept in England until
the latter part of April, 2006. He filed a petition
an extension of time to complete his term

his

for

50651

3

Case 6

work to the Committee on Standing, which was refused in the decision of April 26, 2006,
referred to above.
The facts Sl.L.Tilllarized in fae preceding paragraph formed the soie basis for r.cis petition and
appeal below. Before your Cmn.rnittee, the Student raised what he considered an even more
important factu.al groun.d of appeal. In late January of 2006, a person with whom foe accused was
acquainted was charged with a very serious sexual crime against another person with whom the
Student was also acquainted. Suggestions were made that t.he Student was implicated in the
offence, which the Student emphatically deDies. However, the possibility that these suggestions
would be taken seriously by the police, and that he would also be charged, frightened the
Student, and led hii.--n to retain legal counsel for his protection. Toe Student felt that this
possibility of being charged was lying over him until this year, when the person charged was
acquitted. In fact, the Stu.dent never was charged with any offence by the police. The Student
stated that during the entire period when he felt the possibi.lity of being charged, he was under
severe stress from this source, which affected his performance and his judgment on how to deal
with his course obligations. Toe Student states that he had been in.structed by his lawyer to
refrain from discussing the case with anyone, and the lawyer has written a letter to your
Committee corroborating that this instruction was given. The Student interpreted this instruction
as precluding him from raising these facts in the original petition or in the appeal below.
Decision

Your Committee has decided that relief should be granted in tbis case, although not in the form
requested in the original petition, in the appeal below, or in the appeal to your Committee. To
permit the Student to submit his paper for credit at this late date is completely impractical. Some
penalty for lateness was originally expected by the Student and would be justified, but your
Committee declines to enter upon the exercise of deciding what would be the proper limits of
such a penalty, and sees no justification in asking the then course i.n.structor to weigh this issue,
let alone try to fit his grading into the marking standards he was using in t.1.at course at that time.
In addition, the academic goals of the course would be largely frustrated, as far as the Student is
concerned, as the lapse in time would adversely affect the academic coherence of t.he course.
Your Committee has decided that the appropriate relief is to grant withdrawal without academic
penalty from the course. The facts of the case come within the requirements for granting this
relief as set out in its previous decisions. The stress from the potential criminal charges was ii.7.
existence before the "drop date", and would not have been expected to abate substantially during
the rest of the duration of the course. Therefore, this factor alone would not justify the relief of
withdrawal without academic penalty. However, the major increase in the work 102.d of his job,
and the assignment abroad was not foreseen or reasonably foreseeable by that date. Also, we
accept that the potential criminal charge d.id seriously affect his judgment in deferring his
application to the University for relief as long as he did, or in recognizing sooner that he could
not get his assignment in within sufficient time to avoid ti.me penalties so great as to make it
impossible to secure anything close to a passing grade. However, to some e:x.ient the Student was
being trapped by the employer's actions in extending his ti.me abroad in small increments. Also,
although very late in seeking relief, the petition was launched before the final exarri.ination was
vm.tten, and before the final course mark could be known. The Student was not tryin.g to gamble

50651

4

Case 6

that he could pass the course without the missed paper, and reserving the opportunity to appeal if
he lost his gamble.
The appeal is allowed. The grade of ''F" recorded for the course POL340Yl in the Winter Term
of 2006 shall be· vacated, and the non-grade notation of WDR substituted for the grade. The
status of the Student in the University will be reassessed in accordance with the application of
- this decision.

50651

