Report 332

DATE:

   April 14, 2009

PARTIES:

   Mr. M. S. (the Student) v. UTM

Hearing Date(s):

   March 27, 2009 and April 7, 2009

Committee Members:

   Professor Emeritus Ralph Scane (Senior Chair)
   Professor Jan Angus
   Mr. Kenneth Davy
   Dr. Joel Kirsh
   Professor Elizabeth Smyth

Secretary:

   Ms Mette Mai

In Attendance:

For the Student Appellant:

   Mr. M. S. (the Student)
   Mr. R. S.

For the University of Toronto at Mississauga:

   Professor Gordon Anderson

   Request for an extension of time to complete term work for one course.
   The student failed the course having not submitted term work.Â
   Although the Student was late in seeking relief, the petition was filed
   before the final examination, and before the final course mark could be
   known.Â  At the time, the Student experienced a major increase in his
   employment work load and was assigned abroad. The Committee agreed to
   hear a new ground of appeal, not placed before the divisional appeal
   levels below, that the Student had apprehensions of being charged with
   a major criminal offence, which affected his performance and his
   judgment. The student had been instructed by his lawyer to refrain from
   discussing the case with anyone, which the student had interpreted as
   precluding him from raising the evidence in the original petition or in
   the divisional appeal. The Committee considered the new evidence, the
   Studentâs employment circumstances, and the timing of the Studentâs
   petition, and found that relief should be granted, although not the
   remedy requested. Permitting the Student to submit his paper for credit
   would be impractical considering the time that had lapsed and it would
   frustrate the academic goals of the course. The Committee granted late
   withdrawal without academic penalty. The stress from the potential
   criminal charges, in combination with the major increase in the work
   load of the Studentâs job, the not reasonably foreseeable assignment
   abroad, and the timeliness of the petition, brought the case within the
   requirements for granting the remedy as set out in the Committeeâs
   previous decisions. Appeal allowed. The nonâgrade notation of WDR was
   ordered substituted for the vacated failing grade and the status of the
   student in the University should be reassessed.
   [1]View Report

References

   1. file:///media/12667
