THE UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO

IN THE :MATTER OF charges of academic dishonesty made on October 27, 2008;
A.1'1D IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic

}vfatters, 1995;
AND IN THE l"1ATTER OF the University of Toronto Act, 1971, S.O. 1971, c. 56 as
amended S.O. 1978, c. 88

BETWEEN:
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO

- and -

N

~o

Members of the Panel:
• Ms. Lisa Brownstone, Chair
• Professor Bruno Magliocchetti, Facuity Panel Member
• lvlr. Mir Sadek Ali, Student Panel Member
Appearances:
• Ms. Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel
•

lvlr. J - 0 - , the Student, did not attend

Preliminary
[!)

The Trial Division of the University Tribunal was convened on May 20, 2009 to
consider charges under the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic
,Watters, 1995 (the "Code") laid against the student by letter dated October 27,
2008 from Professor Edith Hillan, Vice-Provost, Academic.

[2)

The charges are as follows:
1.

In or about January, 2008, you knowingly forged or in any other way altered
or falsified an academic record, or uttered, circulated or made use of any such
forged, altered or falsified record, namely a letter dated January 8, 2008,

2
purportedly prepared by the Associate Registrar, University College, contrary
to Section B.I 3(a) of the Code.
ii. In the alternative, in or about January, 2008, you knowingly engaged in a fom1
of cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or misrepresentation
not otherwise described in order to obtain academic credit or other academic
advantage of any kind by submitting to the Canadian High Commission a
letter dated January 8, 2008, confirming your registration status at the
University purportedly from the Associate Registrar at University College
contrary to Section B.I 3(b) of the Code

[3)

Particulars of the charges are as follows:
1.

At all material times, you were emolled at the University of Toronto in the
Faculty of Arts and Science.

11.

On or about January 8, 2008, you requested and were provided with a letter
from the Associate Registrar of University College confirming your
registration status ("Original Letter").

iii. On or about January, 2008, you submitted a letter purportedly from the
Associate Registrar at University College to the Canadian High Commission
in Lagos, Nigeria ("Altered Letter").
iv. The Altered Note was forged, falsified or altered by you and was not the
Original Letter that had been provided to you from the Associate Registrar.
v. The Altered Letter indicated that you were currently registered at the
University, and that you would be eligible to graduate in May, 2008, when
you were not registered and not eligible to graduate.
vi. You submitted this forged, falsified or altered document in support of your
application to extend your study permit to permit you to continue attending
the University. You submitted the Altered Letter knowing that it was forged,
altered or falsified.
[4)

The student did not attend the hearing. The University filed the Affidavit of Betty
Am1 Campbell and proceeded to outline the communications it had had with the

student, in support of its argument that sufficient notice had been given to the
student to allow the hearing to proceed in his absence.
[5)

In August, 2008, the student provided two e-mail addresses to the University at
which iliey could contact him, one being his University address and one being a
hotmail account. In addition, the student provided a telephone number.

3

[6]

The panel was advised that the last communication from the student had been in
September 2008. At that time, the student knew that there were allegations
against him that he had forged a letter, and knew that the Dean's Office had
attempted to get in touch with him in order to deal with those allegations.

[7]

In late September 2008, the student advised the University by e-mail that he
would like to cancel his registration and that he did not intend to continue at the
University. On October 1, 2008, Dr. Kristi Gourlay, the manager of the
University's Office of Academic Integrity, replied and advised that procedures in
the Code apply to him whether he is currently registered at the University or not.
She also attached a letter from the Dean's Designate which informed the student
how the Dean's Designate would be proceeding in this matter. That letter, from
Donald Dewees, Professor and Dean's Designate for Academic Integrity,
indicated that Professor Dewees understood that the student had received his letter
of September 8, 2008 which invited the student to a meeting with Professor
Dewees to discuss the allegations that he altered or falsified a document, which
Professor Dewees identified, and that the student submitted that altered document
to the Canadian High Commission in Lagos, Nigeria. In that correspondence, the
Dean's Designate advised that he had sent the case to the Provost for review and
that he was confident that the offence had been committed, and that the student
would hear from the Provost's Office in due course about the status of his case.
On or about November 5, 2008, the Judicial Affairs officer in the Office of the
Governing Council e-mailed the student and attached a letter containing
procedural information about the charges and the hearing, and suggested that the
student seek legal advice.

[8]

Thus, as of September 2008, the student knew that there was ongoing business
with the University and that he could not simply cancel or withdraw from the
University; rather, the outstanding issue had to be resolved. He was on notice at
that time that he needed to stay in touch with and be aware of communications
from the University.

(9]

On February 26, 2009, University counsel provided the student by e-mail with a
summary of the University's anticipated evidence and the disclosure brief.
Counsel provided suggested dates for a tribunal hearing in March and April 2009,
and asked that the student contact the law firm regarding his availability on those
dates. Again, she advised him that he consider obtaining legal representation and
provided him the contact information for Downtown Legal Services. This
information was sent to both e-mail addresses that had been provided by the
student. The law firm for the University attempted to reach the student by
telephone, at a number previously provided by the student, but was unable to do
so. In the e-mails, the firm asked for a current mailing or residential address to
which it could send a bound copy of the disclosure brief, and asked for a
telephone number. He was also asked to up-date his ROSI record.

4
[10]

Having received no response, on March 11, 2009, the law firm sent the student
another e-mail requesting a response and advising that the three previously
proposed tribunal dates were no longer available. The firm provided him with
additional suggested hearing dates in May and June 2009 and asked him to
contact them no later than March 13. E-mails were sent to both addresses once
again, and no response was received.

[11]

On Monday, March 16, 2009, the firm requested the Judicial Affairs Officer to
schedule the Tribunal hearing for May 20, 2009 beginning at 5:30 p.m. The
student was notified of the date by e-mail from the Judicial Affairs Officer to both
of his addresses on March 18, 2009. The e-mail sent to the hotmail account was
returned as undeliverable. On March 19, 2009 further e-mails were sent to the
student to confirm the May 20 hearing date. There was no contact received from
the student and no delivery failure notices in relation to these e-mails. Attempts
to reach the student by telephone were again unsuccessful. The student never updated his ROSI record.

[12]

The Notice of Hearing dated March 18, 2009 was sent to e-mail addresses
provided by the student, and contained the underlined warning that "if you do not
attend, the hearing may take place without you and you will not be entitled to
further notice in the proceeding."

[13]

University counsel also drew the panel's attention to the policy of the University
entitled "Policy on Official Correspondence with Students" approved May 1,
2006 and effective since September 1, 2006. The policy requires the student to
maintain a current and valid postal address as well as the address for a Universityissued electronic mail account, and to advise the University of these addresses.
The policy notes that failure to do so may result in a student missing important
information, and will not be considered an acceptable rationale for failing to
receive official correspondence from the University. The policy also notes that
students are expected to monitor and retrieve their mail, including electronic
messaging account[s] issued to them by the University, on a frequent and
consistent basis, and that students have the responsibility to recognize that certain
communications may be time critical. Students are to be responsible for ensuring
that all electronic messages sent to the official University-issued account are
received and read.

[14]

1n the University's submission, its efforts were sufficient to provide notice to the
student. The student knew that the University needed to speak with him. The
student knew the allegations against him. Although there was some evidence that
he was not able to enter Canada for a period of two years, he never said that he
could not attend a hearing because he could not get into the country but that he
would like to attend. He made absolutely no effort to engage with the University
after September, 2008, when he knew that these serious allegations were pending
against him.

5
[15]

The relevant portions of the Statutory Powers Procedure Act provide as follows:
Notice of hearing
6.( 1)The parties to a proceeding shall be given reasonable notice of the hearing by the
tribunal. R.S.O. 1990, c. S.22, s. 6 (I).
Statutory authority
(2)A notice of a hearing shall include a reference to the statutory authority under
which the hearing will be held.
Oral hearing
(3)A notice of an oral hearing shall include,

(a) a statement of the time, place and purpose of the hearing; and
(b) a statement that if the party notified does not attend at the hearing, the
tribunal may proceed in the party's absence and the party will not be entitled to
any further notice in the proceeding. 1994, c. 27, s. 56 (13).

Effect of non-attendance at hearing after due notice
7.(1)\Vhere notice of an oral hearing has been given to a party to a proceeding in
accordance with this Act and the party does not attend at the hearing, the tribunal
may proceed in the absence of the party and the party is not entitled to any further
notice in the proceeding. R.S.O. 1990, c. S.22, s. 7; 1994, c. 27, s. 56 (14).

[16]

The University provided to the Tribunal three cases in support of its position that
its efforts constituted reasonable notice in the circumstances.

[17]

Although in none of the cases was the student out of the country, the Tribunal was
satisfied that the principle articulated in those cases applies to this case. The
University had made all reasonable efforts to contact the student, to advise the
student of the importance of his remaining in communication with the University,
and had exhausted all reasonable approaches to finding the student. Yet, the
student had chosen not to respond and not to engage with the University in any
way. The University is not to be precluded from proceeding with its important
duties by the actions of a student in ignoring or failing to engage at all with the
University. In the circumstances, the panel concluded that reasonable notice
within the meaning of-the Statutory Powers Procedure Act had been provided.

Evidence on the merits

[18]

The University first tendered the evidence of Linda Nauman, the Registrarial
Assistant at University College. She has been employed by the University of
Toronto since January 2005 and became an Associate Registrar in October 2006,
a position that she continues to hold. In that role, she helps students with
problems and requests, and manages frontline staff e-mails and telephone calls.

6
[19J

Ms Nauman testified that she did not know the student personally but that she
became aware of him in January 2008, when he telephoned her office requesting a
letter to extend his Visa, and requested that this letter be sent by e-mail.

[20]

Her staff responded that such a letter could not be sent by e-mail. Because the
student was persistent in his requests, his call was passed on to Ms Nauman. The
student insisted that the requested letter be sent by e-mail as he was not in
Toronto and had no other way of getting the letter, and therefore Ms Nauman
finally reluctantly agreed. He said that he wanted to renew his study permit.

[21 J

Ms Nauman outlined for the Panel the usual practice with respect to requests for
this sort of letter. That practice is to prepare a hard copy of the letter and require
the student to pick it up with a student card, and to provide relevant ROSI
information in order to ensure that the letter is going into the right hands. The
letters contain the student's registration status, the dates of registration, when the
student is expected to graduate, the academic progress as indicated by the
projected graduation date, and the fees paid. The letters are on University College
Registrar Office letterhead, with the student's name and identification and a few
short paragraphs, and a signature and seal. The seal is raised and embossed over
the signature and the letters are generally picked up by the students. Sometimes
the letters will be faxed to the Canadian Immigration Office or to the student if
the student cannot pick it up. The University College Registrar's Office staff asks
a number of questions in order to ensure that they are speaking to the student. Ms
Nauman did so with this student in order to ensure that it was him that was
making the request, and was so satisfied.

[22]

Ms Nauman provided the panel with some background information about the
student. The student had been admitted to Arts and Sciences in 2004 with one
credit from his international baccalaureate. In the winter of 2005 he had taken
half a course which he had failed. He had emolled in a full course in mathematics
from which he had withdrawn late. There were three more courses the student
had taken in which he had received a grade of F. In the summer of 2006, the
student was placed on academic probation, which occurs if the student has a GPA
of less than 1.5. He therefore was suspended for one year from May 2007 to May
2008. He would have been eligible to return for the summer of 2008 if he so
chose. After his suspension, the student was permitted one session to show a
GPA of I. 7 and if not, the student would have a three year suspension.

[23]

When Ms Nauman was speaking with the student on the telephone at the time he
requested the letter, he advised her that he wanted to return in September of 2008,
that his study permit had lapsed, and that he needed a new permit and therefore
needed a letter from the University. He said that he wanted a letter to say that he
was currently registered and Ms Nauman advised that she could not provide such
a letter but could say that he was eligible to return in May 2008 to continue his
studies. He asked her to do him a favour and write a different letter but
eventually accepted this was the only letter she could provide. He wanted the

7
letter e-mailed, and although Ms Nauman offered to send it by fax, he indicated
that he was in Calgary, could not come and pick it up and was not going to be in
Toronto and that he had an urgent deadline. He said that he did not have a fax
number and Ms Nauman offered to fax it to Nigeria, but he s~id that he needed to
send a package containing the letter. He said that there was no one who could get
it for him in Toronto and eventually, Ms Nauman agreed to e-mail it, because, as
she described it, she was giving him the benefit of the doubt and wanted to help
him. He insisted he needed it that day, and so she sent it to his University of
Toronto e-mail address.
[24]

The letter was filed before the Tribunal. It indicated that the student was not
registered in the current academic session but would be eligible to return in the
2008 summer session which would run from May 12, 2008 to August 15, 2008. It
also provided Ms Nauman's telephone number and e-mail address if further
information was required. The letter was on University College letterhead.

[25]

Ms Nauman testified that she put the letter in PDF format and e-mailed it to the
student and heard nothing further. However, she did receive an e-mail from the
High Commissioner in Lagos, Nigeria, copies of which were provided to the
Tribunal. The e-mail sought authentication of a letter that had been provided by
the student to the High Commissioner in Lagos. Ms Nauman noticed that the
crest on the letter was different. She testified that it was an alternate University
College crest that she assumed the student had obtained from the website. The
content of the letter had been changed to make it look as though he was
continuously registered with the University. It identified a major subject of study
which was not true, and said that he was registered in the current academic
session and eligible to graduate in May 2008 (also not true). In addition, it
removed her telephone number and changed her e-mail address. She advised the
Canadian High Commissioner in Lagos that the letter was not authentic and that
she had sent a different letter.

(26]

She did not hear from the student again until August 2008. At that time, he
advised her that he was banned from coming to Canada for two years and that it
would help if the University of Toronto would allow him back. In the e-mail he
confessed that he forged a letter saying that he was still a student and apologized
for doing so. He said that he did it because he believed that a Nigerian on
suspension would not be granted a single entry Visa. He indicated that he would
still like to resume studies as a student at the University and indicated that he was
informed that if he returns to Canada, the University would take action against
him, and he accepts this. He advised that he has been banned from Canada for
two years beginning August 7, 2008 but there is a thirty day period during which
the ban could be reversed. He requested that the University assist him in making
a new application for single entry Visa and lifting the two-year ban, and asked
that the University (Ms Nauman) inform Canadian Immigration that he was
suspended and not expelled and that his suspension ends in September 2008.
Again, he asked her forgiveness for forging the letter, but explained he did not

8

want anyone to know he had been suspended. He said that he would submit
himself to the University's action when he returned but asked that the University
assist him in assuring that his future stays intact. He provided his University of
Toronto e-mail address as well as the hotmail account address and a telephone
number at which he could be reached in Nigeria.
(27]

Ms Nauman testified that she sent a reply e-mail right away that she could not
write a Jetter at this point given that there was an issue of discipline/academic
integrity and that this would have to be resolved before she could write any Jetter,
and that this would not be resolved within thirty days.

[28]

Later in August, she was advised by the student that he wanted to cancel his
registration. She advised that he was not currently registered and has not been
since May 2007, but that his record remains intact in the case if he ever returned
to continue his studies.

[29]

The panel next heard from Dr. Kristi Gourlay who manages the office of Student
Academic Integrity. Dr. Gourlay testified that she sent an e-mail to the student in
response to being advised he wanted to cancel his registration. That e-mail
advised that he was considered to be a student at the time of the alleged academic
offence and thus the procedures outlined in the Code of Behaviour in Academic
Matters applied to him whether he is currently registered or not. She attached the
letter from the Dean's Designate referred to above. Dr. Gourlay testified that she
had heard nothing from the student since then.

[30]

University counsel submitted that the evidence established that the student had
knowingly forged or in any other way altered or falsified an academic record, or
uttered, circulated or made use of any such forged, altered or falsified record,
namely a letter dated January 8, 2008, purportedly prepared by the Associate
Registrar, University College, contrary to section B.l (3)(a) of the Code. In
response to a question from the Tribunal, University counsel submitted that the
letter was an "academic record", defined in 2(c) of Appendix A to the Code as
"any record or document included within the definition of the official student
academic record ... and any other record or document of the University or of
another educational institution ... used, submitted or to be submitted for the
purposes of the University."

[31 J

In the alternative, the University counsel submitted that the student knowingly
engaged in the form of cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or
misrepresentation not otherwise described in order to obtain academic credit or
other academic advantage of any kind by submitting to the committee and High
Commission a letter dated January 8, 2008 confirming his registration status at the
University, purportedly from the Associate Registrar at University College
contrary to section B.l (3)(b) of the Code. The academic advantage, in the
submission of the University counsel, was the ability to attend the University
which was an advantage because other international students were unable to get it.

9

Finding

[32]

After some deliberation, the Tribunal concluded that the purposes of the
University include assisting its international students to register and attend, and
therefore, the document falls within the definition of "academic record" in s. 2( c)
of Appendix A. Therefore, the panel found the student had committed the offence
outlined in charge 1 and the second charge was withdrawn.

Sanction

[33)

The University sought to have the student expelled, the most serious possible
sanction. University counsel referred to the preamble of the Code which
emphasizes the need for integrity, honesty, fairness and mutual respect in the
relationship between the University and students. In her submission, forgery and
falsifying letters are egregious acts. Although there had only been one instance of
misconduct, in the University counsel's submission, it was of such a nature that it
warranted the most onerous penalty. She noted that the student did not engage in
the process but communicated only when it was to his benefit to communicate.
When Ms Nauman could not be of assistance, he chose to disassociate himself
from the University. In University counsel's submission, there was no compelling
reason to give the student another opportunity and the student had done nothing to
suggest that he deserves a second chance. This, in her submission, made
expulsion, as opposed to lengthy suspension, the appropriate sanction.

[34)

In University counsel's submission, although the admission in the e-mail to the
University was to his credit, the context of confessing only when he was enlisting
assistance, and disengaging when he found out the consequences of his actions,
indicated that the student had neither asked for nor should receive a second
chance. University counsel was careful to indicate that there is no information
about why the student had struggled with his courses, and that there was no
evidence to suggest any extenuating or mitigating circumstances. In her
submission, this was not a case where the student had done so well that there
would be a traumatic terrible effect if he were expelled; that is, there was nothing
compelling about his academic situation. University counsel submitted that, if the
panel was not inclined to order expulsion, a suspension of five years would be a
possible alternative penalty.

[35)

University counsel referred the Tribunal to the six factors to consider when
assessing appropriate penalty. In terms of character, counsel noted that the
student had removed himself from the University and the process; in tenns of
likelihood of repetition, counsel fairly pointed out that there was no way of
knowing this, as it was a first offence. In counsel's submission, the nature of the
offence was egregious, and the University has to be vigilant against this kind of
offence; and the detriment to the University was high. In this case, in her
submission, there was deliberation in the student's conduct. He took advantage of
Ms Nauman's conduct and misused the trust that she placed in him after his

10
begging and pleading with her. Because of the serious detriment to the
University, a serious response is warranted.
[36)

In response to a question from the Tribunal, counsel indicated that if there were a
five year suspension, she would request a notation to stay on his transcript for
seven years.

Decision Sanction
[37)

After deliberation, the Tribunal has concluded that a five year suspension with a
seven year notation is the appropriate penalty. Although the acts were egregious,
it was the student's first offence. Given the absence of the student, the Tribunal
did not have evidence of aggravating or mitigating circumstances before it.
Although the offence was egregious, and the student certainly took advantage of
the trust that Ms Nauman placed in him, the panel feels that the very lengthy
suspension v,.ith an even lengthier notation should suffice to demonstrate the
seriousness with which the University views this kind of conduct, and serve as
both a specific and general deterrent to this kind of action. The Tribunal notes
that the document is not a transcript or a ROSI record, as was the case in other
cases in which expulsion was ordered. That is, although the document is
technically an academic record \\~thin the definition in the Appendix, it is not one
of the records that goes to the heart of the University and its business. Unlike the
other decisions, it did not go to an employer or another academic institution.

[3 8]

Therefore, the Panel orders:
(a)

that the student be suspended from the University for a period of five (5)
years effective September 1, 2008;

(b)

that suspension be recorded on his transcript for a period of seven (7)
years, from September 1, 2008; and

(c)

that this case be reported to the Provost for publication in the University
newspapers, with the name of the student mthheld.

Dated this_·__ day of October, 2009

/

Lisa Brownstone, Chair

