Case 541

DATE:

   April 18, 2008

PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v. K.N.

Hearing Date(s):

   April 16, 2008

Panel Members:

   Andrew Pinto, Chair
   Ikuko Komuro-Lee, Faculty Member
   Sujata Pokhrel, Student Member

Appearances:

   Danny Kastner, Assistant Discipline Counsel
   Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel
   Lucy Gaspini, Manager, Academic Integrity and Affairs

   Student charged under s. B.i.1(c) , B.i.1.(b) , and alternatively,
   under s. B.i.3(b) of the Code . The charges related to allegations that
   the Student paid an individual to impersonate him and write a term test
   as if he were the Student. The Student did not attend the hearing. The
   Panel considered the Notice of Hearing and the Studentâs declaration,
   in which he attested to his permanent residency outside of Canada and
   requested that the Tribunal accept the Agreed Statement of Facts and
   Joint Submission on Penalty in lieu of his attendance. The Panel
   permitted the hearing to proceed in the Studentâs absence. The Student
   admitted his guilt. Based on the Agreed Statement of Facts, the Panel
   found the Student guilty of the charge under s. B.i.1(c) of the Code .
   The Panel was informed that it was customary for the period of notation
   on the Studentâs transcript to exceed the expiration of the suspension
   because it serves as a reminder to the Student to comply with standards
   of academic integrity upon his return to the University and it serves
   as an advisory to University officials, in the event that the Student
   commits further offences after resuming his academic career. The
   University noted that the proposed sanction included a notation caveat
   that would safeguard the Studentâs reputation after graduation. The
   Panel accepted the Joint Submission on Penalty. The Panel noted that
   while the Provostâs guidelines on sanction recommend expulsion for
   impersonation, deference was to be shown to joint submissions. The
   Panel imposed a grade of zero in the course; a five-year suspension; a
   seven year notation on the Studentâs academic record and transcript (or
   until graduation, whichever was to occur first); and that a report be
   issued to the Provost.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12738
