Case 1211

   DATE: September 23, 2021
   PARTIES: University of Toronto v. P.L. ("the Student")

   HEARING DATE: July 6, 2021, via Zoom

   Panel Members:
   Ms. Michelle S. Henry, Chair
   Professor Mike Evans, Faculty Panel Member
   Ms. Parsa Mahmud,Â Student Panel Member

   Appearances:
   Mr. Robert Centa, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland
   Rosenberg Rothstein LLP
   Mr. Ryan Shah, Summer Student, Paliare Roland Rosenberg Rothstein LLP
   Mr. Antone Liu, Counsel for the Student, L&B LLP

   Not in Attendance:
   The Student

   Hearing Secretary:
   Ms. Krista Kennedy, Administrative Clerk & Hearing Secretary, Office of
   Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances

   The Student was charged underÂ s. B.i.1(c) of theâ¯Code of Behaviour on
   Academic Matters, 1995â¯(the âCodeâ) on the basis thatÂ the
   StudentÂ knowinglyÂ had someone personate her in a midterm examination.
   In the alternative, the Student was charged underÂ s.Â B.i.1(b)Â of
   theÂ CodeÂ on the basis that the StudentÂ knowingly used or possessed
   an unauthorized aid or obtained unauthorized assistance in connection
   with the midterm examination. In the further alternative, the Student
   was charged under s. B.i.3(b) of the Code on the basis that the
   StudentÂ knowingly engaged in a form of cheating, academic dishonesty
   or misconduct,Â fraudÂ or misrepresentation in order to obtain academic
   credit or other academic advantageÂ in connectionÂ with aÂ midterm
   examination.

   The StudentÂ and the University wereÂ represented by counsel.Â The
   Student and the University submitted an Agreed Statement of
   FactsÂ (âASFâ) and a JointÂ Book of DocumentsÂ (âJBDâ).Â The Panel
   noted thatÂ theÂ ASF outlined that the ProfessorÂ who taught the course
   in which the midterm examinationÂ in question was submitted noticed
   thatÂ two students appeared to have uploaded each otherâs ID. The
   Student uploaded the solutionÂ with the photo ID and signature of
   another student and the other student uploaded the solution with photo
   ID and signature of the Student.Â The ASF outlined that the Professor
   found thisÂ suspicious and set the two answers aside for further
   investigation.Â Approximately a week after the midterm examination, the
   Student emailed the Professor and admittedÂ to the misconduct.Â At the
   Deanâs Designate meeting,Â the Student admitted that she hiredÂ a
   person to write her midterm forÂ $200.00. The Student further admitted
   that she permitted this individual to log into her Quercus account
   using her login credentials to complete the midterm in her name.Â The
   Panel noted that the ASF outlined that the Student confirmedÂ that the
   statements she made to the Deanâs Designate were true and
   accurate.Â Based on theÂ ASF and JBD, the Panel found thatÂ the first
   charge had been proven with clear and convincing evidence on a balance
   of probabilitiesÂ and therefore,Â the PanelÂ accepted the guilty plea
   with respect this charge under s. B.i.1(c) of the Code.Â Given the
   PanelâsÂ finding,Â the University withdrewÂ the alternative charges.

   The UniversityÂ and the Student submitted a Joint Submission on Penalty
   (âJSPâ).Â Counsel for the UniversityÂ provided submissions on the high
   threshold required for the Panel to deviate from a JSP.Â As set
   outÂ byÂ the Appeals Board inÂ The University of Toronto and
   S.F.Â (Case No.Â 690, October 20, 2014), only truly unreasonable or
   âunconscionableâÂ joint submissions should be rejected (para. 22).Â The
   PanelÂ also heard submissions regarding the appropriateness of the
   penalty,Â reviewed relevant past decisions of the Tribunal, and
   considered the factors set out inÂ University of Toronto and Mr.
   C.Â (File 1976/77-3, November 5, 1976).Â The Panel noted thatÂ the
   Studentâs admission of wrongdoing came veryÂ early on.Â She providedÂ a
   candid explanationÂ along with the Studentâs desire to have the issue
   resolved as soon as possible. The Studentâs admission of guilt
   demonstrated insight.Â The Panel accepted that the Student was under
   stress in her personal lifeÂ however, her explanation didÂ not justify
   the mistake. The Panel also considered the serious and deliberate
   nature of the offence and theÂ detrimentÂ toÂ the University.Â Counsel
   for the University stressed thatÂ there is a needÂ to send a strong
   message of deterrenceÂ in order toÂ communicate the seriousnessÂ with
   which these decisions are taken. Furthermore, the University pointed
   out the commercial elementÂ of the offence since the Student paid
   forÂ an individualÂ to complete the midtermÂ on her behalf.Â Having
   regard to the submissions, past decisions and the Mr. C. factors, the
   PanelÂ accepted the JSP,Â as it was reasonable.Â The Panel imposed the
   following sanction:Â final grade of zero in the course;Â five-year
   suspension;Â five-year notation on the transcript; andÂ a report to the
   Provost forÂ publication.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/30008
