Case No. 1211
THE UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
IN THE MATTER OF charges of academic dishonesty filed on June 1, 2021,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters, 1995,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Act, 1971, S.O. 1971, c. 56 as am. S.O. 1978, c. 88

B E T W E E N:
UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO (the “University”)
- and P

L

(the “Student”)

REASONS FOR DECISION

Hearing Date: July 6, 2021, via Zoom
Panel Members:
Ms. Michelle S. Henry, Chair
Professor Michael Evans, Faculty Panel Member
Ms. Parsa Mahmud, Student Panel Member
Appearances:
Mr. Robert Centa Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg Rothstein LLP
Mr. Ryan Shah, Summer Student, Paliare Roland Rosenberg Rothstein LLP
Mr. Antone Liu, Counsel for the Student, L&B LLP
Hearing Secretary:
Ms. Krista Kennedy, Administrative Clerk & Hearings Secretary, Appeals, Discipline and
Faculty Grievances
Not in Attendance:
The Student

1. A Hearing of the Trial Division of the University Tribunal convened on July 6, 2021, to
consider charges of academic dishonesty brought by the University against the Student,
under the Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters, 1995 (the “Code”). The Student was
informed of the charges by letter dated June 1, 2021, from Professor Heather Boon, ViceProvost, Faculty & Academic Life.
THE CHARGES
2. At all material times, the Student was a registered student in the Faculty of Arts &
Science at the University of Toronto. The University alleges that the Student engaged in
the following offences:
i.

On or about February 23, 2021, the Student knowingly had someone personate her in the
midterm examination in ECO461H1S (20211) (the “Course”), contrary to section
B.I.1(c) of the Code.

ii.

In the alternative to Charge #1, on or about February 23, 2021, she knowingly used or
possessed an unauthorized aid or obtained unauthorized assistance in connection with the
midterm examination in the Course, contrary to section B.I.1(b) of the Code.

iii.

In the further alternative to Charges #1 and 2, the Student knowingly engaged in a form
of cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or misrepresentation not otherwise
described in the Code in order to obtain academic credit or other academic advantage of
any kind in connection with the midterm examination in the Course, contrary to section
B.I.3(b) of the Code.

3. The particulars related to Charges #1, 2 and 3 are as follows:
a. Professor Ata Mazaheri taught the Course, which required the Student to take a midterm
examination worth 40% of the final grade.
b. The Student knew that students were required to complete the examination themselves
and without any assistance or aids, except for those that were specifically authorized by
Prof. Mazaheri.

c. The Student knowingly hired another person to write the examination in her name. On or
about February 23, 2021, this person wrote the examination in the Student’s name and
submitted it on Quercus using the Student’s account.
d. The examination required students to submit a picture of their photo identification to
attest and ensure that the students themselves were completing the examination. The
examination submitted using your Quercus account included the photo identification of a
different University of Toronto student.
e. The Student knowingly received unauthorized assistance in the examination by having
someone else complete it for her.
f.

For the purposes of obtaining academic credit and/or other academic advantage, the
Student knowingly engaged in a form of cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct,
fraud or misrepresentation by having someone else write the examination for you.

AGREED STATEMENT OF FACTS
4. The Hearing proceeded on the basis of an Agreed Statement of Facts (“ASF”). The Panel
also received a Joint Book of Documents (“JBD”) that is referred to in the ASF. The
following is an abridged version of the ASF.
5. The Student first registered as a student in the Faculty of Arts & Science at the University
of Toronto in Fall 2016. As of June 7, 2021, she has earned 19.50 credits.
6. In Winter 2021, the Student enrolled in ECO461 – Economics of Financial Risk
Management (the “Course”), which was taught by Professor Ata Mazaheri. The Course
was taught via remote / on-line learning. The assessments for the Course were open
book; but the assessments were to be done individually.
7. The midterm examination was an online exam on Quercus on February 23, 2021, from
9:00 to 11:00 a.m. The instructions for the final assessment repeated the warning to
students that they must work individually. In addition, students were required to submit a
signature sheet and provide proof of identification.

8. At the end of the mid-term test, two students appeared to have uploaded each other’s ID:
the Student uploaded the solution with the photo ID and signature of another student and
the other student uploaded the solution with photo ID and signature of the Student.
9. Dr. Mazaheri found this to be suspicious and set the two answers aside for a further
investigation.
10. On March 1, 2021, the Student sent an email to Dr. Mazaheri admitting to the
misconduct. The email read as follows:

Dear Dr. Mazaheri,
This is [Student’s Name]. I have realized my mistake and I need to tell you the
truth. I cheated during the midterm, which means I found another person to help
me to do the test. Due to COVID-19, I come back to China and I was told that
my mother got thyroid cancer and breast cancer. I am so stressful and falling
apart. Those things made me feel tired, and I can't sleep at night. Before the
midterm, I felt nervous and I didn’t think I would do well on the test, because I
was not prepared well for that. Because the weight of the test is so high, I don’t
want to get a low mark from the midterm since I need to get a great grade from
the course for applying for the graduate program and because this is my final
year, the course is so important for me. Since my CGPA is 3.64, and the GPA
for last semester is 3.5. I want to apply to graduate schools, so I want to improve
my GPA. I have a preferred graduate program that requires me to have a higher
GPA. As a result, I found a third party to help me do the midterm to improve my
grade, and this is really the first time for me to do that. I understood it is a huge
mistake, and I should do it by myself. I should never let other people do my
work. I worked so hard for this course, and because I feel unsure of myself and I
have lots of doubt, I made this ridiculous decision and I really regret it.
I know it is all my fault and I am so sorry, and I deeply regret what I did. I am so
afraid and I don’t know what I should do. This will never happen again, and I
promise! From this experience, I know how serious cheating is to my studies. I
have applied for several graduated programs, and if I mess up this course, it
would influence me significantly. I really understand my problem, and I want to
beg you for your forgiveness. I would study harder for the final, and I will never
be dishonest. Please trust me!
Once again, I will never do that in the future, and I have realized my mistake.
This is the first time for me to do that, and it would also be the last time. I’m so

sorry about that. Could you please forgive me and give me another chance on
the final, or could you please tell me what I should do to make up for this
mistake? I would definitely do the final by myself with no other people's help.
This course is so important to me and my future studies, and please forgive me
this time, and this is the last time for me to do that. Thanks so much!
Best Wishes,
[Student’s Name]

Meeting with Dean’s Designate
11. On April 8, 2021, the Student met with Professor Jennifer Purtle, the Dean’s Designate
for Academic for the Faculty of Arts & Science. The Student admits that Prof. Purtle
read her the required warnings from the Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters.
12. The Student admitted that she did not think that she would do well on the midterm. She
then saw an advertisement on WeChat from someone who said that they would help
students take tests. The Student admitted to hiring this person who had the WeChat
identifier <SkyIsWhite> to write the test for her. The Student paid $200 through WeChat
Pay to SkyIsWhite.
13. The Student admitted that she permitted SkyIsWhite to log in to her Quercus account
using her login credentials and to complete the midterm examination in her name.
14. The Student confirms that the statements she made to the Dean’s Designate were true and
accurate.
Admissions and Acknowledgements
15. The Student acknowledges and admits that:
a. She knew that she was not permitted to have any assist her during the midterm
examination;
b. She knowingly paid $200 to someone using the WeChat identifier SkyIsWhite to write
the mid-term examination for her, which the Student knew to be unauthorized assistance;
c. She is guilty of having another person personate her during the mid-term examination in
the Course.

FINDINGS ON CHARGES
16. Following deliberations and based on the ASF and the JBD, the Panel concluded that
charge 1 (the Student knowingly had someone personate her in the midterm examination
in the Course, contrary to section B.I.1(c) of the Code) had been proven with clear and
convincing evidence on a balance of probabilities, and accepted the guilty pleas of the
Student in respect of this charge.
17. The Panel was advised that if the Tribunal convicts the Student on charge 1, outlined
above, the University would withdraw the alternative charges. Accordingly, the Panel
makes no findings with respect to charges 2 and 3.
PENALTY
18. The University and the Student submitted a Joint Submission on Penalty (“JSP”)
recommending the following penalty:
a. a final grade of zero in ECO461H1;
b. a suspension from the University for 5 years commencing from the date the Tribunal
makes its order and;
c. a notation of the sanction on the Student’s academic record and transcript for 5 years
from the date the Tribunal makes its order.

19. The parties also agreed that this case would be reported to the Provost for publication of
a notice of the decision of the Tribunal and the sanctions imposed, with the name of the
Student withheld.
20. Assistant Discipline Counsel provided submissions on the high threshold required for a
Tribunal to deviate from the JSP. As set out in the Appeals Board in The University of
Toronto and S.F. (Case No. 690, October 20, 2014), only truly unreasonable or
“unconscionable” joint submissions should be rejected (para. 22).

21. The Panel also heard submissions regarding the appropriateness of the penalty, reviewed
relevant past decisions of the Tribunal submitted by the University, and considered the
factors set out in University of Toronto and Mr. C. (File 1976/77-3, November 5, 1976),
namely: 1) the character of person charged; 2) the likelihood of repetition of the offence;
3) the nature of offence committed; 4) any extenuating circumstances surrounding the
commission of the offence; 5) detriment to the University occasioned by the offence; and
6) the need to deter others from committing a similar offence.
22. With respect to her character, the Student’s admission of wrongdoing came very early on,
and she provided a candid explanation and provided helpful facts, which incriminated
herself, but was helpful to the University. We noted the Student’s desire to have the issue
resolved as soon as possible. Her early admission of guilt was a demonstration of her
insight.
23. The Panel accepted that the Student was under stress in her personal life, as set out in the
correspondence to her Professor. As noted by the parties, her explanation does not justify
the mistake but helps to explain the circumstances.
24. The Panel also took into consideration the serious and deliberate nature of the offence
and the detriment to the University. With respect to the detriment to the University
occasioned by the offence, and the need to deter others from committing a similar
offence, Assistant Discipline Counsel noted the fact that another individual completed the
exam for the Student, and the commercial element of the incident. The University
stressed the need to send a strong message of deterrence in order to communicate the
seriousness with which these decisions are taken.
25. Academically, the Student has done well, and was close to the completion of her degree.
The Panel agrees that the penalty balances the interest of the University in maintaining
the integrity of the University, and the Student’s interests. The penalty does hold out the
prospect that the student can return if she chooses to do so after the five-year suspension.

26. Having regard to the above, and based on the review of similar cases provided by
Counsel to the University, in the Panel’s view, the joint submission in this case is
reasonable. The Panel agrees that the recommended sanctions are appropriate.
DECISION OF THE PANEL
27. At the conclusion of the hearing, the Panel made the following order:
a. THAT the hearing may proceed in the absence of the Student, who was represented by
counsel;
b. THAT the Student is guilty of one count of the academic offence of personation,
contrary to section B.I.1(c) of the Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters;
c. THAT the following sanctions shall be imposed on the Student:
i. a final grade of zero in ECO461H1;
ii. a suspension from the University for 5 years from the date of this order and;
iii. a notation of the sanction on her academic record and transcript for 5 years from
the date of this order.
d. THAT this case shall be reported to the Provost for publication of a notice of the decision
of the Tribunal and the sanctions imposed, with the name of the student withheld.

28. An Order was signed at the hearing by the Panel to this effect.

DATED at Toronto, September 23, 2021.
Original signed by:
_______________________________________
Michelle S. Henry, Chair
On behalf of the Panel

