1
THE UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
IN THE MATTER OF charges of academic dishonesty made in
September 21, 2005,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code of
Behaviour on Academic Mallers, 1995,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Act, 1971, S.O.
1971, c. 56 as amended S.O. 1978, c. 88

BETWEEN:
THE UNIVERSITY 01!' TORONTO
- andThe Student

Members of the panel:
•
•
•

Mr. Bernard Fishbein, Chair
Professor William Weiss. Faculty Panel Member
Mr. Felix Chow, Student Panel Member

Appearances:
•
•
•

Mr. Robert Centa for the University of Toronto
Professor Betty Roots
Dr. Kristi Gourlay

•
•

The Student
Ms Joy Ann Cohen for The Student

NOTICE OF HEARING AND CHARGES
11]
The Trial Division of the University Tribunal was convened on March 28, 2006 to
consider charges under the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters. 1995
(the "Code''). The Notice of Hearing is dated March 6, 2006. The charges are as follows:

1.

36308 v2

In or about January 2005, you did knowingly forge or in any other way alter or
falsify an academic record, and/or did knowingly utter, circulate or make use of
any such forged, altered or falsified record, whether the record be in print or
electronic form, namely, a University of Toronto Transcript of Consolidated

2

Academic Record, contrary to Section B.L3.(a) of the Code of Behaviour on
Academic Mauer.1·, 1995 ("Code"). Pursuant to Section B of the Code you are
deemed to have acted knowingly if you ought reasonably to have known that you
forged or in any other way altered or falsified any academic record, and/or
uttered, circulated or made use of any snch forged, altered or falsified record.
2.

12]

In the alternative. in or about January 2005, you did knowingly engage in a form
of cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or misrepresentation not
otherwise described in order to obtain academic credit or other academic
advantage of any kind contrary to Section B.1.3.(b) of the Code. Pursuant to
Section B of the Code you are deemed to have acted knowingly if you ought
reasonably to have known that you engaged in a form of cheating, academic
dishonesty or misconduct. fraud or misrepresentation in order to obtain academic
credit or other academic advantage of any kind contrary to Section B.1.3.(b) of the
Code.

Particulars of the charges set out in the Notice of Hearing are as follows:
I.

At all material times you were a student at the University of Toronto in the
Faculty of Arts and Science.

2.

In or about January 2005, you submitted a document to Morgan Stanley, your
employer. that purported to be a University of Toronto transcript in the form of a
Transcript of Consolidated Academic Record.

3.

The document did not accurately reflect the information contained on your
official University of Toronto transcript and academic record.

4.

Rather, the document that you created and/or submitted to Morgan Stanley
misrepresented. altered and falsified many of the marks that you had received for
University of Toronto courses, added courses you had not taken and deleted
others that you had taken, misrepresented your grade point averages, and
misrepresented that you had obtained a Bachelor of Arts degree from the
University of Toronto when you had not. all as reflected in the attached Table 1.

THE HEARING
13]
At the outset of the hearing the tribunal was advised that the Student had agreed to plead
guilty to Charge #1 and the University withdrew Charge #2. The Student and the University
entered into an Agreed Statement of Facts upon which the guilty plea was based. A copy of the
Agreed Statement of Facts is attached hereto as appendix "A".
14]
After reviewing the facts set out in the Agreed Statement of Facts. The Student indicated
her willingness to plead guilty to Charge #l and the panel unanimously agreed after deliberation
to accept the guilty plea. The precise wording of the Student's guilty plea is found in paragraph
12 of the attached Agreed Statement of Facts.
15]

36308 v2

The remainder of the hearing considered the appropriate penalty in the circumstances.

3

[6]
The tribunal was advised that The Student and the University entered into a Joint
Submission on Penalty. A copy of the Joint Submission on Penalty is attached hereto as
Appendix "B".
[7]

The University and the Student jointly submitted that the appropriate penalty was:
J.

(a) that the Tribunal recommend to the President that he recommend to the
Governing Council that The Student be expelled from the University; and
(b) that pending the decision of the Governing Council, that The Student be
suspended from the University for a period of up to five years

2.

The University of Toronto and The Student submit that the Tribunal should report
this case to the Provost who may publish a notice of the decision of the Tribunal
and the sanctions imposed, with The Student's name withheld.

[8]
Mr. Centa for the University presented brief submissions on penalty and led the panel
through several past Tribunal cases in a Book of Authorities, arguing for the appropriateness of
the penalty.
[9]
Ms Cohen, in turn, presented somewhat more lengthy submissions in support of the Joint
Submission on Penalty. Ms Cohen addressed the Tribunal's jurisdiction, her client's character
and her client's desire and need to move on to the next stage of her life.
11 0]

The panel thanked the two parties for their submissions and broke to deliberate.

CONCLUSION

[ l l]
In view of the Joint Submission on Penalty and the fact that both parties had spoken in
support of the Joint Submission, the panel unanimously accepts the Joint Submission and
imposes the jointly submitted sanction noted above. The panel concluded that there was no
reason to depart from the Joint Submission.

DATED at Toronto
March 28, 2006
Chair

3(1308 \2

