Case 1080

   DATE: September 29, 2020

   PARTIES: University of Toronto v.Â X.T.Â (âthe Studentâ)

   HEARING DATES: July 6, 2020, via Zoom

   Panel Members:
   Ms. Erin Dann, Chair
   Professor Margaret MacNeill, Faculty Panel Member
   Ms. Alena Zelinka, Student Panel Member

   Appearances:
   Mr. Robert A. Centa, Assistant Discipline Counsel,Â PaliareÂ Roland
   Rosenberg Rothstein LLP

   Not in Attendance:
   The Student

   In Attendance:
   Ms. Krista Kennedy, Hearings Secretary, Office of the Appeals,
   Discipline and Faculty Grievances, University of Toronto

   The Student was charged under s. B.i.1(a) of theâ¯Code of Behaviour on
   Academic Matters, 1995â¯(the âCodeâ)Â forÂ knowingly alteringÂ or
   falsifyingÂ a document or evidence required by the University of
   Toronto, or uttering,Â circulatingÂ orÂ makingÂ use of any such altered
   or falsified document, namely, a University ofÂ TorontoÂ Verification
   of Student Illness or Injury Form, which he submitted in support of his
   petition for a late withdrawal
   fromÂ aÂ course.Â Alternatively,Â theÂ University charged the
   StudentÂ underÂ s.Â B.i.3(b) of theÂ Code.

   Neither the Student nor a legal representative of the Student appeared
   at the hearing.â¯The University provided evidenceÂ setting out the
   measures takenÂ regarding service.Â Based on that evidence and relying
   onÂ ss.Â 6 and 7 of theÂ Statutory Powers Procedure Act,Â Rules
   9Â andÂ 17 of theÂ University TribunalÂ Rules of Practice and
   ProcedureÂ andÂ the UniversityâsÂ Policy on Official Correspondence
   with Students, theÂ PanelÂ was satisfied that theÂ University
   hadÂ given reasonable notice of the hearingÂ to the Student.Â The
   PanelÂ proceeded to hear the case on its merits in the absence of the
   Student.

   The Tribunal found the Student guilty under s. B.i.1(a) of
   theÂ CodeÂ because the evidence established that theÂ doctor identified
   on the formÂ hadÂ notÂ completed, signed or stampedÂ the form.Â The
   PanelÂ notedÂ the following: (1)Â that the business stamp on
   theÂ formÂ contained the same error in the postal code as on a stamp
   previously affixed to a fraudulentÂ form;Â (2)Â thatÂ the
   doctorâsÂ office confirmed that the Student was
   notÂ hisÂ patient;Â andÂ (3)Â thatÂ the doctorâsÂ authentic stamp
   differed fromÂ the stampÂ affixed to theÂ formÂ submitted by the
   Student.Â According to the Panel, the Studentâs claim that the
   doctorÂ hadÂ met him in the lobby ofÂ aÂ hospital andÂ was prepared to
   complete the formÂ inÂ December 2019 in respect of aÂ prior
   visit,Â withoutÂ performingÂ any physical examination, was not
   credible.Â Given the Panelâs finding, the University
   withdrewÂ theÂ alternativeÂ charge underÂ s. B.i.3(b)Â of theÂ Code.

   In determining the sanction,Â the PanelÂ took into account the
   followingÂ factors:Â (1)Â there was no evidence before the Tribunal
   regarding the Studentâs character other than the facts relating to this
   offence; (2)Â the Student did not have a prior record of academic
   offences andÂ the offence appearedÂ to be an isolated incident;
   (3)Â the University is unable to verify every medical note submitted by
   studentsÂ and itÂ must be able to trust that the students are
   submitting legitimate documentation in support of accommodation and
   late withdrawal requests; (4)Â the StudentÂ hadÂ expressed feeling
   significant stress and anxiety about the delay in his studies
   causedÂ by his suspension; (5)Â the Universityâs concerns that the
   Studentâs conduct implicated medical professionals and undermined the
   integrity of those charged with providing those medical notes, as well
   as the Universityâs procedure for assessing and granting accommodations
   to its students; (6)Â the University and the Tribunal must send a
   strong message to other students that such misconduct is considered a
   serious offence.

   Theâ¯Tribunalâ¯imposed the following sanctions:Â grade assignment of
   zero for course;Â two-year suspension;Â three-year notation on the
   Studentâs transcript;Â report toÂ Provost of the decision and
   sanctionsâ¯imposed,â¯with the Studentâs name withheld.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/29446
