Case No.: 1022
THE UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO

IN THE MATTER OF charges of academic dishonesty filed on May 14, 2019,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters,
1995,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Act, 1971, S.O. 1971, c.56 as amended
S.O. 1978, c. 88

B E T W E E N:

THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
– AND –
J

G

(the “Student”)

Hearing Date: September 20, 2019
Members of the Panel:
Mr. Dean Embry, Barrister and Solicitor, Chair
Dr. Gabriele D'Eleuterio, Faculty Panel Member
Ms. Madison Bruno, Student Panel Member
Appearances:
Ms. Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg Rothstein LLP
Hearing Secretary:
Ms. Jennifer Dent, Associate Director, Office of Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances,
University of Toronto
Not in Attendance:
The Student

I.

CHARGES

1.

The Trial Division of the Tribunal held a hearing on September 20, 2019 to address the
following charges brought by the University of Toronto (the “University”) against the Student
under the Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters (the “Code”):
1. On or about December 16, 2016, you knowingly forged or in any
other way altered or falsified a document or evidence required by the
University, or uttered, circulated or made use of any such forged,
altered or falsified document, namely, a petition including a University
Verification of Student Illness or Injury Form dated December 16, 2016
(“LIN VOSI”), which you submitted to the University in support of your
request for academic accommodation in LIN204H5, contrary to Section
B.I.1(a) of the Code.
2. On or about December 18, 2016, you knowingly forged or in any
other way altered or falsified a document or evidence required by the
University, or uttered, circulated or made use of any such forged,
altered or falsified document, namely, a petition including a University
Verification of Student Illness or Injury Form dated December 18, 2016
(“MAT VOSI”), which you submitted to the University in support of your
request for academic accommodation in MAT236H5, contrary to
Section B.I.1(a) of the Code.
3. In the alternative to charges 1 and 2 above, you knowingly engaged
in a form of cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or
misrepresentation not herein otherwise described, in order to obtain
academic credit or other academic advantage of any kind, in
connection with the submission of each of the LIN VOSI and the MAT
VOSI, contrary to Section B.I.3(b) of the Code.

II.

PRELIMINARY ISSUE: Proceeding in the Absence of the Student

2.

The Student was neither present nor represented. The University filed evidence that the
Student was served with the charges by email at the email address provided by the
Student to the University of Toronto in ROSI on May 14, 2019.

3.

Further, the University filed evidence that on August 26, 2019 the Student was served with
the Notice of Hearing, again via the email address provided in ROSI. On August 27, 2019
the Student was served a hard copy of the Notice of Hearing via courier to the address
provided to the University in ROSI.
1

4.

In addition to the above, the University filed evidence demonstrating that extraordinary
efforts were made to ensure the Student was aware of the hearing and in a position to
attend. In addition to the service of documents outlined above correspondence via email
was sent to the Student on July 26, August 7, September 6, September 16 and September
18, 2019. These emails, which included invitations for discussion, efforts to arrange
scheduling, disclosure of material and reminders of the hearing all went unanswered.

5.

On September 4, 2019 a law clerk from Assistant Discipline Counsel’s firm called the
Student’s phone number as listed on ROSI and spoke to a male who identified himself as
“Ken”. This individual provided an allegedly current telephone number for the Student but
when that number was called a recorded message indicated that the subscriber was
unavailable. Contact information for Assistant Discipline Counsel was provided to Ken but
no response from the Student was ever received.

6.

Given the above the Panel found that the Student was provided with reasonable notice
and proper service as contemplated by sections 14 and 9 of the Tribunal’s Rules of
Practice and Procedure (the “Rules”). As such the hearing proceeded in the Student’s
absence.

III.

SUMMARY OF FACTS/PARTICULARS

7.

The University relied on the affidavit of Michelle Kraus to establish the facts underlying the
charges.

8.

In the Fall 2016 term the Student was enrolled in LIN204H5F – English Grammar I ("LIN
Course") and MAT236HF – Vector Calculus ("MAT Course").

9.

The final exam for the LIN Course was held on December 14, 2016 ("LIN Exam"). It was
worth 38% of the final mark in the LIN Course. The final exam for the MAT Course was
held on December 17, 2016 (“MAT Exam"). It was worth 35% of the MAT Course mark.
The Student did not write either of these exams.

10.

On December 16, 2016, The Student submitted a petition requesting permission to write
the LIN Exam on a deferred date, which was assigned a tracking number 51538 ("LIN
Petition").

2

11.

On December 18, 2016, The Student submitted a petition requesting permission to write
the MAT Exam on a deferred date (“MAT Petition"). The MAT Petition was assigned a
tracking number 51744.

12.

On January 3, 2017, The Student submitted a Verification of Student Illness form to the
Office of the Registrar in support of his LIN Petition which indicated that he had seen Dr.
S.P. Kwong at the Finch-Midland Medical Centre on December 14, 2016 ("December 14,
2016 VSI") and that he was severely incapacitated and completely unable to function from
December 14 to 15, 2016.

13.

On January 6, 2017, The Student submitted a Verification of Student Illness form to the
Office of the Registrar in support of his MAT Petition which indicated that he had seen Dr.
S.P. Kwong at the Finch-Midland Medical Centre on December 17, 2016 "December 17,
2016 VSI") and that he was severely incapacitated and completely unable to function from
December 17 to 18, 2016.

14.

Both of the Student’s petitions were granted and he was permitted to write deferred final
exams in both courses in February 2017.

15.

The Student did not attend to write either deferred final exam.

16.

In June 2018 during a periodic review of retained documentation the VSIs submitted by
the Student raised suspicion insofar as they resembled similar documents that had been
submitted in other matters that had proved to be inauthentic.

17.

Both the December 14, 2016 and the December 17, 2016 VSI bore a signature and stamp
for Dr. S.P. Kwong. On June 28, 2018 Michelle Kraus sent two faxes to Dr. Kwong
requesting that he confirm the Student was seen on December 14 and 17, 2016 and that
Dr. Kwong filled out the VISs. Dr. Kwong responded by fax the same day and indicated
he did “not have [the Student] as a patient in [his] office” and that he “did not fill out the
‘Verification of Student Illness’ form [the Student] for the dates as shown (December 14,
2016 and December 17, 2016)”.

IV.

ARGUMENT OF THE UNIVERSITY

18.

Assistant Discipline Counsel submitted that the Affidavit of Michelle Kraus and
accompanying exhibits clearly demonstrated the Student’s guilt. The Student submitted two
3

VSIs in support of his petitions to defer two exams. When efforts were made to authenticate
the VSI the doctor who allegedly saw the Student unequivocally indicated that he did not
see the Student or sign the VSIs.
19.

The Panel expressed concern that the central piece of evidence – the confirmation from Dr.
Kwong that he had not seen the Student – was available only via hearsay. Assistant
Discipline Counsel referred the Panel to the section 15(1) of the Statutory Powers
Procedure Act which allows the reception of evidence whether or not it is given or proven
under oath or affirmation. The University relied on the fact that the address for Dr. Kwong
noted on the stamp on the VSIs matched the address on Dr. Kwong’s faxed response and
that the CPSO number from the VSIs matched that provided on the response as
circumstantial evidence of the reliability of the evidence. The Panel was satisfied with this
explanation.

V.

CONCLUSION ON CHARGES

20.

Following deliberation and based on the filed affidavit evidence, the Panel concluded that
charges 1, 2 and 3 had been proven.

21.

VI.

Given the findings of guilt, the University withdrew charge 3.

SANCTION
A. Evidence and Submissions on Sanction

22. The University provided affidavit evidence establishing that the Student had previously been
found guilty of an academic offence on November 10, 2015.

Specifically, the Student

admitted plagiarizing an assignment which he had submitted for credit. The Student received
a sanction of zero for the assignment in question and an annotation on his transcript for 12
months.
23. In light of the facts of the present matter and the prior academic offence the University
submitted that an appropriate sanction in this matter would be:
a. A grade of zero in both involved courses.
b. A suspension for up to five years.

4

c. A recommendation of expulsion and;
d. A permanent notation on the Student’s transcript.
24. In support of this position the University pointed to a number of factors:
a. That although the forgery in this case was not particularly serious it
can be assumed that the forged doctor’s notes were purchased.
b. The forgeries in this matter undermined the University’s system
regarding accommodations. The prevalence of forgeries of this kind
necessitated more stringent requirements and therefore make it more
difficult for students who require genuine accommodations.
c. The existence of a prior finding of an academic offence approximately
one year prior to these offences.
d. The Student’s complete disregard for the process as evidenced by the
Student’s failure to respond to any of the correspondence regarding
this matter.
25. With regard to this final factor the University highlighted the fact that there was evidence that
the Student had accessed his email account at such times as would suggest that he received
most of the correspondence and the fact that he led the University on a “merry chase” as
evidenced by the phones calls with “Ken”. The University also highlighted the extraordinary
efforts that had been undertaken to provide notice to the Student and secure his attendance
at the Hearing or participation in the process.
26. The University provided a collection of cases that featured similar offences as well as similar
aggravating features. The University also helpfully provided a summary matrix containing the
salient facts present in the various cases along with the ultimate sanction ordered by the
Tribunal.
27. The factors reflected in this matrix included the type of documents forged or falsified, whether
there had been a prior offence, whether the student attended the hearing, whether there was
an agreed statement of facts or a joint position on sentence and any other extenuating or
aggravating factors.

5

28. The sanctions reflected in the matrix ranged from a zero in the course with a three year
suspension and 4 year notation on the low end and recommendations for expulsion on the
high end.
B. Conclusion of the Panel on Sanction

29.

In this case, the Student has been found guilty of two forgery offences. The Panel declines
to assume or infer that the forged doctor’s notes were purchased. While the Panel heard
submissions and some evidence that the documents in this matter were similar to those in
other cases there was no evidence that the documents in this case were purchased.

30.

The Panel agrees that the fact that the forgeries were used in an accommodation seeking
context and the fact that the Student has a previous finding of guilt in an academic offence
are significant aggravating factors.

31. The Panel does not agree that the Student’s failure to engage with the process is an
aggravating factor. While the Student’s cooperation may have occasioned some degree of
mitigation his lack of participation is not aggravating.
32.

More specifically in relation to this case, there is no evidence that the Student led the
University on a “merry chase”. It is not clear who the individual who identified himself as
“Ken” is or what his relationship to the Student is. More importantly there is no evidence that
the Student was aware of Ken’s interactions with Assistant Discipline Counsel’s firm or
directed Ken to give or not give any information to Assistant Discipline Counsel.

33.

Finally, while there is no doubt that Assistant Discipline Counsel undertook extraordinary
efforts to provide the Student with notice and information and to secure his participation in
the process these efforts are not strictly necessary under the Rules. It is understood and
appreciated that these efforts were undertaken in a laudable spirit of fairness. It would be
unfair, however, to allow these efforts to effectively enhance the sanction by considering a
lack of response to extraordinary efforts aggravating.

34.

No two cases are ever going to be identical. Of all the cases provided, however, the one
that bore the most similarly to the present case was that of University of Toronto v. Y.D.
[Case No. 903, April 26, 2017]. That case dealt with a student who submitted multiple
fraudulent medical forms and included close proximity to an admission of guilt and sanction
6

for a prior offence. The student in that case also did not participate in the disciplinary
process.
35.

As in that case and taking all of the circumstances into account, we find that a 5 year
suspension is appropriate and that it should commence on September 20, 2019.

VII.

ORDER OF THE PANEL

36. At the conclusion of the hearing, the Panel conferred and made the following order:
37. THAT the hearing may proceed in the absence of the Student;
38. THAT the Student is guilty of two counts of forgery, contrary to sections B.I.1(a) of the Code
of Behaviour on Academic Matters;
39. THAT the following sanctions shall be imposed on the Student:
a. a final grade of zero in each of the following courses:
i. LIN204H5 in Fall 2016; and
ii. MAT236H5 in Fall 2016;
b. a suspension from the University for a period of five years, from the
date of this order to September 20, 2024;
c. a notation of this sanction shall be placed on the Student’s academic
record and transcript for a period of 6 years, from September 20, 2019
to September 20, 2025.

7

d. that this case shall be reported to the Provost for publication of a notice
of the decision of the Tribunal and the sanction or sanctions imposed,
with the name of the Student withheld.

DATED at Toronto, December 17, 2019

Dean Embry, Chair

8

