Case 1022

   DATE: December 17, 2019

   PARTIES: University of Toronto v. J.G. (âthe Studentâ)

   HEARING DATE(S): September 20, 2019

   Panel Members:
   Mr. Dean Embry, Chair
   Professor Gabriele D'Eleuterio, Faculty Panel Member
   Ms. Madison Bruno, Student Panel Member

   Appearances:
   Ms. Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg
   Rothstein LLP

   Not in Attendance:
   The Student

   Hearing Secretary:
   Ms. Jennifer Dent, Associate Director, Office of the Appeals,
   Discipline and Faculty Grievances, University of Toronto

   TheÂ StudentÂ was charged withâ¯twoâ¯countsâ¯of forgeryÂ under
   s.Â B.i.1(a)Â of theâ¯Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters, 1995â¯(the
   âCodeâ) on the basis thatÂ heÂ knowinglyÂ submittedÂ two petitions
   includingÂ forgedÂ UniversityÂ Verification of Student Illness or
   Injury FormsÂ in support of two requests for academic
   accommodation.Â TheÂ StudentÂ was charged with a thirdÂ offence, which
   wasÂ laterÂ withdrawn.

   Neither the Student nor a legal representative of
   theÂ StudentÂ appeared at the hearing.Â The University provided
   evidenceÂ demonstrating thatÂ theÂ StudentÂ had beenÂ servedÂ with the
   chargesÂ andÂ Notice of HearingÂ by emailÂ to the email address
   provided in ROSI,Â andÂ thatÂ it had madeÂ extraordinary efforts to
   ensure theÂ StudentÂ was aware of the hearing andÂ wasÂ in a
   positionÂ to attend.Â TheÂ PanelÂ foundÂ that theÂ StudentÂ was
   provided with reasonable notice and proper serviceÂ in accordance with
   sections 14 and 9 of theÂ Tribunalâs Rules of Practice and
   Procedures.Â The hearing proceeded in theÂ StudentâsÂ absence.

   On two occasions, theÂ StudentÂ submittedÂ (1)Â a petition requesting
   to writeÂ an exam on a deferred date,Â andÂ (2)Â aÂ Verification of
   Student IllnessÂ form to the Office of the Registrar in support
   ofÂ each petition. The petitionsÂ pertained to two different
   coursesÂ and wereÂ granted.Â TheÂ StudentÂ did not attend to write
   either deferred final exam.Â DuringÂ the UniversityâsÂ periodic review
   of retained documentation, theÂ StudentâsÂ formsÂ raised
   suspicionÂ becauseÂ they resembled similar documents that had been
   submitted in other matters that had proved to be inauthentic.Â Contrary
   to the information provided in theÂ StudentâsÂ forms, the
   UniversityÂ discovered that the doctor named in the formsÂ had never
   seen theÂ StudentÂ asÂ aÂ patient.

   The PanelÂ concluded that the University had provenÂ all chargesÂ and
   found theÂ StudentÂ guilty of twoÂ counts ofÂ forgery.

   In determiningÂ the sanctions, theÂ PanelÂ noted that there was no
   evidence that theÂ forgedÂ documents had been purchased. It agreed with
   the Universityâs submission thatÂ the fact that the forgeries were used
   in an accommodation seeking context and that theÂ StudentÂ hadÂ a
   previous finding of guilt in an academic offenceÂ wereÂ significant
   aggravating factors.Â According to the Panel,Â the Studentâs failure to
   engage with the processÂ was not an aggravating factor.Â While
   recognizing the Universityâs extraordinary efforts toÂ provide
   theÂ StudentÂ with notice and information to secure his participation
   in the process, theÂ PanelÂ stated that itÂ would be unfair to allow
   these efforts to effectively enhance the sanction by considering a lack
   of response to extraordinary efforts aggravating.

   TheÂ PanelÂ imposed the following sanctions: a final grade of zero in
   each course,Â a five-year suspension,Â a notation of this
   sanctionÂ toÂ be placed on theÂ StudentâsÂ academic record and
   transcript for a period ofÂ sixÂ years;Â andÂ thatÂ theÂ case be
   reported to theÂ ProvostÂ for publication of a notice of the decision
   and the sanctions imposed, with the name of theÂ StudentÂ withheld.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/28858
