3

support of your request for academic accommodation in the Courses,
contrary to Section B.1.1 (a) of the Code;
e. In the alternative to charges 1, 2, 3 and 4 above, on or about November
30, 2015 and December 18, 2015, you knowingly engaged in a form of
cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or misrepresentation
not herein otherwise described, in order to obtain academic credit of other
academic advantage of any kind, in connection with the submission of the
following documents, contrary to Section B.l.3(b) of the Code:
i. Petition form dated November 30, 2015;
ii. Verification of Student Illness or Injury Form dated April 29, 2015;
iii. Notice dated April 29, 2015; and
iv. Medical Absence Report dated April 29, 2015 from NewHope
Health Network. (the "Charges")
3. For the reasons set out in this decision, the Student was found guilty at the Hearing
of four counts of forgery, contrary to section B.1.1 (a) of the Code of Behaviour on
Academic Matters.
Decision to Proceed with the Hearing in the Student's Absence

4. Neither the Student nor any representative on his behalf appeared at the hearing.
The Tribunal waited past the scheduled commencement time before beginning
the proceeding.
5. Ms. Harmer requested that the Tribunal proceed with the hearing in the Student's
absence and presented evidence in support of that submission.
6. The affidavit of Virginia Fletcher, a law clerk at Paliare Roland Rosenberg
Rothstein LLP, was tendered and admitted into evidence.
7. Ms. Fletcher's affidavit detailed the repeated communications sent by the
University to the Student regarding the Charges. The Student appears to have

4

ignored all of these communications and chosen the route of non-participation in
the disciplinary process.
8. In the months of March and May 2016, eight emails were sent by the University
to the Student's email account on file in order to schedule a Dean's meeting to
discuss the allegations at issue. The Student did not attend either of the two
Dean's meetings that were scheduled.
9. Notice of the Charges was both emailed and couriered to the Student in
November 2016. Ms. Fletcher's evidence showed that the Student accessed the
University's website as recently as December 2, 2016, which was after the Notice
of Charges was delivered to him. Furthermore, Ms. Fletcher's evidence
established that the copy of the Notice of Charges that was delivered to the
Student's home address on record was retrieved by someone from the mailbox.
10.0n February 2, 2017, the Office of Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances,
couriered the Notice of Hearing to the Student's home address on record. The
courier package was received and signed for by the Student.
11. On February 2, 21 and 22, 2017, the University emailed the Student the affidavit
evidence that it relied upon at the Hearing. None of these emails bounced back.
12. Ms. Fletcher provided evidence of other efforts made by the University to contact
the Student via social media. These efforts were also ignored. Finally, Ms.
Fletcher's evidence established that the Student was very likely in the
Mississauga region during the period of time when the University was
communicating him. His home address on record, where the courier packages
were delivered, was in Mississauga.
13. The University must satisfy its burden under the Rules to provide proper notice of a
Hearing before a proceeding will be held without the student's participation.
However, at the same time, a student cannot derail the disciplinary process by
remaining silent and refusing to participate.

5

14. In this case, based on the evidence presented, the Tribunal was satisfied that the
University had discharged its obligation to provide proper notice to the Student
regarding the Charges and the hearing scheduled for February 28, 2017. Therefore,
the Tribunal determined that it would proceed with the Hearing in the Student's
absence.
The University's Evidence

15. The University submitted affidavit evidence from the following witnesses:
a. Alvaro Nosedal Sanchez, the professor for STA260H5;
b. Ramya Thinniyam, the professor for STA258H5;
c. Michael Ho, the professor for EC0349H5; and
d. Laura Ferlito, the Assistant Registrar, Academic Standards & Petitions at
the University of Toronto Mississauga ("UTM").
16.All of the aforementioned affidavits were properly served on the Student in
accordance with the Rules and were admitted into evidence by the Tribunal. The
University also tendered a supplementary affidavit from Ms. Ferlito but this was not
admitted into evidence as it was not served on the Student in accordance with the
Rules. The decision not to accept Ms. Ferlito's supplementary affidavit as evidence
did not affect the Tribunal's ultimate decision on the merits.
17. The University also called Lucy Gaspini, the Manager of Academic Integrity at the
UTM, as its witness. Ms. Gaspini assisted the Tribunal by reviewing the Student's
academic transcript and giving evidence regarding various notations on it as they
related to the Courses.
Events Giving Rise to the Charges

18. The University's evidence, which was unchallenged, established that the Student
was enrolled in the three Courses during the Winter 2015 semester. Between April

6

21 and 23, 2015, the Student was supposed to write the final exams for each of the
Courses.
19. The Student did not write the final exams on the scheduled dates. Instead, he
submitted a petition to write a deferred exam for each Course. The petitions were
granted and the final exams were rescheduled to be written during the April Special
Deferred Exam Period between April 28 and May 2, 2015.
20. The Student did not end up writing the final exams on the rescheduled deferral
dates. As a result, the Student's GPA fell below 1.50 and he was placed on
academic probation.
21. In the Summer 2015 semester, the Student performed poorly in the courses he was
enrolled in and was suspended for one year due to his poor academic standing. The
suspension was for the period of September 1, 2015 to August 31, 2016.
22. Following his suspension, the Student submitted three on-line petition forms, Petition
Nos. 45410, 45411 and 45412, requesting late withdrawal without academic penalty
from STA260, EC0349, and STA258. These were the three courses from the
Winter 2015 semester where the Student failed to write the deferred final exams.
The online Petitions for late withdrawal were submitted on November 30, 2015.
23. In his Petitions, the Student explained that he did not write the deferred exams
because he had not recovered in time from the illness that caused him to miss the
original exam dates. He also stated that he did not appreciate the impact that
missing the exams would have on his university career until he was suspended for a
year.
24. The day after he submitted the Petitions, on December 1, 2015, the Student visited
the Registrar's Office and indicated that he would not be submitting any supporting
medical or other documentation for the November Petitions.

7

25. Despite what he indicated at the time that he submitted the Petitions, the Student did
end up providing supporting documentation. On December 18, 2015, he submitted
the following documents:
a. A Verification of Student Illness or Injury form dated April 29, 2015,
bearing the name and signature of John P. Winston, ENT Specialist,
CPSO # 77179. The Verification Form purported to verify a severe
incapacity on the Student's academic functioning from April 29, 2015 to
May 5, 2015;

b. A handwritten note bearing the signature of John P. Winston, dated April
29, 2015. The note purported to describe symptoms experienced by the
Student on April 29, 2015 and prescribed two weeks of rest; and
c. A Medical Absence Report from NewHope Health Network dated April 29,
2015, bearing a stamp for John P. Winston, M.D. ENT Specialist.
26. The University attempted to authenticate the supporting documentation submitted by
the Student but was unable to.
27. In her affidavit, Ms. Ferlito described searches that she performed of the College of
Physicians and Surgeons of Ontario ("CPSO") website for the registration number
(#77179). This was the number that was given for Dr. John P. Winston on the
supporting documents submitted by the Student. However, the number did not
match a Dr. John P. Winston on the CPSO website. A further search on the website
for a "Dr. John P. Winston" yielded no results.
28. Ms. Ferlito also tried searching online for the NewHope Health Network and the
address listed for the Network on the Student's documentation. Her searches failed
to turn up any results.
29. Next, Ms. Ferlito tried calling the telephone number listed for the NewHope Health
Network on the Medical Absence Report. Her first call was not answered and there
was no voicemail. Her second call went to a voicemail box that was full.

8

30. Finally, in February, 2016, the Student emailed Ms. Ferlito and advised that his
doctor had said that he had already contacted the University. Ms. Ferlito responded
to the Student's email to tell him that there had been no contact from a doctor.
3 1. There were no further communications from the Student.
Decision of the Tribunal

32. Ms. Harmer, on behalf of the University, submitted that the Student belatedly came
to realize the consequences of missing the final exams for the Courses when he was
suspended for a year in September 2015. He then decided to apply for late
withdrawal from the three Courses in an attempt to avoid the suspension.
33. The University alleged that, in support of his application, the Student submitted false
documents, specifically: (1) the Petition forms dated November 30, 2015; (2) the
Verification of Student Illness or Injury Form dated April 29, 2015; (3) the Notice
dated April 29, 2015; and (4) the Medical Absence Report dated April 29, 2015 from
NewHope Health Network.
34. The Tribunal deliberated and after considering the evidence presented by the
University and Ms. Harmer's submissions, it unanimously determined that the
Student had submitted false documents in an attempt to mislead the University to
grant his Petitions for late withdrawal from the Courses.
35. The evidence submitted by the University to support its allegations against the
Student was compelling. Ms. Ferlito's evidence cast significant doubt on the
authenticity of the so-called medical documents written by a "Dr. John P. Winston"
and obtained from the "NewHope Health Network".
36. It also defied logic for the Student to have remained silent for seven months about
his alleged illness after missing the deferred final exams. If he had actually obtained
the documents in late April 2015, around the time that the deferred final exams were
to have been written, one would reasonably expect him to petition for
accommodation and provide the documentation at that time.

9

37. In addition, if the Student actually had been seen by a doctor in April 2015 and had
the supporting documentation that he provided in support of his Petitions, it is
difficult to explain why he initially told the University that he would not be submitting
any supporting documentation for his Petitions. The fact that the Student went
completely silent after his email exchange with Ms. Ferlito in February 2016 also is
inconsistent with the documentation being authentic.
38. The compelling evidence submitted by the University, coupled with the Student's
failure to attend the Hearing and offer any explanation for the suspicious
circumstances surrounding his Petitions and supporting documentation, left no doubt
for the Tribunal that the Student was guilty of four counts of forgery, contrary to
section B.1.1 (a) of the Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters.
The Penalty

39. Ms. Gaspini gave evidence for the University at the sanction phase of the Hearing.
She explained that on December 1, 2015, the Student admitted guilt for obtaining
unauthorized assistance in an unrelated course he took during the 2014 academic
year. December 1st was exactly one day after the Student submitted the false
Petitions and only a few weeks before he submitted false documents in support of
his Petitions.
40. The University provided the Panel with a letter sent to the Student on December 10,
2015, describing the offence for which he had admitted his guilt and outlining the
sanction that was imposed on him. That penalty consisted of a mark of zero on the
assignment where he obtained the unauthorized assistance, a further reduction of 8
marks to his final grade in the subject course and a notation on his academic record
for one year.
41. Importantly, the December 101h letter cautioned the Student about learning from his
transgression. The letter spoke to the seriousness of the offence committed by the
Student and spoke to the University's belief that "there will be no repetition of similar
behaviour in the future." The final paragraph of the letter contained the following

10

warning "I trust that you have had time to reflect on the seriousness of this incident
and will not commit another academic offence."
42. Despite these warnings, one week after receiving the letter relating to his guilt for
obtaining unauthorized assistance in a course, the Student proceeded to submit
false documents in an effort to deceive the University and take advantage of a
process designed to accommodate students who experience legitimate hardships.
43. In the Tribunal's view, this type of conduct warrants a strong rebuke and serious
sanction.
44. The University provided the Tribunal with a number of precedents for cases where
students were found guilty of submitting forged or falsified documents. The
University's submission was helpful in outlining characteristics of the precedents that
were either similar or dissimilar from the present case.
45. While the precedents revealed that there is a range in the duration of the suspension
imposed as a penalty for these types of cases, a majority of the cases involved a five
year suspension.
46. In this case, the Panel felt that a five year suspension was warranted. The
aggravating circumstances that were present, including the close proximity of the
admission of guilt and sanction for the prior offence, the fact that the Student
submitted multiple false documents and the Student's non-participation in the
disciplinary process, all weighed in favour of a penalty towards the upper end of the
range. The Tribunal also took account of the importance for the University in
maintaining the integrity of the petition process.
47. Accordingly, the Tribunal imposed the following penalty on the Student:
a. That the Student receive a final grade of zero in each of the following
courses:
i.

EC0349H5S in Winter 2015;

