Case #903

   DATE: April 26, 2017
   PARTIES: University of Toronto v. Y.D. ("the Student")

   Hearing Date(s): February 28, 2017

   Panel Members:
   Mr. Shaun Laubman, Lawyer, Chair
   Professor Graeme Hirst, Faculty Panel Member
   Mr. Daniel Lazzam, Student Panel Member

   Appearances:
   Ms. Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland
   Barristers
   Ms. Lucy Gaspini, Manager, Academic Integrity and Affairs, Office of
   the Dean, University of Toronto - Mississauga

   In Attendance:
   Mr. Christopher Lang, Director, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty
   Grievances, University of Toronto
   Mr. Sean Lourim, Technology Assistant, Office of the Governing Council

   Not in Attendance:
   The Student

   Trial Division - s. B.i.1(a) of Code - forged or falsified evidence -
   student falsified petitions for accommodation for final exams of three
   courses - student did not attend hearing - University provided proper
   notice of hearing - finding of guilt - zero on courses, five year
   suspension, six year notation, publication of the decision with the
   name of the Student withheld

   The Student was charged with four offences of forgery or falsifying
   evidence under s. B.i.1(a) of the Code, and alternatively, academic
   dishonesty under s. B.i.3(b) of the Code. The charges related to
   falsified petitions for accommodation and Verification Of Illness forms
   in three courses. Attempts to find or contact the clinic and doctor
   mentioned in the documents were futile.

   The Student did not attend the hearing. The Tribunal found that the
   University had discharged its obligation to provide the Student proper
   notice of the hearing. The University had tried to contact the Student
   by e-mail to their institutional address, courier to the Student's home
   address on record, and through social media. The Tribunal thus decided
   to proceed in the Student's absence.

   The Tribunal found the student guilty of the forgery charges, and did
   not need to decide the academic dishonesty charge. In determining the
   penalty, the Tribunal noted that the Student had a prior guilty plea on
   an unrelated charge and had been warned not to re-offend, and yet had
   committed the present falsifications one week after this warning. The
   Student's falsifications took advantage of the process designed to
   accommodate students who experience legitimate hardships. The
   University has an interest in maintaining the integrity of this
   process. These factors, along with the Student's non-participation in
   the disciplinary process and the multiple findings of guilt, argued for
   a penalty in the upper end of the range for such offences. The Student
   received a grade of zero in each of the three courses, a five year
   suspension, and a six year notation, and publication of the decision
   with the name of the Student withheld.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12936
