Case 1224

   DATE:

   May 16, 2022

   PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v. A.S. ("the Student")

   HEARING DATE:

   March 25, 2022, via Zoom

   PANEL MEMBERS:

   Ms. Alexi Wood, Chair
   Professor Marc Laflamme, Faculty Panel Member
   Ms. Giselle Dalili, Student Panel Member

   APPEARANCES:

   Ms. Tina Lie, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg
   Rothstein LLP
   Mr. William Webb, Co-Counsel, Paliare Roland Rothstein Rosenberg LLP

   NOT IN ATTENDANCE:

   The Student

   HEARING SECRETARY:

   Ms. Krista Kennedy, Administrative Clerk & Hearing Secretary, Office of
   Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances

   The Student was charged with six counts of knowingly forging or in any
   other way altering or falsifying an academic record, and/or uttering,
   circulating or making use of such forged, altered or falsified record
   contrary to s. B.i.3(a) of the‚ØCode of Behaviour on Academic Matters,
   1995‚Ø(the ‚Code‚). The Student was also charged under s. B.i.3(b) of
   the Code on the basis that the Student knowingly engaged in a form of
   cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or misrepresentation
   not otherwise described in the Code in order to obtain academic credit
   or other academic advantage. In the alternative, the Student was
   charged with three counts of knowingly forging or in any way altering
   or falsifying a document or evidence required by the University, or
   uttering, circulating or making use of such forged, altered or
   falsified document contrary to s.B.i.1(a) of the Code, and one count of
   knowingly engaging in a form of cheating, academic dishonesty or
   misconduct, fraud or misrepresentation not otherwise described in the
   Code in order to obtain academic credit or other academic advantage
   contrary to s.B.i.3(b) of the Code. In the further alternative, the
   Student was charged with three counts of knowingly engaging in a form
   of cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or
   misrepresentation not otherwise described in the Code in order to
   obtain academic credit or other academic advantage contrary to
   s.B.i.3(b) of the Code.

   Neither the Student nor a representative for the Student appeared at
   the hearing. In considering whether to proceed with the hearing in the
   Student‚s absence, the Panel considered the section 6 and 7 of the
   Statutory Power Procedures Act (‚SPPA‚), rules 9 and 17 of the
   University Tribunal‚s Rules of Practice and Procedure (‚Rules‚), and
   the Policy on Official Correspondence with Students. The Panel received
   evidence from the University outlining various attempts to contact the
   Student about the charges and the hearing. The University provided
   evidence that they attempted to contact the student via email, courier,
   and telephone using the contact information contained in the
   University‚s Repository of Student Information (‚ROSI‚). The University
   did not receive any communication from the Student. The University also
   provided evidence that the Student‚s email account was last accessed
   approximately two weeks before the hearing date. The Panel noted that
   the University is not required to provide actual notice, and although
   it is likely the Student had actual notice of the hearing, the Panel
   found that the University complied with the Rules and demonstrated
   reasonable steps to notify the Student of the charges and the hearing.
   The Panel therefore determined that it would proceed to hear the case
   on its merits in the absence of the Student.

   The Panel received affidavit evidence of three Professors, the Manager
   of the University Transcript Centre (the ‚Manager‚), and the Dean‚s
   Designate for Academic Integrity with Student Academic Integrity in the
   Faculty of Arts and Science (‚Dean‚s Designate‚). The Dean‚s Designate
   also testified at the hearing. The Panel noted that the Student applied
   to the University‚s School of Graduate Studies (‚SGS‚). As part of his
   application, he asked two Professors of the Department of Physiology to
   provide reference letters. One of the Professor‚s requested the Student
   provide him with a CV and a personal statement, the other Professor
   requested a copy of the Student‚s CV and a transcript. The Student
   provided a CV, a personal statement, and a copy of his transcript
   (‚Purported Transcript‚) to the Professors. The Professors relied on
   these documents to prepare their letters of recommendation for the
   Student‚s application to the SGS. At the time, the Professors were
   unaware that the CV and the transcript provided by the Student
   contained false statements. After the Student submitted their
   application to SGS, the admissions committee discovered that the
   Student was never on the Dean‚s List (as purported in the CV) and that
   the Student had altered the letter grades on his transcript. The Panel
   also noted that the Student provided another falsified version of his
   transcript to an international education agent that helps Canadians
   apply to universities in Australia and New Zealand. The Panel noted
   that the key difference between the falsified transcript and Purported
   Transcript was that the falsified transcript contained grades through
   the Winter 2021 semester. Both these allegations were forwarded to
   Student Academic Integrity for investigation. The Dean‚s Designate met
   with the Student about the allegations. The Dean‚s Designate testified
   that he gave the Student the warning required under the Code, and that
   the Student understood the warning and was given an opportunity to ask
   questions. The Student attempted to explain that he submitted the wrong
   document when he submitted the Purported Transcript. The Student told
   the Dean‚s Designate that he created the Purported Transcript in 2020
   to show students what an unofficial transcript would look like. The
   Panel noted that this explanation was not a credible as the Purported
   Transcript contained marks through 2021, when it was supposedly created
   in 2020. The Panel was satisfied, based on clear and convincing
   evidence, that the Student committed offences under s.B.i.3(a) and
   s.B.i.3(b). The Student was, therefore, found guilty of six counts of
   knowingly forging or in any other way altering or falsifying an
   academic record, and/or uttering, circulating or making use of such
   forged, altered or falsified record and one count of knowingly engaging
   in a form of cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or
   misrepresentation not otherwise described in the Code in order to
   obtain academic credit or other academic advantage. The University
   withdrew the remaining charges made in the alternative and the further
   alternative.

   In determining sanction, the University asked the Panel to consider the
   factors in determining sanction as outlined in University of Toronto v.
   Mr. C (Case No. 1976/77-3, November 5, 1976). The Panel noted that the
   Student engaged in multiple acts of planned deceit that included lying
   to his professors and claiming he was on the Dean‚s List and creating
   two forged transcripts. The Panel further noted that the Student
   registered a domain and sent a fake email containing one of the forged
   transcript. The Student‚s coordinated and planned deceit must be
   condemned in the strongest terms. The Panel found that imposition of
   the harshest penalty available to the Tribunal was appropriate in the
   circumstances. The Panel noted that this penalty was in keeping with
   other cases where students had forged transcripts including University
   of Toronto and K.L. (Case No. 979, October 30, 2018) and University of
   Toronto and Q.W. (Case No. 963, September 7, 2018). In both cases, the
   Tribunal recommended expulsion. The Panel imposed the following
   sanctions: immediate suspension from the University for a period of up
   to five years or until Governing Council makes its decision on
   expulsion, whichever comes first; a five-year notation on the
   transcript; a recommendation that the Student be expelled, as per s.
   C.ii(b)(i) of Code; and a report to the Provost for publication.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/30501
