Case 1104

   DATE: June 24, 2021
   PARTIES: University of Toronto v. G.G.

   HEARING DATE: March 22, 2021, via Zoom

   Panel Members:
   Ms. Ira Parghi, Chair
   Professor Gabriele D'Eleuterio, Faculty Panel Member
   Ms. Elizabeth Frangos, Student Panel Member

   Appearances:
   Ms. Lauren Pearce, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland
   Rosenberg Rothstein LLP
   Ms. Sonia Patel, Articling Student, Paliare Roland Rosenberg Rothstein
   LLP

   In Attendance:
   Ms. Krista Kennedy, Administrative Clerk & Hearing Secretary, Appeals,
   Discipline and Faculty Grievances

   Not in Attendance:
   The Student

   Theâ¯Studentâ¯was charged underâ¯s. B.i.1(d)â¯of theâ¯Code of Behaviour
   on Academic Matters, 1995â¯(theÂ âCodeâ) on the basis thatÂ he
   knowingly represented the ideas of another, or the expressions of the
   ideas of another, asÂ hisÂ own work in an assignment.â¯In the
   alternative, theâ¯Studentâ¯was charged under s.â¯B.i.3(b) of
   theâ¯Codeâ¯on the basis that theâ¯Studentâ¯knowingly engaged in a form
   of cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or
   misrepresentationâ¯in order toâ¯obtain academic credit or other
   academic advantageâ¯in connection withâ¯an assignment.

   Neither the Student nor a legal representative of
   theâ¯Studentâ¯appeared at the hearing.â¯The PanelÂ waited fifteen
   minutesÂ after the hearing was scheduled to commenceÂ to allow for the
   Student toÂ appear.Â The Universityâsâ¯Policy on Official
   Correspondence with Studentsâ¯provides that students enrolled at the
   University must maintain current contact information in their record in
   the Universityâs record of academic history and student information
   (âROSIâ) andâ¯must update that information if it changes.â¯Rule 9 of
   theâ¯Rulesâ¯provides thatâ¯service can beâ¯effectedâ¯viaâ¯email to the
   studentâs email address in ROSI.â¯The University provided evidence that
   theâ¯Studentâ¯had been served at his ROSI-listed email address with
   theâ¯charges,Â a disclosure brief,â¯and notice of hearing.â¯Counsel for
   the University provided further evidence that their office attempted to
   contact the StudentÂ via FacebookÂ message, on two separate
   occasions,Â advising theÂ StudentÂ that Counsel had sent an important
   email to their University email addressÂ and to check the
   email.Â Counsel for the University also attempted to contact the
   Student via telephone to the number provided to the University in ROSI.
   An individual answered the phone and Counsel asked if they had reached
   the Student, identifying them by name. The individual asked for Counsel
   to identify themselves which theyÂ did and then again asked if they had
   reached the Student.Â The individual hung up. Counsel called back and
   attempted to explain the purpose of the call, but the individual hung
   up before Counsel could offer the explanation.Â At a later date,
   Counsel attempted to call the phone number again but received a message
   from the operator indicating that the person whom Counsel had called
   was not taking calls; the line then disconnected.Â Theâ¯Studentâ¯was
   subsequently provided an opportunity to provide submissions in relation
   to the request ofâ¯the Provost of the Universityâ¯for the hearing to
   proceed electronicallyâ¯due to the COVID-19 pandemic. Theâ¯Studentâ¯did
   not respond to this request and the hearing was ordered to proceed
   electronically.â¯The charges,â¯notice,
   emailÂ correspondence,Â andÂ FacebookÂ messages toÂ theâ¯Studentâ¯went
   unanswered.â¯â¯The Panel found that reasonable notice of the hearing
   had been provided to the Student in accordance with theÂ RulesÂ and
   theÂ SPPA, therefore the Panel ordered that the hearingÂ proceed in
   theâ¯Studentâsâ¯absence.

   Regarding the charges laid under sB.i.1(d)â¯of theâ¯Code,
   theâ¯PanelÂ consideredÂ ofâ¯the Professor who taughtâ¯the course for
   which the assignment in question was submitted.â¯The
   PanelÂ receivedÂ evidenceÂ from the Professor that the Student
   submitted theÂ assignment via Turnitin.com and the
   TurnitinÂ OriginalityÂ Report indicated that the
   StudentâsÂ assignmentÂ had aÂ 41% similarity index to other sources in
   the Turnitin database.Â Based on this Originality Report, the
   ProfessorÂ provided evidence that he reviewedÂ the Studentâs assignment
   more closely and observed that itÂ didÂ notÂ citeÂ any
   outsideÂ sources.Â TheÂ ProfessorÂ providedÂ further evidence thatÂ the
   assignmentÂ containedÂ significantÂ portions that closely matched
   portions of two outside sources that were identified by the Turnitin
   Originality Report.Â The Panel noted that the ProfessorâsÂ evidence
   closely mapped overÂ tenÂ passages in the Studentâs assignment that
   wereÂ copied verbatim or nearly verbatimÂ and that the outside sources
   were not cited.Â On the evidenceâ¯presented by the
   University,â¯theâ¯Panel found thatâ¯on the balance of
   probabilitiesâ¯theâ¯Studentâ¯was guilty ofâ¯one count ofÂ knowingly
   representing the idea of another, or the expressions of the ideas of
   another,Â contrary to section B.i.1(d) the Code.Â Given the Panelâs
   finding, the University withdrew the charge underâ¯s.â¯B.i.3(b).

   In determining sanction,â¯theâ¯Panel considered the principles and
   factors relevant to sanctionâ¯discussed inâ¯University of Toronto and
   Mr. C.â¯(âMr. C. factorsâ)â¯and determined thatâ¯it was important to
   consider the serious nature of the offence, the great detriment to the
   University and the strong need to deter others from committing similar
   offences.â¯The Panel noted that this offence is serious in nature and
   causes great detriment to the University and its students.Â The Panel
   further considered theâ¯Tribunalâs case law, includingÂ University of
   Toronto and Y.GÂ (Case No. 802, September 28,
   2015),â¯whichâ¯indicatesÂ that plagiarism corrodes academic integrity
   at the Universityâ¯and undermines the relationship of trust between the
   University and its students. The Panel found that, for these reasons,
   plagiarism is considered a very serious offence that requires a serious
   penalty.â¯Upon review of the relevant case law and the Mr. C. factors,
   the Panelâ¯found that theÂ sanction proposed by the UniversityÂ was
   appropriate.â¯Without the Studentâs participation,â¯the Panelâ¯found no
   evidence of mitigating circumstances or factorsâ¯that would prevent the
   Panel from imposing a serious penalty.â¯Theâ¯Panelâ¯imposedâ¯the
   following sanctions:â¯a final grade of zero in the course;â¯aâ¯two-year
   suspension;â¯aâ¯three-year notation on the transcript; andÂ a report to
   the ProvostÂ for publication.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/29937
