THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
The University Tribunal
Trial Division

IN THE iVIATTER of charges of academic dishonesty made on August 7, 2008;

AND IN THE MATTER of the University of Toronto Code ofBehaviour on Academic
1Hatters, 1995;
ANDINTHEl\tIATTERofTheUniversityofTorontoAct, 1971, S.0.1971,c. 56as
amended S.O. 1978, c. 88

BETWEEN:

UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO (the "University")
- and -

A

A

Members of the Panel:

Ms. Laura Trachuk

wfr. Adil D'Sousa
Professor Graham Trope
Appearances:

AIII AIIII

Mark Lapowich, for
Linda Rothstein and Lily Hanner, for the University of Toronto

DECISION
[1]

A hearing of the Trial Division of the University Tribunal was convened on September
10, 2009 to consider charges brought against .AIII AIIII under the University of
Toronto's Code of Behaviour on Academic }vlatters (the "Code"). A preliminary
decision had been issued on January 14, 2009.

Charges

[2]

On August 7, 2008 Aa Aal was charged as follows under the Code of Behaviour
on Academic Matters, 1995 (the "Code):
CHARGES
Note: Wherever in the Code of Behaviour on Academic 1.vfatters, 1995 ("Code")
an offence is described as depending on "knowing", the offence shall likewise be
deemed to have been committed if the person ought reasonably to have known.

1. On or about April 23, 2008 you knowingly forged or in any other way altered
or falsified any document or evidence required by the University, or uttered,
circulated or made use of any such forged, altered or falsified document, whether
the document be in print or electronic form, namely the final exam submitted by
NIIII A - in MGTC03H- Principles of Finance, contrary to section B.I. l .{a)
of the Code.
2. In the alternative, on or about April 23, 2008, you knowingly forged or in any
other way altered or falsified any academic record or uttered, circulated or made
use of any such forged, altered or falsified record, whether the record be in print
or electronic form, namely the final exam submitted by NIIII AIIII in
MGTC03H - Principles of Finance, contrary to section B.I.3.(a) of the Code.

3. In the alternative, on or about April 23, 2008, you knowingly engaged in any
form of cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or misrepresentation
not here and otherwise described, in order to obtain academic credit or other
academic advantage of any kind, in marking the final exam of N. . AIIIIII in
MGTC3H - Principles of Finance, contrary to section B.I.3.(b) of the Code.
[3]

The following charges we~e laid against Mr. AIIIIII on November 21, 2008:

CHARGES
Note: Wherever in the Code of Behaviour on Academic i\,fatters, 1995 ("Code")
an offence is described as depending on "knowing", the offence shall likewise be
deemed to have been committed if the person ought reasonably to have known.
1. On or about November 29, 2007 you knowingly forged or in any other way
altered or falsified any document or evidence required by the University, or
uttered, circulated or made use of any such forged, altered 01· falsified document,
whether the document be in print or electronic form, namely the marks for the
mid-term exam submitted by NIii Allllin MGTB03H - Management
Accounting, contrary to section B.I.l.(a) of the Code.

2

2. In the alternative, on or about November 29, 2007, you knowingly forged or in
any other way altered or falsified any academic record or uttered, circulated or
made use of any such forged, altered or falsified record, whether the record be in
print or electronic fonn, namely the marks for the mid-te1m exam submitted by
in MGTB0JH - Management Accounting, contrary to section
B.1.3.(a) of the Code.

NIIIIIAIIII

3. In the alternative, on or about November 29, 2007, you knowingly engaged in
any form of cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or
misrepresentation not herein otherwise described, in order to obtain academic
credit or other academic advantage of any kind, in marking the mid-term exam of
in MGTB03H -Management Accounting, contrary to section
B.I.3.(b) of the Code.

NIii Allll

4. On or about pecember 10, 2007 you knowingly forged or in any other way
altered or falsified any document or evidence required by the University, or
uttered, circulated or made use of any such forged, altered or falsified document,
\vhether the document be in print or electronic form, namely the marks for the
final exam submitted by
in MGTB03H - Management
Accounting, contrary to section B.I.1 (a) of the Code.

NIIII AIIII

N-

5. In the alternative, on or about December 10, 2007, you knowingly forged or in

any other way altered or falsified any academic record or uttered, circulated or
made use of any such forged, altered or falsified record, whether the record be in
print or electronic form, namely the marks for the final exam submitted by
~ in MGTB03H - Management Accounting, contrary to section B.I.3.(a) of
the Code.

6. In the alternative, on or about December 10, 2007, you knowingly engaged in
any form of cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or
misrepresentation not herein otherwise described, in order to obtain academic
credit or other academic advantage of any kind, in marking the mid-te1m exam of
N. . AIIII in MGTBOJH-Management Accounting, contrary to section
B.I.3.(b) of the Code.
Decision
[4]

At the hearing of this matter on September 10, 2009, Mr. Alllland the University
submitted an agreed Statement of Facts in vvhich Mr.
acknowledges that he was
a teaching assistant for two courses in which his brother was emolled. He did not advise
the professors responsible for the courses of that fact. He also acknowledges that he
changed his brother's marks in both courses as charged. He pleads guilty to charge 2 of
the charges laid on August 7, 2008 and to charges 2 and 5 of the charges laid on
November 21, 2008.

AIII

3

10/09/2009 16:07 FA.X

!4!003

(5J After reviewing the agreed Statement of Facts the panel has decided to accept Mr,

Ala's piea of guilty to three of the charges, We therefore find that A-AIIII did,
on two occasions, commit offences in violation of section B.i.(3)(a) of the Code. We also
find that he committed an offence in violation of section B.i.(3)(b).
[6] We will hear submissions on penalty when the hearing reconvenes.

Dated at Toronto, October 9, 2009

,..._

Graha

chuk for the panel
Trope

Adil D'So~a

4

