Case #601

   DATE: March 8, 2011
   PARTIES: University of Toronto v. S.P.
   Hearing Date(s): September 14, 2010
   Panel Members:
   Andrew Pinto, Chair
   Dr. Roslyn Thomas-Long, Faculty Member
   Amy Gullage, Student Member
   Appearances:
   Robert Centa, Assistant Discipline Counsel for the University
   Professor John Brown, Deanâs Designate
   Camille Labchuk, DLS for the Student
   S.P., the Student
   Trial Division â s. B.I.1(d); s. B.I.1(f); s. B.I.1(b); s. B.I.3(b) of
   Code â plagiarism â concocted sources â purchased essayâ Agreed
   Statement of Facts â guilty plea â finding of guilt â no prior academic
   offences â aggravating factors â actively misled the University â
   campaign of concerted deception â see CHK case â see Ms. L â see A.M. â
   see A.K. â see Ms. T -Â  final grade of zero in the Course; five-year
   suspension; seven-year notation on transcript; report to Provost
   Student charged with four offences under s. B.I.1(d), s. B.I.1(f), s.
   B.I.1(b) and s. B.I.3(b)Â  of the Code. The charges related to the
   allegations that the Student purchased a customized essay, knowingly
   represented the work of another as his own, included others ideas and
   expressions that were not his own, received unauthorized assistance in
   writing the essay, contained incorrect references, and committed
   plagiarism. The matter proceeded on an Agreed Statement of Facts. The
   Student pled guilty to the charges under s. B.I.1(d), s. B.I.3(b) andÂ
   s. B.I.1(b). The University then withdrew the charge under s. B.I.1(f)
   and stated that if the Panel convicted the Student of either of the
   charges under s. B.I.1(d) or s. B.I.1(b), they would withdraw the
   charge under s. B.I.3(b). On the basis of the Agreed Statement of Facts
   and the documents contained in a Joint book of Documents submitted, the
   Panel accepted the Studentâs guilty plea on the two charges. The
   University withdrew the remaining charges. The Studentâs representative
   submitted there were mitigating factors and that the appropriate
   sanction was a three to four year suspension from the University. The
   Student indicated he was President of a University Studentsâ
   Association and was devoted to this extra-curricular activity. They
   also alluded to helping his sibling and that his fatherâs business
   overseas was in trouble. The Student admitted he made a bad choice. In
   submissions concerning the sanction, Discipline Counsel noted the
   aggravating circumstances of the Studentâs conduct, namely the
   commercial aspect of the fraud, the planning and deliberation of the
   Studentâs actions, and the many opportunities to reconsider their
   actions and come clean that the Student missed, having instead
   repeatedly attempted to mislead the University. The Discipline Counsel
   submitted that the Studentâs actions to mislead the University when
   confronted amounted to a concerted campaign of deception. Discipline
   Counsel noted that three other classmates of the Student had also been
   involved in a discipline proceeding regarding the submission of
   purchased essays from the same facility as the Student, the CHK case.
   Reasons for the CHK case had not been released and therefore could not
   be considered at the time of the hearing. Discipline Counsel nor the
   Studentâs counsel could comment on that panelâs reasoning. Discipline
   Counsel concluded by characterizing the case as involving one of the
   most serious academic offences alongside an aftermath of deception and
   little evidence of mitigating circumstances. The Studentâs
   representative characterized the Student as a first time offender who
   had eventually cooperated with the University and pled guilty. The
   representative further characterized the recommendation for expulsion
   as excessive and inconsistent with the Panelâs previous rulings. The
   representative also acknowledged that the Student continued to mislead
   the University after the commission of the offense, but submitted the
   Student was very unlikely to reoffend. The Panel looked at the Sopinka
   factors as articulated in the Mr. C. decision. The Panel noted the lack
   of prior disciplinary history of the Student. In looking at the 12
   cases presented by the parties in the Joint Book of Policies and Joint
   book of Documents that involved a one time offender being recommended
   for expulsion, the Panel noted no case involved a recommendation of
   expulsion for a one-time offender. The Panel noted that a one-time
   offence can not never result in a recommendation of expulsion, but
   rather that the nature of the one-time offence and the other
   circumstances would have to be very grave to warrant a recommendation
   for expulsion. The Panel further noted that short of a crisis event for
   an extracurricular commitment where a student had little choice but to
   be involved, it would be difficult to find that involvement would
   amount to extenuating circumstances material to a sanction decision.
   The Panel noted the Studentâs actions to mislead the University and
   agreed with Discipline Counselâs characterization of the misconduct as
   a campaign of concerted deception, but held that this was insufficient
   to warrant a recommendation for expulsion. The Panel also took issue
   with the CHK decision, a decision in which students submitted purchased
   essays having, each had two prior academic offenses, and received,
   respectively, five-year suspensions as sanctions. The Panel questioned
   whether the majority was correct. The Panel distinguished the Studentâs
   case from the submitted cases of Ms. L, A.M., A.K., and the CHK
   decisions holding that the Studentâs conduct was not as egregious as
   the studentsâ actions within those cases. The Panel noted, though, that
   the Studentâs actions were more egregious than the student in the Ms. T
   decision, who received only a two-year suspension for a purchased essay
   conviction. The Panel held that the Studentâs deception was a
   significant aggravating factor that warranted the imposition of the
   strongest suspension available. The Panel imposed a final grade of zero
   in the Course, a five-year suspension from the University, a seven year
   notation on the Studentâs transcript, and that a report to the Provost
   be issued.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12757
