THE UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO

IN THE MATTER OF charges of academic dishonesty made on March 13, 2014,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic
Matters, 1995,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Act, 1971, S.O. 1971, c. 56 as
amended S.O. 1978, c. 88
BETWEEN:
UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
- and -

REASONS FOR DECISION
Hearing Dates: December 3, 2014; March 16, 2015, April 6, 2015, and November 6,
2015

Members of the Panel:
Mr. Paul Schabas, Lawyer, Chair
Professor Markus Bussmann, Faculty of Applied Science and Engineering, Faculty
Panel Member
Mr. Sean McGowan, Student Panel Member
Appearances:
Ms. Tina Lie, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland, Barristers
Dr. Kristi Gourlay, Manager, Office of Student Academic Integrity, Faculty of Arts and
Science
Mr. Samuel Greene, Legal Case Worker, Downtown Legal Services
Mr. Zachary Al-Khatib, Legal Case Worker, Downtown Legal Services
Ms. ~
the Student

9,

In Attendance:
Mr. Christopher Lang, Director, Appeals Discipline and Faculty Grievances
Ms. Krista Osbourne, Administrative Assistant, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty
Grievances
Mr. Xu Dong Chang, Observer

Ill - Reasons on penalty
[1]

This panel reconvened on November 6, 2015 to hear submissions on
penalty following the panel's written decision dated June 22, 2015, finding
the student guilty of academic misconduct arising from having an
individual impersonate her at an exam. At the conclusion of the
submissions the panel deliberated and concluded that the appropriate
penalty was to direct that the student receive a mark of zero in the
course, STA220, and to recommend expulsion. We indicated that
reasons would follow. These are our reasons.

[2]

The student committed a serious offence, which was planned and
calculated. She went ahead with the offence even after she was made
aware that the University was concerned about her identity at an earlier
exam. She had previously received help and support from her College
when she was having academic challenges and knew how to seek help.
Following the discovery by the University that someone had impersonated
her, the student did not acknowledge her guilt, but instead permitted the
University to be misled about her involvement, up to and including the
hearing into her conduct.

[3]

She has demonstrated no remorse for her conduct, nor did the student
lead any evidence of mitigating factors that might have explained, or
diminished, her culpability. Although the student attended throughout the
hearing, including the submissions on penalty, no evidence was called
respecting penalty, and we only heard submissions from counsel.

[4]

Counsel for the University directed us to several authorities dealing with
personation cases, as well as the Provost's Guidance on Sanctions. We
are not bound by the Provost's Guidance, and we recognize that every
case is different and imposing a penalty involves consideration of each
student's own circumstances. However, we also recognize the
importance of relative consistency in meting out punishment for academic
offences, and so are influenced by the guidance and prior decisions in
coming to our own conclusion on the appropriate penalty for Ms.

W-

[5]

As University counsel noted, the Provost's Guidance tells students that,
absent exceptional circumstances, expulsion will be sought as the penalty

for impersonation at an exam. Counsel for the University submitted that
there were no exceptional circumstances here, and sought expulsion.
[6]

She supported her submission by having regard to the factors relevant to
punishment set out by John Sopinka in the case of the University of
Toronto and Mr. C. (Trial: 1975/76-04) - the leading and well-accepted
decision laying out the appropriate factors to consider in determining an
appropriate penalty. Consideration of each of the factors does in fact
support a penalty at the highest end of the range:
1. Character - In this case, this is an exacerbating factor. The student did
something very dishonest, which was planned in advance. She was
dishonest when confronted with the conduct including, we found, at the
hearing before us. Despite several opportunities to show insight and
remorse, she failed to do so. We have nothing before us in terms of
good character evidence or even an expression of regret at the penalty
hearing that would counterbalance these facts.
2. Likelihood of Repetition - While this is a first offence, because we have
no indication that the student appreciates her wrongful conduct we have
no comfort that she will not reoffend. At its highest for the student this
factor is neutral.
3. Nature of the Offence - Personation is a very serious offence. It can be
difficult to catch (but for the anonymous email in this case, Ms. 11111's
actions may never have been exposed), and strikes at the heart of
academic integrity by threatening the evaluation process and fairness to
other students. The Provost warns students of this in the Guidelines
noted above. [See also
Case 617, para 23, Aug 25, 2011] In this
case, as noted, the planned and deliberate nature of the offence is a
serious further aggravating factor, as is the commercial nature of the
actions, paying the individual who impersonated her, both before and
after the event. [See
supra, paras 29-30 regarding the concern

ca,

ca,

over commercialization of cheating and the need for strong denunciation
of it.]
4. Extenuating circumstances -As noted, there is no evidence of any
extenuating circumstances.

5. Detriment to the University - See comments above relating to the
serious nature of the offence of personation.
6. Deterrence - There is no question that such conduct cannot be tolerated
and it is important that this message be conveyed to others, especially
because of the difficulty in detecting the offence.
[7]

Counsel for the University reviewed with us a number of cases involving
impersonation, many of which, like this case, involved a first time
offender, but where expulsion was nevertheless ordered. Those cases
were GI and 5'11(Case 734 and 735 2014), v,,a (Case 585, 2010),
(Case 623, 2011),
(Case 627, 2012), CIIII (Case 617 2011), ~
(Case 663, 2013), ll\.f and
(Case 583 with Case 578, 2010), J9
(Case 465, 2008), and
(Case 531, 2009). Of those nine cases,
expulsion was recommended in six. For the three in which a suspension
was ordered, there were mitigating factors absent here - including a lack
of premeditation (£9), or a plea of guilty and demonstration of remorse
(c;a, '9), or compelling personal circumstances (<=a).

J:9

ca
LIii
ca

[8]

The submissions on behalf of the student, very ably put to us by Mr.
Greene, were to the effect that a lengthy suspension was an appropriate
and strong enough denunciation of his client's conduct. He argued that
this was a first offence, that Ms.
was relatively young at the time, and
that her mother was ill - a fact not contested by the University. He noted
that some cases had recognized and mitigated penalties due to personal
pressures faced by students and urged the same here. However, the
evidence does not take us that far. Ms.
had time, the opportunity,
and the knowledge of how to deal with missing an exam when the
opportunity arose to fly home to visit her mother. She had interacted with
her College on academic issues previously, and could have acted
differently. There is no evidence that she was under such pressure, or
emotional stress, that she was compelled to do what she did. Such
evidence simply isn't before us.

1111

1111

[9]

lll's

Mr Greene submitted that the "elephant in the room" was Ms.
failure to plead guilty, and that this should not be an aggravating factor,
citing Ruby on Sentencing (8th ed.), at para 6.1. We agree with his
proposition, and do not regard the failure to plead guilty as an aggravating
factor; a plea of not guilty and contesting an offence, however, is not an
indication of remorse, which can be a mitigating factor.

r

[1 OJ It was also urged on us that an important factor in determining penalty is
the prospect of rehabilitation, and that expulsion should only be
recommended where there is no such prospect. While we agree that Ms.
prospects of rehabilitation should be considered, we have nothing
on which to conclude that there is some prospect of rehabilitation. As
noted , we have no expression of remorse or sign of insight by her into her
conduct, no evidence that this was an isolated uncharacteristic act
caused by some overwhelming external factors or personal stress that
would explain such conduct, or that she is taking steps to acknowledge
her wrongdoing.

W 's

[11] According ly, we concluded that the appropriate sanctions in this case
should be:
(a)

a final grade of zero in the course STA220H1;

(b)

Ms.
be immediately suspended from the University of Toronto
for a period of up to 5 years from the date of this order or until
Govern ing Council makes its decision on expulsion, whichever
comes first, and that a corresponding notation be placed on her
academic record and transcript; and

(c)

the Tribunal recommends to the President of the University that he
recommend to the Governing Council that Ms.
be expelled from
the University; and

(d)

that this case be reported to the Provost, with Ms.
name
withheld, for publication of a notice of the decision of the Tribunal
and the sanctions imposed .

9

9

Dated at Toronto, this

W 's

li~
/ day of December, 2015

(

Mr. Paul Schabas, Chair

