Case No. 1317
THE UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
IN THE MATTER OF the revised charges of academic dishonesty made on May 12, 2022,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters,
1995,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Act, 1971, S.O. 1971, c. 56 as amended
S.O. 1978, c. 88
B E T W E E N:
UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
- and X

Z

REASONS FOR DECISION
Hearing Dates: May 27, 2022, via Zoom
Members of the Panel:
Ms. Dena Varah, Chair
Professor Marc Laflamme, Faculty Panel Member
Ms. Madison Kerr, Student Panel Member
Appearances:
Ms. Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg Rothstein LLP
Mr. William Webb, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg Rothstein LLP
Hearing Secretary:
Mr. Christopher Lang, Director, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances
Not In Attendance:
Mr. X
Z

2

1.

The Trial Division of the University of Toronto Tribunal was convened on May 27, 2022

(the “Hearing Date”) to consider the charges brought by the University of Toronto (the
“University”) against X

Z

(the “Student”).

PART 1 - THE CHARGES
2.

The Student is charged with two offences under the University of Toronto Code of

Behaviour on Academic Matters, 1995 (the “Code”):
a)

You knowingly forged or in any other way altered or falsified an academic record, and/or
uttered, circulated or made use of such forged, altered or falsified record, namely, a
document that purported to be a Transcript of Consolidated Academic Record from the
University of Toronto bearing document number 0959322, contrary to section B.I.3(a) of
the Code; and

b)

You knowingly falsified an academic record, and and/or uttered, circulated or made use of
such a falsified record by falsely claiming to have graduated from the University of
Toronto, contrary to section B.I.3(a) of the Code.

3.

Assistant Discipline Counsel advised that Charges 1 and 2 are in the alternative. That is,

if the Student is found guilty of either Charge 1 or Charge 2 the other will be withdrawn.

PART 2 - PROCEEDING IN THE ABSENCE OF THE STUDENT
4.

Assistant Discipline Counsel attended the Hearing Date and the Student did not.

5.

Assistant Discipline Counsel relied on the Affidavit of Ms. Samanthe Huang affirmed May

19, 2022. Ms. Huang affirmed that she served the Student with a letter regarding the charges on
January 11, 2022 to the email address that the Student had provided in Repository of Student

3

Information (“ROSI”).
6.

Ms. Huang also noted that she received an email that copied the Student from Assistant

Discipline Counsel requesting to schedule an electronic hearing on May 27, 2022. Ms. Huang
subsequently served the Student with that same Notice along with the copy of the letter regarding
the charges.
7.

Ms. Huang did not receive any bounce back messages to any of her emails.

8.

Assistant Discipline Counsel also relied on the Affidavit of Ms. Sharon Hawley, an

assistant at Paliare Roland Rosenberg Rothstein LLP. Ms. Hawley also sent various letters and
other communications to the Student at the email address provided for in ROSI. Ms. Hawley also
sent a letter on February 1, 2022 to the permanent address contained in the contact information in
ROSI. ROSI contained a mailing address listed as being no longer current, meaning that the
Student had either allowed the currency to lapse or had actively removed the address.
9.

Finally, Assistant Discipline Counsel tendered the Affidavit of Mr. Andrew Wagg affirmed

May 12, 2022. Mr. Wagg is the Incident Report Architect, Information Technology Services of
the University of Toronto. Mr. Wagg indicated that the last time someone accessed the email
account listed in the Student’s account in ROSI was March 23, 2020.
10.

The Student did not answer any correspondence of the University.

11.

Although it does not appear that the Student accessed his email address, the Panel

concluded that pursuant to the Statutory Power and Procedures Act and the University Tribunal’s
Rules of Practice and Procedure, the Student received reasonable notice of the hearing date.

4

12.

The University Tribunal’s Rules of Practice and Procedure provide that service is effected

by sending a copy of the document to the Student’s mailing address contained in ROSI or by
emailing a copy to the email address contained in ROSI.
13.

The Panel was therefore satisfied to proceed with this hearing in the absence of the Student.

PART 3 - THE FACTS UNDERLYING THE CHARGE
14.

The Student first enrolled at the University of Toronto, Scarborough in the fall of 2015.

He has earned four credits towards his degree.
15.

The last time the Student was enrolled in a class at the University of Toronto was in the

2016 fall session. During this time, the Student earned four credits with an accumulative GPA .98.
16.

Assistant Discipline Counsel tendered the Affidavit evidence of Ms. Brenda Anderson

affirmed May 18, 2022. Ms. Anderson is the Assistant Registrar, Client and Enrollment Services
at the University of Toronto. As Ms. Anderson explained, the Registrar’s Office/Enrollment
Services oversees student financial aid and awards, student accounts, client services, transcripts
and student systems. The Transcript Centre is part of these services.
17.

On February 26, 2020 the Transcript Centre received an email from Pansy Xu, Admissions

Officer at the University of New South Wales (“UNSW”), Sydney. Ms. Xu asked the Transcript
Centre to verify 22 applications that UNSW had received from University of Toronto students.
18.

One of the transcripts that Ms. Xu asked the Transcript Centre to verify was a transcript of

2019 with the following identifiable information:
a) X

Z

;

5

b) Birth Day/Month:

;

c) Address:

;

d) Campus: University of Toronto, Scarborough;
e) Student Number:
f) Ontario Education Number (“OEN”).:

(Defined herein as the “UNSW Application Transcript”)
19.

The UNSW Application Transcript also stated that the University of Toronto had conferred

an Honours Bachelor of Arts on the Student in June 2019.
20.

On review, the Transcript Centre noted that the student number did not exist and that one

of the course codes was inaccurately listed. It was also clear that the UNSW Application
Transcript was not a true copy of the Student’s academic record and the University of Toronto had
never conferred a degree on him.
21.

After receiving this information, Ms. Anderson searched ROSI for a student with personal

information that matched the personal information in the UNSW Application Transcript.
22.

According to Ms. Anderson, the personal information in the UNSW Application Transcript

matched only one student, being the Student. The name, date of birth, and campus in the UNSW
Application Transcript all match the personal information in the Student’s ROSI records. The
address in the UNSW Application Transcript matches the lapsed mailing address from the
Student’s ROSI.
23.

The student number and OEN number are incorrect, but there is no student who matches

both of those numbers. There is a student with the same OEN number, but there are no significant

6

similarities between that student’s academic record and the UNSW Application Transcript.
24.

The UNSW Application Transcript does not match the true transcript of the Student or

accurately reflect his academic record. In particular:
a)

The true transcript reflects that the Student never received a degree from the
University of Toronto, but the UNSW Application Transcript states that the
University of Toronto conferred a degree on him in June 2019;

b)

The true transcript reflects the Student’s attendance at the University of Toronto
from Fall 2015 to Fall 2016 but the UNSW Application Transcript has the Student
attending the University of Toronto from Fall 2015 to Winter 2019;

c)

The true transcript states that the Student earned 4.00 credits with a cumulative
GPA of .98. The UNSW Application Transcript states that he earned 21 credits and
had a cumulative GPA of 2.77; and

d)

The courses in the two transcripts are different with the exception of the four
courses the Student actually took. Even in those courses, the grades and marks are
higher in the UNSW Application Transcript than in the true transcript.

PART 4 - FINDINGS ON LIABILITY
25.

The panel accepts that the Student submitted or made use of the UNSW Application

Transcript to gain admission to UNSW Sydney.
26.

The panel also accepts that the UNSW Application Transcript is a forged document. It

purports to be an official document from the University of Toronto that accurately reflected the
Student’s academic record but, in fact, bore no relationship to reality. The Student earned a paltry
4.0 credits at the University of Toronto and never graduated. He submitted a transcript where he

7

allegedly earned 21.0 credits and obtained a degree from the University of Toronto. The only true
portions of the transcript were the Student’s name and other identifying information (but for the
Student and OEN numbers, which were also misrepresented).
27.

The Panel was satisfied that Charge 1 was amply supported by the underlying facts. As a

result, Charge 2 was withdrawn.

PART 5 - SUBMISSIONS ON PENALTY
28.

Assistant Discipline Counsel submitted that the appropriate sanction for a forged degree

is:
(a)

Immediate suspension from the University for a period of up to five years;

(b)

that the Tribunal recommend to the President of the University that the President
recommend to Governing Council that the Student be expelled from the University; and

(c)

the Tribunal report this case to the Provost who may publish a notice of the decision of this
Tribunal with the Student’s name withheld.

29.

Assistant Discipline Counsel provided the Tribunal with a chart of 23 cases involving

charges of falsified transcripts or other academic records. In all but two of the cases, the Tribunal
recommended expulsion. In one of the cases, a degree had already been conferred and was
cancelled as were 1.50 transfer credits (the University of Toronto and C.L. (Case No. 822, March
22, 2016)). In the other, the University of Toronto and J. L. (Case No.959, September 19, 2018),
there was a Joint Submission on Penalty providing for a five-year suspension and an undertaking
by the Student not to re-apply to the University for readmission. The Tribunal in that case
determined that it was reasonable to accept the Joint Submission of Penalty. It did note that

8

expulsion is a common penalty in cases of falsified academic records.

PART 6 - THE DECISION ON PENALTY
30.

The University of Toronto v. Mr. C. Case No. 1976/77-3, November 5, 1976 decision sets

out the factors to consider in penalty decisions:

31.

a)

The character of the person charged;

b)

The likelihood of repetition of the offense;

c)

The nature of the offense committed;

d)

Any extenuating circumstances surrounding the commission of the offense;

e)

The detriment to the University occasioned by the offense; and

f)

The need to deter others from committing a similar offense.

In this case, there is no evidence of the character of the person charged, the likelihood of

repetition of the offence or extenuating circumstances. The Student did not participate in the
process or provide any explanation with regard the use of the forged transcript. As a result, the
Tribunal must focus on the nature of the offence, the detriment to the University and the need to
deter others from committing a similar offence.
32.

On review of the Tribunal decisions presented by Assistant Discipline Counsel, it is clear

that forgery of a transcript is amongst the most serious offences a student can commit. Forged
transcripts and other academic records negatively impact the entire University community. They
undermine the credibility and standing of the institution and of their peers who are attempting to

9

legitimately use their transcripts and degrees.
33.

The Student was attempting to use a forged transcript in order to obtain admission to the

UNSW Sydney in Australia. These actions were a deliberate attempt by the Student to obtain the
benefit of an academic record and degree that he did not earn. Admissions at UNSW Sydney did
a spot check of a number of transcripts from the University. Had the Student’s transcript not been
included in this batch, it is likely that the forgery would have slipped through undetected. This
demonstrates the crucial need for general deterrence as these offences are committed with ease and
often without detection.
34.

This Tribunal is therefore satisfied that the appropriate penalty is as requested by Assistant

Discipline Counsel.

PART 7 - THE PANEL ORDERED AS FOLLOWS:
a)

the Tribunal proceed in the absence of the Student;

b)

the Student is immediately suspended from the University for a period of up to five
years from the date of the order or until Governing Council makes its decision on
expulsion, whichever comes first, and that a corresponding notation be placed on
his academic record and transcript;

c)

the Tribunal recommend to the President of the University that the President
recommend to Governing Council that the Student be expelled from the University;
and

d)

the Tribunal report this case to the Provost who may publish a notice of the decision
of this Tribunal with the Student’s name withheld.

10

Dated at Toronto this 24th day of August, 2022

Original signed by:
________________________________________
Dena Varah, Chair
On behalf of the Panel

