UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
TRIAL DIVISION
IN THE MATIER OF charges of academic misconduct made on October 9, 2013;
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic
Matters, 1995;
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University o/Toronto Act, 1971, S.O. 1971 , c. 56 as amended
S.Q. 1978, C. 88.

BETWEEN:
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO

-AND-

REASONS FOR DECISION

Hearing Date: February 20, 2014

Members of the Panel:
Ms. Roslyn Tsao, Barrister and Solicitor, Chair
Professor Charmaine Williams, Faculty of Social Work, Faculty Panel Member
Ms. Lucy Chau, Student Panel Member
Appearances:
Ms. Tina Lie, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Barristers
Ms. ~-~
the Student, via Skype

Kl,

In Attendance:
Ms. Lucy Gaspini, Manager, Academic Integrity and Affairs, University of Toronto
Mississauga
Ms. Sinead Cutt, Administrative Assistant, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances

-2-

1.

The hearing of this matter was conducted via Skype, on consent, as the Student
currently resides in Taiwan.

2.

The Student confirmed that she had had the opportunity to seek legal advice and
representation but declined to have such representation at the hearing.

3.

The Student and the University submitted an Agreed Statement of Facts ("ASF") and
Joint Book of Documents. The ASF was signed by the Student and University. In the
ASF, the Student admits to committing the academic offence of knowingly using or
possessing an unauthorized aid under section B.I.l(b) of the Code (the "Offence").

4.

The Student was charged on October 9, 2013 of committing the Offence on February
14, 2013 during a quiz in LIN100Y5Y. The Student was also charged with an
alternative offence contrary to section B.I.3(b) of the Code, which charge was
withdrawn following a finding of guilt of the Offence.

5.

The Student admits to having used four small sheets of paper that contained notes
relevant to the quiz and did so knowing that such notes were not permitted during the
qmz.

6.

As such, the elements of the Offence have been admitted and the Panel accepts the
Student's guilty plea to the Offence and notes the alternative charge as being
withdrawn.

Penalty
7.

The Student and the University submitted a Joint Submission on Penalty, proposing
the following sanctions:
(a)

The Student will receive a final grade of zero in the course LIN100Y5Y;

(b)

The Student to be suspended for three (3) years from the University of
Toronto, commencing on the day the Tribunal makes its order;

-3-

(c)

A notation of the sanction to be recorded on the Student's academic record and
transcript from the date of the order until the Student's graduation; and

(d)

The case to be reported to the Provost for publication, with the name of the
Student withheld.

8.

The Student and the University also submitted an Agreed Statement of Facts on
Penalty with documents. The relevant circumstances in this matter are as follows:
(a)

The Student is 27 years old and came to Canada when she was 20 years old
from Taiwan. The Student commenced studies at the University of Toronto in
2010.

(b)

There are two prior findings of guilt for the Student for two separate offences:
(i)

In June, 2011, the Student committed a similar offence by bringing 4
pieces of papers with handwritten notes into an examination.

The

Student was confronted with the allegations and admitted her guilt at
the Dean's Designate level on November 17, 2011. The Student was
sanctioned with a mark of zero for the examination and an annotation
on her transcript for 6 months.

The Student was warned of the

seriousness of the incident and that any subsequent allegation of
academic offence would be referred directly to the Tribunal.
(ii)

On November 15, 2011, the Student submitted an assignment m
LIN200H5F which, she subsequently admitted, had been prepared with
unauthorized assistance. Again, the Student admitted her guilt to the
Chair of the Department at the earliest opportunity. Because the Chair
was not aware of the earlier offence (as it had not been disposed of at
that time), he imposed a sanction of a mark of zero for the Assignment.
Subsequently in February 2012, after the Student had failed to return a
signed Acknowledgment of Receipt of the letter with the sanction, the

-4-

Vice-Dean sent a further letter to the Student after having also
discovered that there was an earlier finding of guilt. The penalty was
not amended despite this new information but the Student was again
warned of the seriousness of any subsequent academic offence.
9.

After the commission of the within Offence in February, 2013, the Student met with
the Dean's Designate on June 19, 2013 and pleaded guilty to the Offence at that time.
The Student explained that she had been on academic probation and was worried
about a coursework, that she had struggled with depression and anxiety since she was
a teenager, had been on medication for many years and was isolated.

10.

For this hearing, the Student has provided letters and reports from healthcare
professionals which state:
(a)

In about April, 2013, the Student sought assistance from the UTM Health and
Counselling Centre with Dr. Dunstall;

(b)

On June 7, 2011, the Student was brought to Credit Valley Hospital by UTM
police for suicidal ideation and depression after meeting with her academic
counsellor. The emergency physician certified that the Student was unable to
care for herself at that time; and

(c)

At that time, she was referred to a psychiatrist, Dr. M Singh, and, following
her discharge on June 9th, she continued as an outpatient of Credit Valley
Hospital treated by Dr. Singh with counselling and medication. Dr. Singh
diagnosed the Student with Major Depressive Disorder.

11.

The Student left Canada on August 15 th to return to Taiwan and currently lives with
her family in Taiwan. She advises that she is under the care of a physician in Taiwan
whom she sees monthly for continuing treatment for her depression and anxiety.

- 512.

The Student is currently looking for work and not engaged in studies but has indicated
her intention to return to studies, at the University of Toronto, at the end of any
suspension.

13.

It is not contradicted that the Student has a history of anxiety and depression both
before coming to Canada and more recently, as diagnosed based on the reports from
Dr. Dunstall and Dr. Singh since at least Spring 2013.

14.

In response to questions from the Panel, the Student confirmed that she had been
treated for depression in Taiwan before coming to Canada but that she had not sought
medical assistance when she came to Canada until Spring 2013.

15.

The University has been fair in its position that, but for the following mitigating
circumstances, the penalty that it would have sought would have been more serious
than the 3-year suspension that is presented to the Panel:
(a)

The Student has pleaded guilty at the earliest opportunity and has cooperated
fully with the process, including attending the hearing by Skype after moving
back to Taiwan;

(b)

The Student's seeking of and compliance with medical treatment for her
anxiety and depression after the Offence and since returning to Taiwan
demonstrates the Student's acknowledgment of the seriousness of her situation
and her attempts to address same; and

(c)

The Student has expressed her remorse both immediately after committing the
Offence and throughout the process, including at the hearing.

16.

The University has also rightly submitted that "while the Student's depression and
anxiety are relevant to the appropriate sanction, her medical condition neither excuses
nor justifies her unacceptable conduct". (see ~

(2013), paragraph 12)

-617.

The Panel views the Student's mental health challenges as relevant considerations to
penalty insofar as fashioning an appropriate disposition for this Student. We wish to
add that the Student has admitted that she was aware at the time of the offence that
her conduct consisted of academic dishonesty and, as such, her mental health history,
in itself, is not a mitigating factor for penalty on the basis that her ability to know
"right from wrong" was impaired and can excuse knowingly dishonest behaviour.

18.

Given the circumstances and documentation provided, the Panel accepts the Joint
Submission on Penalty and orders accordingly.

Had the Student not cooperated

throughout nor provided insight into her personal circumstances, the Panel would not
have hesitated to impose a more serious penalty given the prior two (2) offences.
19.

The Panel has expressed its sincere hope that the Student will succeed in her goals of
completing her education and continue to access medical and counselling supports.
The Panel felt that her remorse was genuine and that the medical reports that were
submitted were helpful to the Panel in determining penalty.

'11-,
Dated at Toronto, this

/ (

day of March, 2014.

