Case 657

DATE:

   September 11, 2012

PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v.Â the Student

Hearing Date(s):

   August 23, 2012

Panel Members:

   Ms. Roslyn Tsao, Chair
   Prof. Ato Quayson, Faculty Member
   Mr. Blake Chapman, Student Member

Appearances:

   Mr. Robert Centa, Assistant Discipline Counsel for the University
   Ms. Mary Phan, DLS for the Student

In Attendance:

   The Student
   Dr. Kristi Gourlay,Â Manager of Office of Academic Integrity, Faculty
   of Arts and Science
   Mr. Christopher Lang, Director, Appeals, Discipline and
   FacultyÂ Grievances

   Student charged under s.B.i.1 (d) and s.B.i.1 (f) of the Code . The
   charges related to allegations that the Student submitted an essay
   containing passages taken verbatim from unattributed sources and
   concocted references to disguise plagiarism. The Student pleaded guilty
   to the charges and the Panel found the Student guilty under s. B.i.1
   (d) and s. B.i.1 (f). The Parties submitted a Joint Submission on
   Penalty (âJSPâ). In considering the JSP, the Panel invited the Parties
   for further submissions, stating that it was disinclined to accept the
   JSP for the following reasons: (1) the Panel was troubled by the prior
   findings of guilt for the same offence and in particular, the second
   offence committed only a month before the current offence; (2) the
   Student was able to complete other courses because the Deanâs designate
   had kindly deferred the commencement of suspension for the second
   offence to allow the Student to complete the term; and (3) without a
   JSP, the Panel would be inclined to consider expulsion. After hearing
   further submissions, the Panel reluctantly accepted the JSP. In further
   submissions, both Parties cited Tsicos which endorsed the principle
   that a JSP ought not to be rejected unless the requested penalty âwould
   be contrary to the public interest or bring the administration of
   justice into disreputeâ. The Panel considered extending the period of
   notation but stated that âtinkeringâ with the terms of a JSP would be
   difficult to reconcile with the test in Tsicos. The Panel imposed a
   grade assignment of zero for the course; a five-year suspension;
   theÂ later of either a six-year notation on transcript or until
   graduation; and report be issued to the Provost.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12800
