Case 837

   [1]Case 837 - Appeal

DATE:

   August 31, 2016

PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v M.A.

Hearing Date(s):

   April 25, 2016

Panel Members:

   Paul Morrison, Chair
   Markus Bussman, Faculty Member
   Jeffery Couse, Student Member

Appearances:

   Rob Centa, Assistant Discipline Counsel
   Luisa Ritacca, Counsel for the Student
   Kasha Visutskie, Academic Integrity Officer

In Attendance:

   Christopher Lang, Director, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances
   M.A., the Student
   Note: OVERTURNED ON APPEAL
   The Trial Division of the Tribunal held a hearing to consider charges
   brought by the University against the Student under the Code of
   Behaviour on Academic Matters.
   Student charged with offences under s. B.i.1(c), s. B.i.1(d), and s.
   B.i.3(b) of the Code . The charges related to allegations that the
   student knowingly had someone personate them in an exam and represented
   the work of another as their own. The University proceeded on the
   charges under s. B.i.1(c) , the charges under s. B.i.1(d), were
   disposed of.
   The Hearing proceeded on the basis of an Agreed Statement of Facts
   (ASF). In the ASF the Student admitted to hiring another person to take
   a test for her. The Student further admitted that she was scheduled to
   meet with the Deanâs Designate for Academic Integrity in the Faculty of
   Arts and Sciences to discuss the allegations of personation but that
   instead of attending the meeting herself, she engaged the imposter to
   personate her at the Meeting, which they did. On the basis of the ASF,
   the Panel entered a finding of guilty.
   The parties presented a Joint Submission on Penalty recommending a
   grade of zero in the courses; a five-year suspension; and a permanent
   notation on the Studentâs academic record and transcript. The Student
   also agreed to voluntarily withdraw and not reapply to the University.
   The Panel noted the presence of mitigating factors including the
   Student's cooperation, full admission, and young age at the time of
   offence. The Panel accepted the penalty of a grade of zero in the
   course and suspension but not the permanent notation on the Student's
   record. In light of the Studentâs agreement to withdraw voluntarily
   from the University and not to reapply in the future, the Tribunal was
   concerned that a permanent notation of the sanction would have the
   effect that the penalty would approximate expulsion from the
   University. The Panel considered that a sanction with this effect was
   too severe in the circumstances.
   The Panel found the Student guilty of one count of personation contrary
   to s. B.i.1(c) of the Code and one count of academic dishonesty
   contrary to s. B.i.3(b) of the Code . The Panel imposed a penalty of a
   grade of zero in the course, a five-year suspension; a five-year
   notation on her transcript; and that a report be issued to the Provost.
   [2]View Case

References

   1. https://live-the-office-of-the-governing-council.pantheonsite.io/media/13072
   2. file:///media/12911
