Case 1457

FILE:

   Case # 1457 (2023-2024)

DATE:

   August 11, 2023

PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v. S.K.K (‚the Student‚)

HEARING DATE(S):

   June 8, 2023, via Zoom

PANEL MEMBERS:

   F. Paul Morrison, Chair

   Professor Richard Day, Faculty Panel Member

   Giselle Sami Dalili, Student Panel Member

APPEARANCES:

   Tina Lie, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg
   Rothstein LLP

   Joseph Berger, Co-Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg Rothstein LLP

HEARING SECRETARY:

   Samanthe Huang, Quasi-Judicial Coordinator & Hearing Secretary, Office
   of Appeals, Discipline and Faculty of Grievances

   The Student was charged under s. B.i.1(b) of the Code for knowingly
   obtaining unauthorized assistance in connection with the final exam in
   AST101H1 (‚Course‚). In the alternative, the Student was charged under
   s. B.i.1(d) for knowingly representing as their own an idea or
   expression of an idea or work of another in the final exam in the
   Course. In the further alternative, the Student with knowingly engaging
   in a form of cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or
   misrepresentation not otherwise described in the Code to obtain
   academic advantage in connection with the Course, contrary to s.
   B.i.3(b) of the Code.

   The Student was enrolled in the Course in Fall 2019. The Student
   obtained permission to defer their final exam and later wrote the exam
   in August 2020. Due to the COVID-19 pandemic, the exam was administered
   and submitted online. The Student was permitted to consult with the
   course materials but was required to complete the exam independently,
   which the course outline emphasized. The instructors, upon reviewing
   the Student‚s submission, determined that the answers the Student had
   submitted to Question 4(b) and Question 6 were very similar to the
   answers submitted by another student who had also written the deferred
   final exam. The degree of similarity was found to be highly suspicious
   by the Course instructors as the Student and the other student both
   made the same errors and had similarly structured responses that the
   question did not request.

   The Student did not attend the hearing and was not represented by
   counsel. The Panel heard evidence that the University had made serious
   efforts to serve the Student with notice. The Panel concluded that the
   Student had received actual notice and was aware of the date on which
   the hearing was to be held. The Panel found that reasonable notice of
   the hearing was provided.

   The Panel considered all the evidence presented at the hearing and
   specifically noted that the other student involved produced a written
   formal admission to the offence and noted the close similarities
   between the answers by the other student and the Student in this case.
   Based on the evidence presented, the Panel found the Student guilty of
   unauthorized assistance under s. B.i.1(b) of the Code. The University
   withdrew the alternative charges.

   In determining the appropriate sanction, the Panel considered the
   University‚s submission and relevant authorities. The Panel accepted
   that general deterrence had been established as an important factor in
   these cases. The Panel noted that the use of unauthorized sources is
   unfair to other students and undermines the integrity of the University
   evaluation process and the honesty that must underlie the teaching and
   learning relationship.

   The Panel imposed the following sanctions: a final grade of zero in the
   courses; a suspension from the University for a period of two years; a
   notation of the sanction on the Student‚s academic record for a period
   of three years, and a report to the Provost for publication.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/31267
