Case No. 1457
THE UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
IN THE MATTER OF charges of academic dishonesty made on November 3, 2022,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters, 1995,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Act, 1971, S.O. 1971, c. 56 as amended S.O. 1978, c.
88

B E T W E E N:
UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO

- and -

S

K

K

REASONS FOR DECISION
Hearing Date: June 8, 2023, via Zoom
Members of the Panel:
F. Paul Morrison, Chair
Professor Richard Day, Faculty Panel Member
Giselle Sami Dalili, Student Panel Member
Appearances:
Tina Lie, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg Rothstein LLP
Joseph Berger, Co-Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg Rothstein LLP
Hearing Secretary:
Samanthe Huang, Quasi-Judicial Coordinator & Hearing Secretary, Office of Appeals
Discipline and Faculty Grievances
Not In Attendance:
S
K
K

-21.

On June 8, 2023, this Panel of the University Tribunal held a hearing to consider
the charges brought by the University of Toronto (the “University”) against S
K

K

(the “Student”) under the Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters,

1995 (the “Code”).
A.

CHARGES AND PARTICULARS

2.

The Charges were as follows:
1.

On or about August 28, 2020, you knowingly obtained unauthorized
assistance in connection with the final exam in AST101H1 (the
“Course”), contrary to section B.I.1(b) of the Code.

2.

In the alternative, on or about August 28, 2020, you knowingly
represented as your own an idea or expression of an idea or work of
another in the final exam in the Course, contrary to section B.I.1(d) of
the Code.

3.

In the further alternative, on or about August 28, 2020, you knowingly
engaged in a form of cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct,
fraud or misrepresentation not otherwise described in the Code in
order to obtain academic credit or other academic advantage of any
kind in connection with the final exam in the Course, contrary to section
B.I.3(b) of the Code.

Particulars of the offences charged are as follows:
1.

At all material times, you were a student enrolled at the University of
Toronto Scarborough.

2.

In Fall 2019, you enrolled in AST101H1 (The Sun and Its Neighbours).

3.

You sought and obtained permission to defer your final exam in the
Course.

4.

On August 28, 2020, you wrote the deferred final exam in the Course
(the “Exam”). Due to the covid19 pandemic, the Exam was

-3administered online. You were permitted to consult with the course
materials in completing the Exam; however, you were required to
complete the Exam independently, without the assistance of any other
sources, including other students.
5.

You knowingly obtained unauthorized assistance on the Exam from
another student, J S

S

(the “Other Student”), or others, and/or

aided, assisted, abetted, counselled, procured or conspired with the
Other Student or others to obtain unauthorized assistance on the
Exam.
6.

You submitted your answers to the Exam:
(a) to obtain academic credit;
(b) knowing that they contained ideas, expressions of ideas or work
which were not your own, but were the ideas, expressions of ideas
or work of others, including the Other Student; and
(c) knowing that you did not properly reference the ideas, expressions
of ideas or work that you drew from the Other Student or others.

7.

You knowingly aided, assisted, abetted, counselled, procured or
conspired with the Other Student or others to commit the offence of
plagiarism in the Exam.

8.

You knowingly submitted the Exam with the intention that the
University of Toronto Scarborough rely on it as containing your own
ideas or work in considering the appropriate academic credit to be
assigned to your work.

B.

PROCEEDING IN ABSENCE OF STUDENT

3.

At the commencement of the hearing, counsel for the University requested an
Order that the hearing proceed in the absence of the Student.

4.

In support of such an Order, the University tendered and filed two Affidavits of
Andrew Wagg and two Affidavits of Kimberly Blake. These Affidavits were

-4contained in a Book of Documents and Supplementary Book of Documents which
were marked as Exhibit 1 and Exhibit 2 at the hearing.
5.

The evidence in the aforementioned Affidavits was, in all respects, uncontradicted.
The evidence detailed the contacts that representatives of the University had with
the Student with respect to the pending charges and the scheduling and conduct
of a hearing with respect to the charges.

6.

By reason of such evidence and in submissions as to the request for the Order,
counsel for the University submitted that the evidence established that the Student
had received reasonable notice of the hearing and the date thereof.

7.

The Panel carefully considered the evidence and counsel’s submissions. The
Panel was satisfied that the Student had received reasonable notice of the hearing.
Indeed, the Panel concluded that the Student had received actual notice of the
hearing and was aware of the date on which it was scheduled to proceed.

8.

As a result, the Panel issued an Order that the hearing may proceed in the absence
of the Student.

C.

EVIDENCE AND FINDINGS

9.

Counsel for the University filed two Affidavits in support of the prosecution. The
first was the Affidavit of Ilana MacDonald, an Instructional Support Administrator
in the David A. Dunlap Department of Astronomy and Astrophysics at the
University. The second was the Affidavit of Sheryl Nauth, an Academic Integrity
Assistant in the Office of the Vice-Principal Academic and Dean at the University
(Scarborough). The evidence in both Affidavits was uncontradicted. Both
Affidavits, together with Exhibits thereto, were contained in a Book of Documents
tendered by counsel for the University and marked as Exhibit 3 at the hearing.

10.

The following are salient extracts from the Affidavit of Ilana MacDonald:
2.

In Fall 2019 S

K

K

(the “Student”) was enrolled in the course

AST101H1: The Sun and Its Neighbours (the “Course”). I have

-5attached a copy of the course outline to my affidavit as Exhibit A. I
was not an instructor for the Course. The co-instructors for the Course
were Dr. Renée Hložek and Dr. Jeremy Webb. I obtained the
information regarding the Student and the final exam that is in issue in
this matter from the instructors in the Course, my meeting with Dr.
Jeremy Webb and the Student on September 22, 2020, and the file
that the instructors from the Course submitted to the University of
Toronto Scarborough’s Academic Integrity Office.
6.

Under the heading “Academic Integrity” (on page 8), the course outline
emphasized the critical importance of academic integrity and provided
a link to the University of Toronto’s Code of Behaviour on Academic
Matters (“Code”). The course outline noted that all students were
expected to read and abide by the Code.

7.

The Student sought and obtained permission to defer his Final Exam
in the Course.

8.

On August 28, 2020, the Student wrote the deferred final exam.
Students were allowed to use Course materials on the final exam, but
were required to write the exam alone, and without any other additional
aids.

10. Upon review, the instructors determined that the answers that the
Student had submitted to Question 4(b) and Question 6 of the final
exam were very similar to the answers submitted by another student,
J.S., who had also written the deferred final exam on August 28, 2020.
11. The Student received a total score of 36.5/43 on the deferred final
exam. J.S. received a total score of 36/43 on the deferred final exam.
13. I have attached a copy of the Student’s final exam answers with
marker’s comments to my affidavit as Exhibit C. I have attached a
copy of J.S.’s final exam answers with marker’s comments to my
affidavit as Exhibit D.

-615. The degree of similarity between answers submitted by the Student
and J.S. to questions 4(b) and 6 of the final exam, were highly
suspicious to the Course instructors.
16. The Student’s and J.S.’s answers to Question 4(b) were substantively
identical. Both students received a mark of 1/2 on this question.
17. According to the instructors of the Course, both the Student and J.S.
made the same error in their answer to Question 4(b). Specifically,
both answers relied on an unfounded assumption that the energy
source for the planets referenced in Question 4(b) was from a star.
18. The Student’s and J.S.’s answer to Question 6 were also substantively
identical. Both students received a mark of 1/3 on Question 6.
19. For their answers to Question 6, both students identified three identical
factors they would anticipate, in order for an exomoon to support life:
(1) presence of liquid water; (2) the tidal effects; and (3) the presence
of atmosphere.
20. There was nothing in Question 6 that specified that students should
answer the question by listing exactly three factors.
21. Additionally the explanations for the three factors provided by both
students were very similar.
•

Both students explained that the presence of water was an
important for determining if an exomoon could support life,
without offering further explanation.

•

Both students referenced the presence of atmosphere as an
important element to supporting life, without significant further
explanation.

•

Both students referenced tidal effects as an important element
of determining if an exomoon can support life.

-7•

Both students explained that tidal effects allow the moon to
tolerate/withstand plate tectonics.

•

Both students articulated that the above factor regulates or
controls the moon’s temperature.

22. According to the Instructors of the Course, both students made the
same errors in their analysis for Question 6. According to the
Instructors:
•

The presence of liquid water would not be visible if observing
an exomoon;

•

The presence of an atmosphere would not be visible if
observing an exomoon; and

•

Multiple moons would be required in order to fully understand
the resonance of tidal effects.

23. On September 22, 2020, Professor Jeremy Webb and I both met with
the Student regarding alleged academic offences.
24. The matter was forwarded to the Department of Astronomy and
Astrophysics and ultimately to the University of Toronto Scarborough’s
Academic Integrity Office.

11.

Salient extracts from the uncontradicted Affidavit of Sheryl Nauth are the following:
3.

My office received a report from Professors Jeremy Webb and Renée
Hložek alleging possible academic misconduct on the deferred final
exam (the “Final Exam”) by two students, S
“Student”) and J S

S

(“S

K

K

(the

”) in the 2019 Fall Session course

AST101H1: The Sun and its Neighbours (the “Course”).
4.

The allegations against both the Student and S

were based on

similarities in the answers the Student and S

had submitted for

questions 4(b) and 6 of the Final Exam.

-8A. Resolution of Allegations against J S
5.

S

The allegations of academic misconduct against S
the divisional level. S

were resolved at

admitted to the use of unauthorized assistance

on the Final Exam and was given a sanction of a grade of zero (0%)
for the Final Exam and a one-year notation of this sanction to be placed
on their academic record and transcript for one year. I have attached
S

12.

s signed admission to my affidavit as Exhibit A.

Ms. Nauth’s Affidavit also contained in detail the record of contacts or attempted
contacts by representatives of the University with the Student. On a number of
occasions in 2022, the Student was offered an opportunity to accept proposed
penalties for the offence in question, but the Student did not respond to such
overtures.

13.

The Panel carefully considered all of the evidence presented at the hearing. It was
particularly noteworthy that the Other Student, J S

S

(“S

”), executed in

writing a formal admission to the offence of using unauthorized assistance on the
exam and accepted a sanction for such academic misconduct. Also noteworthy
were the very close similarities between the answers by the Student on the exam
and the answers by the Other Student, S

on the same exam. On the basis of

the evidence, the Panel readily concluded that the Student was guilty of the
Charges.
14.

Accordingly, the Panel issued a finding of Guilt on Charge 1, a violation of B.I.1(b)
of the Code. In accordance with the University’s undertaking, on the finding of guilt
with respect to Charge 1, Charges 2 and 3 were withdrawn.

D.

SANCTION / PENALTY

15.

Counsel for the University addressed the Panel with submissions as to the
appropriate penalty with respect to conviction of the Student of Charge 1.

16.

The Panel carefully considered the submissions received and pertinent authorities.
The Panel accepts that it is well established that plagiarism and the use of

-9unauthorized third-party sources are serious offences that strike at the heart of
academic integrity. General deterrence is an important factor in these cases.
17.

The Panel also accepts that it is appropriate for similar offences to be deterred by
similar sanctions in such circumstances. The use of unauthorized outside sources
is unfair to other students whose evaluation depends on their own hard work and
attention to their studies. It undermines the integrity of the University evaluation
process and the honesty that must underlie the teaching and learning relationship.
The penalty must be sufficient to deter others from similar misconduct.

18.

Recognizing these principles, the Tribunal issued the following Order.

E.

ORDER

19.

The Tribunal issued the following Order:
(a)

THAT the hearing may proceed in the Student’s absence;

(b)

THAT the Student is guilty of one count of knowingly obtaining unauthorized
assistance in any academic examination or term test or in connection with
any other form of academic work, contrary to section B.I.1(b) of the Code;

(c)

THAT the following sanctions shall be imposed on the Student:
(i)

a final grade of zero in the course AST101H1 in Fall 2019;

(ii)

the Student will be suspended from the University of Toronto from
the date of the Tribunal’s Order until April 30, 2025; and

(iii)

this sanction will be recorded on the Student’s academic record and
transcript for a period of three years from the date of the Tribunal’s
order; and

(d)

THAT this case be reported to the Provost, with the Student’s name
withheld, for publication of a notice of the decision of the Tribunal and the
sanctions imposed.

- 10 DATED at Toronto, this 11th day of August, 2023.
Original signed by:
___________________________________
F. Paul Morrison, Chair
On behalf of the Panel

