Case No.: 932
UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
IN THE MATTER OF charges of academic dishonesty made on April 26, 2017.
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic
Matters, 1995 (“Code”)
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Act, 1971, S.O. 1971, c. 56 as amended
S.O. 1978, c. 88
B E T W E E N:
UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO (the "University")
- AND –

---

Z

C

(the "Student")

REASONS FOR DECISION

Hearing Date: October 5, 2017
Panel Members:
Mr. Christopher Wirth, Barrister and Solicitor, Chair
Dr. Chris Koenig-Woodyard, Faculty Panel Member
Ms. Natasha Ramkissoon, Student Panel Member
Appearances:
Ms. Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel, University of Toronto
In Attendance:
Ms. Tracey Gameiro, University of Toronto, Associate Director, Office of Appeals, Discipline
and Faculty Grievances
Ms. Christina da Rocha-Feeley, Director of Operations, Office of the Governing Council
(Observer)
Mr. Sean Lourim, Technology Assistant, Office of the Governing Council
Ms. Christina Di Matteo, Academic Integrity Officer, Faculty of Arts and Science
Ms. Anna Shevchenko, Academic Integrity Officer, Faculty of Arts and Science

Charges and Appearances
1.

The Trial Division of the Tribunal heard this matter on October 5, 2017. The Student
was charged with the following academic offences filed with the Provost on April 26,
2017:
1.

You knowingly forged or in any other way altered or falsified an academic record,
and/or uttered, circulated or made use of such forged, altered or falsified record,
namely, a document which purported to be your Transcript of Consolidated
Academic Record from the University of Toronto dated August 4, 2015, contrary
to section B.I.3(a) of the Code.

2.

In the alternative, you knowingly engaged in a form of cheating, academic
dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or misrepresentation not otherwise described in
order to obtain academic credit or other academic advantage of any kind, in
connection with a document which purported to be your Transcript of
Consolidated Academic Record from the University of Toronto dated August 4,
2015, contrary to Section B.I.3(b) of the Code.

Particulars of charges

(a)

As part of your application for admission to York University you provided a
document that purported to be your Transcript of Consolidated Academic Record
from the University of Toronto dated August 4, 2015.

(b)

You forged this document and falsely represented your marks, grades, sessional
grade point averages, cumulative grade point averages, and academic history and
status.

2

(c)

You knew that this document was forged, altered, and/or falsified when you
circulated it.

(d)

You had an obligation to provide accurate and truthful information and not to
misrepresent your academic record. You had an obligation not to provide forged
or falsified documents in supp01t of your application.

2.

The Student did not attend the hearing which proceeded in her absence. The Panel was
satisfied that the Student had been served with the charges and the Notice of Hearing in
accordance with the University Tribunal's Rules of Practice and Proceeding and was
content that the hearing proceed in her absence.

The Evidence

2.

An Agreed Statement of Fact ("AGF") and Joint Book of Documents ("JBD") were
entered into evidence. They provided as follows:
1.

This matter arises out of charges of academic misconduct filed on April 26, 2017
by the Provost of the University of Toronto (the "Provost") under the Code of
Behaviour on Academic Matters ("Code"). The Provost and ~ - -

(the

"Student") have prepared this Agreed Statement of Facts ("ASF") and a Joint
Book of Documents ("JBD"). The Provost and the Student agree that:
(a)

each document contained in the JBD may be admitted into evidence for all
purposes, including for the truth of the document's contents, without
fu1ther need to prove the document; and

(b)

if a document indicates that it was sent or received by someone, that is
prima facie proof that the document was sent and received as indicated.

2.

The Student admits that she received a copy of the charges filed by the Provost.
The charges are included in the JBD at Tab 1.

3

3.

The Student admits that she received a copy of the notice of hearing in this matter
and that she has received reasonable notice of this hearing. A copy of the notice of
hearing is included in the JBD at Tab 2.

4.

The Student has chosen not to attend this hearing or to have a legal representative
attend on her behalf, and wishes it to proceed in her absence with no further input
into the hearing other than this Agreed Statement of Facts, and a Joint Submission
on Penalty which she has also executed. A copy of an email from the Student to
Lily Haimer dated August 18, 2017, confirming her position not to contest the
Charges and to have no further input into the matter in writing or in person is
included in the JBD at Tab 3.

5.

The Student waives the reading of the charges filed against her, and pleads guilty
to charges #1 and #2.

6.

From Fall 2011 to Winter 2015, the Student was a student at the University of
Toronto, St. George campus (the "University"). In summer 2012 the Student was
placed on academic probation, followed by a one year academic suspension at the
end of the Winter 2013 term because she was unable to achieve and maintain a
cumulative GPA above 1.5. The Student returned to the University in the Fall
2014 term, but was again placed on a three year academic suspension at the end of
the 2015 Winter term. As of Winter 2017, the Student had accumulated 5
academic credits at the University, with a CGPA of 0.80. A copy of the Student's
current academic record ("ROSI Transcript") is included in the JBD at Tab 4.

7.

On March 30, 2015 the Student submitted an application for admission to York
University ("York U"). As pait of her application process she was required to
submit a transcript of her academic record to York U.

8.

On June 8, 2015 the Student submitted an electronic copy of a University of
Toronto transcript to York U Office of Admissions ("York U Transcript 1"). The
York U Transcript 1 indicated that it was a record as of May 17, 2015, and that it

4

address, student # -

was issued to the Student at a

·

A copy of the YorkU Transcript No. 1 is included in the JBD at Tab 5.
9.

In July, 2015, the Student was offered admission to York U, but was notified in
her admission package that she was required to submit an original transcript
directly from the University of Toronto Transcript Centre (U of T Transcript
Centre") to meet the conditions of her offer.

10.

The Student was admitted to York U and began taking classes there in the Fall
2015 term, with the understanding that she would arrange to have her transcript
from the University of Toronto sent directly from the U of T Transcript Centre to
York U. She did not attempt to fulfill this condition until January 9, 2017, when
she submitted a transcript purporting to be from the University of Toronto dated
August 4, 2015 ("York U Transcript 2"). The York U Transcript 2 was the same
as York U Transcript 1 except that it was addressed to York U Office of
Admissions, and was a record as of August 4, 2015. A copy of York U Transcript
2 is included in the JBD at Tab 6.

11.

The York U Transcript 2 stated at the bottom of the first page: " This transcript is
official only if bearing the Registrar's Signature and Printed on Security Paper".

The York U Transcript 2 was not printed on security paper. It was printed on
regular stock paper.
12.

The York U Transcript 2 was contained in an envelope purp01ting to be from the
U of T Transcript Centre ("Envelope"). The Envelope had a stamp on the front
which stated: "This is an official transcript only if it is received in an envelope
which has been signed and sealed by the University of Toronto Transcript
Centre". The Envelope was sealed with a sticker with U of T Transcript Centre
printed on it; however, it was not date-stamped and there was no signature on the
envelope. A copy of the Envelope is included in the JBD at Tab 7.

5

13.

York U was not satisfied as to the authenticity of the York U Transcript 2 because
of the lack of a signature on the flap of the Envelope, the lack of security features,
the quality and colour of the print, and the weight of the paper.

14.

On or about January 13, 2017, Sana Kawar, manager at the U of T Transcript
Centre for the Faculty of Alts & Science, received an email request from Michelle
Cousins, International Admissions Assessor at York U. Ms. Cousins asked Ms.
Kawar to review an attached transcript received from the Student to verify its
validity. The attachments to the email were the York U Transcript 2 and the
Envelope. A copy of the email from Ms. Cousins together with its attachments is
included in the JBD at Tab 8.

15.

The York U Transcript 2 was not a valid University of Toronto transcript, and had
not been sent to York U by the U of T Transcript Centre. Similarly, the Envelope
was not sent by the U of T Transcript Centre to York U. A copy of the actual
envelope used by the U ofT Transcript Centre is included in the JBD at Tab 9.

16.

Both of the York U Transcript 1 and the York U Transcript 2 (collectively "York
U Transcripts") were different from the Student's actual ROSI Transcript in that
the York U Transcripts:
(a)

listed much higher grades and grade point averages ("GPA") than the
Student' s actual grades and GP As;

(b)

listed a number of courses that the Student n had never taken at the
University of Toronto;

(c)

moved some courses that the Student did take into different te1ms from the
terms in which she actually took those courses;

(d)

showed a total of 11.5 accumulated credits earned by the Student at the
University of Toronto when in fact she had only earned 5.0 credits; and

(e)

indicated that the Student's status was consistently "In Good Standing"
and that she was emolled in courses in each of the fall and winter terms

6

from 2011 Fall to 2015 Winter, when in fact the Studentwas placed on
academic probation in the 2012 Summer term, suspended for one year
following the Winter 2013 term, and suspended for three years following
the 20 14 Fall term because of her low marks.
Included in the JBD at Tab 10 is a chart comparing the details of the Student's
actual ROSI Transcript to the York U Transcripts.
17.

Records maintained by the U of T Transcript Centre reflect the following:
(a)

there was no record of a transcript issued directly to York U for the
Student;

(b)

any transcripts ordered by the Student were issued directly to the Student;

(c)

the Student ordered a transcript on April 20, 2013 which was couriered to
her a

on April 22, 2013;

and
(d)

the Student ordered a transcript on February 26, 2015 which was couriered
at her request to 23 Sheppard Ave East, #1602, Toronto on February 27,
2015.

18.

The Envelope is different from U of T Transcript Centre envelopes in that there is
a slight difference in the "O" and "R" of the word "Toronto" in both font and
formatting.

19.

The Student is no longer a student at York U.

20.

The Student did not respond to invitations to attend a dean's meeting.

21.

The Student admits that she knowingly:
(a)

forged, altered or falsified her academic record in the form of York U
Transcript 2, contrary to s. B.I.3(a) of the Code; and

7

(b)

uttered, circulated or made use of the York U Transcript 2 by submitting it
to York U, contrary to s. B.I.3(a) of the Code.

22.

The Student acknowledges that:
(a)

the Provost has advised her of her right to obtain legal counsel; and

(b)

she is signing this ASF freely and voluntarily, knowing of the potential
consequences she faces.

University's Submissions

3.

The University submitted that the evidence clearly established that the Student had
committed the academic offense charged.

Standard of Proof

4.

The onus is on the University to establish based upon clear and convincing evidence on a
balance of probabilities that the academic offence charge has been committed.

Decision of the Tribunal

5.

Based on the evidence, including the ASF, JBD and the Student's admissions, the Student
was found guilty of forging, altering, fabricating, uttering and circulating the transcript of
her academic record contrary to section B.1.3(a) of the Code, namely Charge 1 as set out
above.

6.

The University then withdrew Charge 2.

Reasons for Decision

7.

The Panel was satisfied that the evidence submitted before it as set out above, clearly
established that the Student had knowingly forged, altered and falsified her academic
record in the fo1m of her York U Transcript 2 and that she had uttered, circulated and
made use of the York U Transcript 2 by submitting it to York University.

8

Accordingly, the Panel was satisfied based upon clear and convincing evidence on a
balance of probabilities that the Student had committed an academic offense contrary to
section B.I.3(a) of the Code.
Penalty

8.

A joint submission on penalty ("JSP") by the University and the Student was entered into
evidence. The JSP provided as follows:
1.

For the purposes of this hearing under the Code of Behaviour on Academic

Matters ("Code"), the Provost of the University of Toronto (the "Provost") and
the Student have prepared this Joint Submission on Penalty ("JSP").
2.

The Provost and the Student submit that, in all the circumstances of this case, the
University Tribunal should impose the following sanctions on the Student:
(a)

an immediate suspension from the University to commence on the day the
Tribunal makes its order for a period of up to five years;

(b)

a recommendation that the Student be expelled from the University, which
recommendation shall be made by the Tribunal to the President for
recommendation by him to the Governing Council; and

(c)

a permanent notation of the sanction on her academic record and
transcript.

3.

The parties agree that this case shall be reported to the Provost for publication of a
notice of the decision of the Tribunal and the sanction imposed in the University
newspapers, with the name of the Student withheld.

4.

The Student acknowledges that:
(d)

she is signing this JSP freely and has been given the opportunity to obtain
independent legal advice before signing this JSP, and that she has chosen
not to obtain legal counsel; and

9

(e)

she is signing this JSP freely and voluntarily, knowing of the potential
consequences she faces and knowing that the Tribunal is not bound by this
JSP and has the discretion to impose a different penalty.

The University's Submissions

9.

The University did not lead any additional evidence with respect to penalty and submitted
that the following penalty should be imposed:
(a)

That the Student be immediately suspended from the University for a period of up
to five years;

(b)

That the Tribunal recommend to the President of the University that he
recommend to the Governing Council that the Student be expelled from the
University;

(c)

That a permanent notation shall be placed on the Student's academic record and
transcript; and

(d)

That this case be reported to the Provost for publication of a notice of the decision
of the Tribunal and the sanction or sanctions imposed, with the name of the
Student withheld.

10.

In the University's submission, the foregoing penalty accorded with other decisions of
this Tribunal in similar circumstances.

Penalty Decision

11.

After deliberations, the Tribunal accepted the JSP and ordered as follows:
(a)

THAT the Student be immediately suspended from the University for a period of

up to five years;

10

(b)

THE Tribunal recommends to the President of the University that he recommend
to the Governing Council that the Student be expelled from the University;

(c)

THAT a permanent notation shall be placed on the Student's academic record and
transcript; and

(d)

THAT this case shall be reported to the Provost for publication of a notice of the
decision of the Tribunal and the sanction or sanctions imposed, with the name of
the Student withheld.

12.

An Order was signed at the hearing by the Panel to this effect.

Reasons for Penalty
13.

The parties had provided the Panel with a JSP. Having considered the penalty which was
proposed by the JSP, the Panel finds that the penalty being proposed was not so
dispropmtionate to the offence that it would be contrary to the public interest of justice
and bring the administration of justice into disrepute to accept it. To the contrary, the
Panel was satisfied that this penalty was appropriate given the C~

ctors (Case No.

1976/77-3, November 5, 1976), and was in accordance with other decisions of this
Tribunal in similar circumstances.

Accordingly, as the Panel was satisfied that the

penalty proposed by the JSP fell within an appropriate range, the panel accepted the
penalty proposed by the patties in the JSP.

11

