Case #932

   DATE: November 10, 2017
   PARTIES: University of Toronto v. Z.C. (âthe Studentâ)
   Hearing Date(s): October 5, 2017
   Panel Members:
   Mr. Christopher Wirth, Barrister and Solicitor, Chair
   Dr. Chris Koenig-Woodyard, Faculty Panel Member
   Ms. Natasha Ramkissoon, Student Panel Member
   Appearances:
   Ms. Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel, University of Toronto
   In Attendance:
   Ms. Tracey Gameiro, University of Toronto, Associate Director, Office
   of Appeals, Discipline
   and Faculty Grievances
   Ms. Christina da Rocha-Feeley, Director of Operations, Office of the
   Governing Council
   (Observer)
   Mr. Sean Lourim, Technology Assistant, Office of the Governing Council
   Ms. Christina Di Matteo, Academic Integrity Officer, Faculty of Arts
   and Science
   Ms. Anna Shevchenko, Academic Integrity Officer, Faculty of Arts and
   Science
   Not in Attendance:
   The Student
   Trial Division - s. B.i.3(a) â forged academic record â Student not
   present âÂ  Student provided email to University counsel that she did
   not wish to attend the hearingÂ  âÂ  falsified transcript submitted to
   another university â agreed statement of facts â joint book of
   documents â joint submission on penalty â suspension of up to five
   years, recommendation of expulsion, permanent notation on transcript
   and academic record, and report to the Provost with the studentâs name
   withheld.
   The Student was charged with one charge of forging an academic record
   contrary to s. B.i.3(a) of the Code , or in the alternative, one charge
   of academic misconduct not otherwise described contrary to s.B.i.3(b)
   of the Code . The charges related to a falsified transcript that the
   Student had submitted in an application to another University. The
   Student received a copy of the Notice of Hearing and received
   reasonable notice of the hearing, but sent an email to counsel for the
   University indicating that she waived her right to counsel and did not
   wish to attend the hearing. The matter proceeded by way of agreed
   statement of facts and a joint book of documents. Upon the Panel
   finding the Student guilty of the first charge of forging an academic
   record contrary to s. B.i.3(a) of the Code , the University withdrew
   the alternative charge that had been laid pursuant to s. B.i.3(b) of
   the Code .Â  The Panel accepted the partiesâ Joint Submission on
   Penalty and ordered:(a) an immediate suspension from the University for
   up to five years; (b) a recommendation that the Student be expelled
   from the University; (c) a permanent notation of the sanction on the
   Studentâs academic record and transcript; and (d) that the case be
   reported to the Provost for publication with the name of the Student
   withheld.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12959
