Case No. 1151

THE UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
IN THE MATTER OF charges of academic dishonesty made on January 18, 2021,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic
Matters, 1995,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Act, 1971, S.O. 1971, c. 56 as amended
S.O. 1978, c. 88
B E T W E E N:
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO (the “University”)
- and S

L

(the “Student”)

REASONS FOR DECISION
Hearing Date: September 14, 2021, via Zoom
Members of the Panel:
Ms. Dena Varah, Chair
Professor Michael Saini, Faculty Panel Member
Ms. Samantha Chang, Student Panel Member
Appearances:
Ms. Tina Lie, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg Rothstein LLP
Hearing Secretary:
Ms. Nadia Bruno, Special Projects Officer, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances
Not In Attendance:
The Student

2

REASONS FOR DECISION

The trial division of the University was convened on September 14, 2021 (the “Hearing

1.
Date”).

PART 1 - THE CHARGES
2.

The Student was charged with the following offences under the Code of Behaviour on

Academic Matters (the “Code”).
1) On or about April 9, 2020, the Student knowingly represented an expression of an idea
or work of another in the final exam MAT136H1 (the “Course”), contrary to s. B.I.1(d)
of the Code.

2) On or about April 9, 2020, the Student knowingly obtained unauthorized assistance in
connection with the final exam in the Course, contrary to s. B.I.1(b) of the Code.

3) In the further alternative, on or about April 9, 2020, the Student knowingly engaged in
a form of cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or misrepresentation not
otherwise described in the Code in order to obtain academic credit or other academic
advantage of any kind in connection with the final exam in the Course, contrary to s.
B.I.3(b) of the Code.

3.

Assistant Discipline Counsel advised that Charges 1 and 2 are in the alternative. That is,

if the Student is found guilty of Charge 1, then Charge 2 will be withdrawn and vice-versa. Charge
3 will be withdrawn if the Student is found guilty of either Charges 1 or 2.

3

PART 2 - PROCEEDING IN THE ABSENCE OF THE STUDENT
4.

The Student did not attend the Hearing Date.

5.

In advance of the Hearing Date, the Student did not respond to any correspondence from

the University regarding charges they were advancing under the Code.
6.

Assistant Discipline Counsel advised that the Student had not responded to any attempts

by the University or by her office to advise of the charges and of the Hearing Date. She relied on
the Affidavit of the Samanthe Huang, an Administrative Assistant with the Appeals, Discipline
and Faculty Grievance Office (“ADFG Office”). Ms. Huang served the Student with a Notice of
Electronic Hearing for a hearing via email on August 20th and 24th, 2020 to the email address that
the Student provided in ROSI.
7.

Assistant Discipline Counsel also relied on the Affidavit of Kimberly Blake, Legal

Assistant at Paliare Roland Rosenberg Rothstein LLP.

Ms. Blake outlined that Assistant

Discipline Counsel had emailed the Student on August 6th and 17th, 2021 to advise of the Hearing
Date. Assistant Discipline Counsel further emailed additional documents on September 2nd and
7th, 2021. The Student did not respond to these emails.
8.

Ms. Blake also telephoned the Student at the number provided in ROSI, but the Student

did not pick up and as the voicemail was automated, it did not indicate the person to whom the
voice mailbox belonged. Ms. Blake left a detailed message. This was followed by a courier
package delivered to the Student’s address as found in ROSI which was signed for by “Glen” on
August 30th, 2021.
9.

Ms. Blake also outlined various attempts by the University to contact the Student from

4

May 4th, 2020 through to October 14th, 2020.
10.

Although it does not appear that the Student accessed his email address, the Panel was

satisfied that pursuant to the Statutory Powers and Procedures Act and the University Tribunal’s
Rules of Practice and Procedure, that the Student received reasonable notice of the Hearing Date.
11.

The Rules of Practice and Procedure provide that service is effected by sending a copy of

the document to the Student’s mailing address contained in ROSI or by emailing a copy to the
email address. Numerous steps were taken above and beyond the requirements of the Rules of
Practice and Procedure and the Statutory Powers and Procedures Act. The Panel was therefore
satisfied to proceed with the hearing in the absence of the Student.

PART 3 - THE FACTS UNDERLYING THE CHARGE
12.

The Student was enrolled at the University of Toronto Faculty of Arts and Sciences

commencing in the 2019 Fall term.
13.

In Winter 2020, the Student was enrolled in MAT1361H1 (Calculus 1(B)) (the “Course”).

14.

The University filed the Affidavit of Dror Bar-Natan a Professor in the Department of

Mathematics at the University. The Panel was satisfied that the facts contained therein and
documents attached in Professor Bar-Natan’s Affidavit were admissible for the truth of their
contents. The Panel did not require that Professor Bar-Natan to provide viva voce evidence.
15.

In Winter 2020, Professor Bar-Natan assisted with the administration of the final exam in

the Course. As a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, the final examination was administered online
on April 9th, 2020 from 2:00 p.m. to 5:00 p.m. There were approximately 1600 students who wrote
the final examination.

5

16.

Professor Bar-Natan was not the instructor of the Course but assisted with the

administration of the final examination. The final examination had two parts: twenty multiple
choice questions and six problems that required students to provide their solutions through an
online grading software used by the Department of Mathematics.
17.

Although the final examination was open book, students were only permitted to use their

course work, but not any other aids or to collaborate with one another in providing their answers.
The final examination material indicated that it would be a potential offence to search for answers
online, look for someone else’s answers or work together to answer questions.
18.

The Student submitted his answers to the final examination on April 9th, 2020. The portion

of the final examination at issue were the solutions to questions 21 – 26, submitted to Crowdmark,
the online grading software described above.
19.

In his Affidavit, Professor Bar-Natan indicated that Chegg.com is a subscription-based

website that allows students to post problems which are answered by “experts” on the site. There
is a subscription cost of $14.95 per month and subscribers are able to receive answers in as little
as thirty minutes. Instructors and teaching assistants in the Course found several problems from
the final examination posted on Chegg.com during the time period that students had to complete
the final examination.
20.

At the time of marking the Student’s answer to question 24, the instructors determined that

there were significant similarities between the Student’s answers and the answer to question 24
that they had seen posted on Chegg.com. Professor Bar-Natan was asked to review the similarities
between the Student’s answer to question 24 and the answer posted on Chegg.com.

6

21.

According to Professor Bar-Natan, in examining the answer he considered the similarities

to be suspicious because the answers were virtually identical and, most importantly, the answer
contained significant errors. In Professor Bar-Natan’s view, it was “highly unlikely” that a student
would make the same logical error as the Chegg.com answer and take the same steps in this
erroneous analysis.
22.

In particular, Professor Bar-Natan noted that the variable “r” was used in lines one and two

to represent a single value and in line two to represent numerous values. Both of these were
mistakes, and, according to Professor Bar-Natan, it is “hard to imagine these two mistakes repeated
in two different solutions (Chegg’s and a student’s) in an independent manner”.
23.

Professor Bar-Natan forwarded the matter to the Student Academic Integrity Office of the

Faculty of Arts and Science (the “Office”). As a result, the Office sent an email with the allegations
to the Student.
24.

The University relied on the Affidavit of Obianuju Umenyi, an Academic Integrity

Specialist with the Office. The Panel relied on the Affidavit of Ms. Umenyi and did not require
that she provide viva voce evidence.
25.

Ms. Umenyi noted that the Office sent the Student an email regarding the allegations of

academic misconduct on May 4th, 2020. On May 7th, 2020 the Student sent an email advising that
he wished to schedule a meeting with the Dean’s Designate.
26.

Ms. Umenyi met with the Student virtually along with Professor Francois Pitt, Dean’s

Designate for Academic Integrity, to discuss the allegations of academic misconduct. In that
meeting on October 13th, 2020, Professor Pitt gave the Student a warning that is required to be

7

given under the Code.
27.

In the discussion regarding academic misconduct, the Student denied any knowledge of

Chegg.com, instead indicating that he had a “private tutor” who he had hired from a Korean
website. The Student stated that the tutor had previously given him several questions and answers
from previous exams including question 24. Although the Student could not recall how far in
advance of the examination he received this question, he held firm that that question and answer
had been provided by the tutor with instructions to memorize the answer.
28.

On October 15th, 2020, Professor Pitt emailed the Student advising that the matter would

be forwarded to the Vice-Provost for review.
29.

The University relied on the Affidavit of Sarah Mayes-Tang, an Associate Professor in the

Department of Mathematics at the University. The Panel deemed the Affidavit of Professor
Mayes-Tang to be admissible with no requirement for viva voce evidence.
30.

Professor Mayes-Tang’s evidence is that she created the problem at question 24 and did so

directly before the final examination in the matter. She indicates that it was entirely unique and
based on a story that she had come across relating to the COVID-19 pandemic and the resulting
stay-at-home orders. The only people who had access to the examination questions before the
final examination were instructors for the Course.

PART 4 - FINDINGS ON LIABILITY

31.

The Panel was satisfied that the evidence supports the Student did commit the offence

contained in Charge 1. As a result of this finding, Charges 2 and 3 are withdrawn. The Panel makes

8

no findings with respect to these Charges.
32.

On Charge 1, the Panel finds that the evidence supports on a balance of probabilities that

the answer to question 24 provided by the Student was in whole or in part the work of another,
namely by those supporting the Chegg.com website. In coming to this conclusion, the Panel
specifically relies on the following facts:
1) The evidence that this question and answer were posted on Chegg.com;
2) Professor Bar-Natan’s evidence the type of errors and reasoning provided that
are almost entirely identical between the Chegg.com website and the Student’s
paper are “highly unlikely” to be the result of chance;
3) The evidence of Professor Mayes-Tang that the problem she had created was
unique and completed directly before the examination; and
4) That the Student’s explanation was therefore unlikely in that context. He would
not have had this question before the examination as it was not repeated from
previous examinations. We also note that the Student was relatively vague
about who his tutor was and when he had been instructed to memorize the
answers.
5) There was no credible explanation for the similarities between the Student’s
answer and the answer on Chegg.com other than the Student representing the
Chegg.com answers as his own.
33.

We note that explanation of the Student would have been unlikely even if the question had

9

not been unique or recently created. The explanation relies on an unknown tutor having access to
past exam questions, telling the Student to memorize an answer, rather than learn how to solve the
problem (itself highly problematic), and providing an answer that was incorrect in the exact way
as it was in the answer listed on Chegg.com.

PART 5 - DECISION ON PENALTY
34.

Assistant Discipline Counsel submitted that the appropriate penalty in this case is:
1) a final grade of 0 in the Course;
2) A suspension from the University immediately for 2 years ending on September
13, 2023;
3) A notation of the sanction on the Student’s academic record and transcripts
immediately for a period of 3 years, ending on September 13, 2024; and
4) That the case be reported to the Provost for publication of a notice of the
Decision of the Tribunal and sanction imposed with the Student’s name
withheld.

35.

Assistant Discipline Counsel relied on the caselaw to outline the factors that the Panel

should consider in determining the appropriate penalty:
1) The character of the person charged;
2) The likelihood of repetition of the offence;
3) The nature of the offence committed;

10

4) Any extenuating circumstances surrounding the commission of the offence;
5) The detriment to the University occasioned by the offence; and
6) The need to deter others from committing a similar offence.
(University of Toronto v. Mr. C. Case No. 1976/77-3, November 5, 1976 at p. 15)
36.

Assistant Discipline Counsel also noted that the Code provides a guide for penalty on the

first offence of representing another’s ideas as one’s own. Although this guide is not binding on
the Panel, it demonstrates the expectations that have been communicated to students in the event
they violate the Code. In the Code, the guide provides for a two-year suspension for a first offence
of plagiarism.
37.

Assistant Discipline Counsel submitted that the nature of the offence is serious and that the

detriment to the University occasioned by the offence and the need to strongly deter others is of
central importance. Plagiarism that has been planned has rightly been described as “one that strikes
at the heart of academic integrity” (University of Toronto v. D.K (Case No. 1119, July 21,2021))
38.

Assistance Discipline Counsel did note that the cases consider plagiarism involving a

commercial aspect to be more serious than those without one. Introducing a commercial aspect to
the academic environment, one built on individual effort and hard work, has been described as
“among the most egregious offences a student can commit”. (University of Toronto v J.W (Case
No. 1082, August 23, 2019)). Assistant Discipline Counsel fairly acknowledged that the
commercial aspect of this offence cannot be proven – it is unknown whether the Student was a
subscriber to Chegg.com or was provided the answer by another student who subscribed to the
service. In the absence of evidence that the Student transacted for this answer, Assistant Discipline

11

Counsel did not seek a finding that this was an aggravating factor.
39.

The Student obviously did not provide any submissions. As a result, there was no evidence

before the Panel of the character of the Student or other mitigating factors on penalty. Assistant
Discipline Counsel acknowledged that this was a first offence. There was not enough evidence to
determine whether an offence was likely to be repeated or whether there were other aggravating
or mitigating factors.
40.

Assistant Discipline Counsel relied on several precedents in which students had committed

similar offences. In the cases relied on by Assistant Discipline Counsel, a two-year suspension was
the minimal penalty imposed for this type of offence. Although these precedents do not bind the
Panel, this is the sanction that has been imposed on students in similar circumstances, and it is
important to have general consistency at the Tribunal. The penalty is appropriate given the serious
nature of the offence and the need for general deterrence.

PART 6 - THE ORDER
41.

The University Tribunal orders as follows:
THAT the hearing may proceed in the Student’s absence;
THAT the Student is guilty of one count of knowingly representing an idea or expression
of an idea or work of another as their own, contrary to section B.I.1.(d) of the Code;
THAT the following sanctions shall be imposed on the Student:
(a) a final grade of zero in the course MAT136H1 in Winter 2020;
(b) a suspension from the University of Toronto from the date of this order for a period
of 2 years, ending on September 13, 2023; and

12

(c) a notation of the sanction on her academic record and transcript from the date of
this order for a period of 3 years, ending on September 13, 2024; and

THAT this case be reported to the Provost for publication of a notice of the decision of the
Tribunal and the sanction imposed, with the Student’s name withheld.

Dated at Toronto this 30th day of November, 2021
Original signed by:
________________________________________
Dena Varah, Chair
On behalf of the Panel

