Case 1151

   DATE: November 30, 2021
   PARTIES: University of Toronto v. S.L. ("the Student")

   HEARING DATE: SeptemberÂ 14, 2021, via Zoom

   Panel Members:
   Ms. Dena Varah, Chair
   Professor Michael Saini, Faculty Panel Member
   Ms. Samantha Chang,Â Student Panel Member

   Appearances:
   Ms. Tina Lie, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg
   Rothstein LLP

   Not in Attendance:
   The Student

   Hearing Secretary:
   Ms. Nadia Bruno, Special Projects Officer, Office of Appeals,
   Discipline and Faculty Grievances

   The Student was charged underÂ s. B.i.1(d) of theâ¯Code of Behaviour on
   Academic Matters, 1995â¯(the âCodeâ) on the basis thatÂ the
   StudentÂ knowinglyÂ represented asÂ theirÂ own an idea or expression of
   an idea or work of another inÂ aÂ final exam. In the alternative, the
   Student was charged underÂ s.Â B.i.1(b)Â of the Code on the basis that
   the StudentÂ knowinglyÂ obtained unauthorized assistance in connection
   with a final exam. In the further alternative, the Student was charged
   under s. B.i.3(b) of the Code on the basis that the Student
   knowinglyÂ engaged in a form of cheating, academic dishonesty or
   misconduct, fraud or misrepresentation in order to obtain academic
   credit or other academic advantageÂ in connection with a final exam.

   The StudentÂ did not attend theÂ hearing.â¯Counsel for
   theÂ UniversityÂ of Toronto (âUniversityâ)Â provided evidence thatÂ the
   Student was served with the notice of hearingÂ via email to the email
   address that the Student provided inÂ theÂ Repository of Student
   Information (âROSIâ).Â The University furthered by providing evidence
   that counselâs office emailed the StudentÂ to advise of the hearing
   date and to provide the Student additional documents. The Panel noted
   that the Student did not respond to these emails. On a
   subsequentÂ occasion, counselâs officeÂ telephoned the Student at the
   number provided in ROSI, but the Student did not answer and since the
   voicemail was automated, it did not indicate the person to whom the
   voicemail box belonged. Counselâs office left a detailed
   message.Â After this, counsel sent a courier package to the Studentâs
   address as outlined in ROSI andÂ the package wasÂ signedÂ for
   byÂ âGlen.âÂ The Panel noted that although it did not appearÂ that the
   Student accessed his email address, it was satisfied that pursuant to
   theÂ Statutory Powers Procedure ActÂ (âSPPAâ)Â and theÂ University
   TribunalÂ Rules of Practice and ProcedureÂ (âRulesâ), the Student
   received reasonable notice of the hearing. The Rules provide that
   service isÂ effectedÂ by sending a copy of the document to the
   Studentâs mailing address contained in ROSI or by emailing a copy to
   the email address.Â The Panel noted that numerous steps were taken
   above and beyond the requirements of the Rules and theÂ SPPA and
   therefore, the Panel wasÂ satisfied to proceed with the hearing in the
   absence of the Student.

   Regarding the charges laid under s.Â B.i.1(d)Â of the Code,
   theÂ PanelÂ receivedÂ evidence in the form of an affidavit byÂ a
   Professor who assisted with the administration of the final exam
   inÂ the courseÂ for which the final exam in question was
   submitted.Â The Panel was satisfied that the facts contained,Â and
   documents attached,Â inÂ theÂ Professorâs affidavit were admissible for
   the truth of their contents. The Panel did not requireÂ theÂ Professor
   to provideÂ viva voceÂ evidence.Â The Professorâs affidavit outlined
   thatÂ Chegg.com is a subscription-based website that allows students to
   post problems, which are then answeredÂ byÂ âexperts.âÂ The affidavit
   further outlined that, instructors and teaching assistants in the
   course foundÂ thatÂ several problemsÂ onÂ the final examÂ wereÂ posted
   on Chegg.com during theÂ time periodÂ that students had to complete the
   final exam.Â The Professorâs affidavit furthered by outlining that the
   instructors found that there were significant similarities between the
   Studentâs answers and the answer to one questionÂ that they had seen
   posted on Chegg.com. UponÂ his review, the Professor noted thatÂ the
   similarities were suspicious because the answers were virtually
   identical, and the answer contained significant errors.Â The Professor
   further noted that it was âhighly unlikelyâ that a student would make
   the same logical error as the Chegg.com answer.Â The University
   submitted an affidavit of an Academic Integrity
   SpecialistÂ (âAISâ)Â with theÂ Student Academic Integrity Office of the
   Faculty of Arts and Science. The Panel did not require thatÂ the
   AISÂ provideÂ viva voceÂ evidence.Â The AISâ affidavit outlined
   thatÂ she met with the Student and the Deanâs Designate regarding the
   allegations. The Panel noted that the AIS outlinedÂ that at the meeting
   the Student denied any knowledge of Chegg.com. The Student indicated
   that he had a private tutorÂ who hadÂ previously given the Student
   several questions and answers from previous exams.Â The Panel received
   affidavit evidenceÂ of an Associate Professor in the Department of
   Mathematics at the University.Â The Panel deemed the affidavit of the
   Associate Professor to be admissible with no requirement forÂ viva
   voceÂ evidence.Â It was the Associate Professorâs evidence that she
   created the problem to the question and did so directly before the
   final exam in the course.Â Furthermore, only the instructors in the
   course hadÂ access to the question before the final exam.Â The Panel
   noted that the explanation of the Student would have been unlikely even
   if the question hadÂ not been unique or recently created. The
   explanationÂ relies on an unknown tutor having access to past exam
   questions, advising the Student to memorize the answers instead of
   learning to solve them, and providing an answer that was incorrect in
   the exact way as it was posted on Chegg.com.Â The Panel was satisfied
   that the evidence supported aÂ finding of guilt with respect to the
   offence under section B.i.1(d) of the Code.Â As a result of
   thisÂ finding, the University withdrew the alternative charges.

   In determining sanction,â¯the Panel consideredÂ the factorsÂ outlined
   inÂ University of Toronto and Mr. C.Â (Case No. 1976/77-3, November 5,
   1976).Â The PanelÂ outlinedÂ that there was no evidenceÂ of the
   character of the Student or other mitigating factors on penalty. The
   PanelÂ noted that this was the Studentâs first offence and that there
   was notÂ enough evidence to determine whether an offence was likely to
   be repeated or whether thereÂ wereÂ other aggravating or mitigating
   factors.Â Counsel for the UniversityÂ asked the Panel to considerÂ that
   the Code provides a guide for penalty on the first offence of
   representing anotherâs ideas as oneâs own. The Panel noted that
   although the guide is notÂ binding, it demonstrates the expectations
   that have been communicated to studentsÂ in the event thatÂ they
   violate the Code.Â Counsel relied on several precedents in which
   students committed similar offences. The Panel noted that although the
   precedents doÂ not bind the Panel,Â it is important to have general
   consistency at the Tribunal. TheÂ Panel found that the penalty sought
   by the University was appropriate given the serious nature of the
   offence and the need for general deterrence.Â The PanelÂ imposedÂ the
   following sanctions:Â a final grade of zero in the
   course;Â aÂ two-yearÂ suspension;Â aÂ three-yearÂ notation on
   transcript; andÂ aÂ report to the Provost for publication.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/30136
