Report #363-1

   DATE: May 29, 2012
   PARTIES: J.C.Â  (the Student) v. the School of Graduate Studies (SGS)
   Hearing Date(s): May, 2012 (in writing)

   Committee Members:
   Prof. Andrew Green, Chair
   Appearances:
   For the Student Appellant:
   Ms. J.C. (the Student)
   For the University of Toronto, School of Graduate Studies:
   Mr. Robert A. Centa, Counsel, Paliare Roland

   SGS â motion to refuse to give hearing on the ground that AAC does not
   have jurisdiction to grant remedies requested â request for an implicit
   increase of grade and a re-evaluation by substituting a paper for the
   exam âÂ  no jurisdiction to increase grade â s.3(b) of the GAAB Terms
   of Reference on jurisdiction â Committee has a broad power to order
   re-evaluation of any grade â Committee rejected that a âre-evaluationâ
   does not include a modification of the method of re-evaluation â
   hearing should be held only on the issue of substitution of a paper for
   the exam

   Motion brought by the SGS to refuse to give formal hearing to the
   appeal on the ground that the AAC does not have jurisdiction to grant
   remedies requested by the Student. At the Divisional Appeal Board
   hearing, the Student stated that she was feeling unwell on the day of
   the exam due to a medication she was taking and that she could not
   participate in the presentation of the team assignment due to
   unexpected circumstances. The Divisional Appeal Board replaced the
   grade of FZ with WDR. In her appeal, the Student requested that, in
   place of the non-grade report of WDR, the AAC increase her grade on the
   team assignment and allow her to submit a term paper in place of the
   examination she wrote. The SGS moved to ask the Committee to refuse to
   grant hearing pursuant to s.3.1.7 of the AAC Terms of Reference. The
   Committee stated that s.3(b) of the GAAB Terms of Reference provided
   some guidance on the AACâs jurisdiction. On the issue of the request
   for an implicit increase in her grade, the Committee held that it did
   not have jurisdiction. The Committee stated that although it had
   jurisdiction to order a re-evaluation, it did not have the expertise
   nor the specific knowledge to exercise the judgment required in
   creating grades for particular courses. On the issue of the second
   remedy requested, a re-evaluation by submission of a paper, the
   Committee held that it had jurisdiction to order such remedy. The
   Committee rejected the SGSâs submission that submitting a paper for the
   examination was not a âre-evaluationâ as âre-evaluationâ did not
   include a modification of the method of evaluation. The Committee
   stated that its powers to order re-evaluation in any grade appeal were
   very broad. S.3(b) of the GAAB Terms of Reference stated that it may
   order a re-evaluation âof the studentâ, âin such manner and on such
   terms and conditions as the Board considers appropriateâ, and thus its
   powers were not limited to ordering a re-evaluation of a particular
   assignment. Accordingly, the Committee held that a hearing should be
   held in the appeal but only on the issue of substitution of a paper for
   the exam.
   [1]View Report

References

   1. file:///media/12690
