THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
THE GOVERNING COUNCIL

Motion Decision #363-1 of the Academic Appeals Committee
May 29, 2012

To the Academic Board
University of Toronto
Your Committee reports that it heard a motion in \\~·iting in May 2012.
Professor Andrew Green (Chair)
Secretary: Mr. Cluistopher Lang, Director, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances
Appearances:
For the Student Appellant (the "Student"):
Ms J.C.
For the School of Graduate Studies ("SGS"):
Mr. Robert A. Centa, Counsel, Paliare Roland

Nature of the Motion
The Student appeals from a decision of the Graduate Academic Appeals Board ("GAAB") of the
University of Toronto dated November 16, 2011 which awarded her a non-grade report ofWDR
for the course RSM2120: Health Policy and Health Care Markets (the "Course"). In place of the
non-grade report of WDR, the Student asks the Academic Appeals Committee ("AAC") to:

•
•

Increase her grade on a team assignment from 12/25 to 12/16.5; and
Allow her to submit a term paper in place of an examination that she wrote in November
2010.

The SGS moves pursuant to s. 3.1.7 of the ACC Terms of Reference asking the Chair to
detennine that the AAC does not have jurisdiction to grant the Student either of the remedies she
seeks and therefore to refuse to give formal hearing to this appeal. The Student submits that a
hearing should be held. For the reasons that follow, the Chair agrees that a hearing should be

2

held, although only in relation to the issue of the submission of the term paper in substitution for
the exam.

Background to the Appeal
The Student was enrolled in the Course in The Joseph L. Rotman School of Management
("Rotman") in the Fall of 2010. In its decision on the Student's appeal in this matter, the GAAB
noted that the Student had been dealing with medical issues since prior to the term. On the way
to write the exam in the Course on November 22, 2010, the Student states that she was in an
accident that caused her to reschedule the exam until November 26, 2010. She wrote the exam
on November 26, 2010 but states that she was feeling unwell from the medication she was taking
as a result of the accident. In addition, she did not pmticipate in a presentation of group work
during the term and received 0/10 for that portion of the assignment. The Student states that she
could not attend the presentation because of the unexpected presence at her home of building
management. She ultimately received a grade of FZ in the Course.
The Student appealed the grade to Rotman's Graduate Depmtment Academic Appeals
Committee ("GDAAC"). The GDAAC dismissed her appeal. The Student then appealed this
decision to the GAAB. The GAAB accepted the Student's statement concerning the accident, the
increased pain, the subsequent increased medication and the fact that the medication negatively
affected her ability to perform on the exam. In its decision of November 16, 2011, the GAAB
allowed her appeal and directed that the grade of FZ in the Course be vacated and replaced with
the non-grade course rep011 of WDR. While the Student had asked for a number of forms of
relief including the assigning of a passing grade for the Course and the opp01tunity to re-write
the exam, the GAAB was unwilling to award either of these remedies. It found that assigning a
grade is the task of the University's appointed examiners and not the GAAB. Further, it found
that rewriting the examination was not feasible due to the time that had already passed.

Jurisdiction
The Student appealed to the AAC requesting that:
•

•

her grade on the team assignment be increased from 12/25 to 12/16.5 (that is, remove
the portion of the grade assigned to the group presentation) because of her inability to
attend on the date of the presentation; and
she be allowed to write a tem1 paper and have it evaluated in place of the November
26, 2010 exam.

The SGS requests that the Chair exercise his discretion under s. 3.1.7 of the ACC Terms of
Reference which states:

3

The Chair may refuse to give formal hearing to an appeal on the grounds that it is
not within the jurisdiction of the Committee.
The SGS states that the AAC does not have jurisdiction to grant either remedy.
The AAC is a committee of Governing Council and only has the powers granted to it explicitly
or implicitly by Governing Council. The AAC Terms of Reference states that the AAC's
function is:
2.1 To hear and consider appeals made by students against decisions of faculty,
college or school councils (or committees thereof) in the application of academic
regulations and requirements ...
In reviewing decisions of the GAAB, some guidance on the AA C's jurisdiction can be found by
examining the jurisdiction of the GAAB. The GAAB's Terms of Reference state that:
s. 3(b) The Board may vacate, reverse, or amend the decision appealed from and
in the case of an appeal of a grade, may order a re-evaluation of the student in
such manner and on such terms and conditions as the Board considers
appropriate.
Both remedies will be considered in turn to determine whether they are within the AAC's
jurisdiction and whether the Chair's discretion should be exercised to refuse a hearing of this
appeal. The Student submits that under s. 3.1.4 of the AAC Terms of Reference (analogous to
section 19 of the GAAB Terms of Reference referred to by the Student) any interpretation of
university policies should be decided by simple majority of the panel hearing the appeal.
However, s. 3.1.7 provides the discretion to the Chair to refuse a formal hearing ifit is not within
the AAC'sjurisdiction. The exercise of this discretion must of necessity include the power to
undertake some interpretation of the scope of the AAC's powers under its Terms of Reference.

(a)

Grade on the Team Assignment

The Student requests an implicit increase in her grade on the team assignment by removing the
portion of the assignment mark relating to the presentation. The AAC has held on a number of
occasions that its role is not to assign or create grades. The assigning of grades is the function of
the examiners appointed by the University and the AAC should not substitute its view of an
appropriate grade for that of the examiner. For example in AAC Repott 307, January 23, 2006,
your Committee refused to increase a student's average that the student claimed was low due to
illness. The Committee stated: "This Committee does not and should not substitute its discretion
for that of the instructors. We may, ifwe choose, vacate a grade, substitute an academic penalty
for another, allow late withdrawal without academic penalty, or award aegrotat standing. But in

4

the normal course of its duties, this Committee does not add percentages to grades to craft an
average that would unlock an academic barrier to proceeding in a program."
The Student states that in AAC Report 262, dated December 3, 2001, the student's grade for the
course was increased due to medical issues the student was experiencing. However, your
Committee in that Report noted that while the professor was willing to accede to the request for
an increase in the grade, he had no power to do so as the grade had not been properly appealed.
As a result, the Committee stated that the mark for the course should stand at 74% and not be
increased to 79%.
The AAC does not have the expe11ise nor the specific knowledge to exercise the judgment
required in creating grades for pm1icular courses. If a student's grade is to be re-assessed, s. 3(b)
provides the power to the GAAB, and implicitly to the AAC on appeal, to order a re-evaluation.
Unlike the AAC, the instructor for the course or a person with similar expertise and experience is
able to assess the student's performance in relation to the paiticular context of the course
including the course material. As a result, the AAC does not have jurisdiction to implicitly
increase the Student's grade on the group presentation.

(b)
Re-evaluation by Submission of Paper
The Student also requests that she be permitted to submit a paper on a topic relevant to the
Course in place of the examination written on November 26, 2010. The examination was w011h
30% of the mark for the Course. As noted above, s. 3(b) of the GAAB's Terms of Reference
states that the GAAB "in the case of an appeal of a grade, may order a re-evaluation of the
student in such manner and on such terms and conditions as the Board considers appropriate."

The SGS submits that substituting a paper for the examination is not a "re-evaluation" as "reevaluation" does not include a modification of the method of evaluation. It argues that a "reevaluation" would include a re-read of the examination or a re-write of the examination but not a
new fo1m of evaluation. It submits that the instructor is responsible for deciding the appropriate
method of evaluation and the AAC should not modify this method. Further, it argues that
granting such a change in the method of evaluation would be unfair to the other students in the
course who did not have the option of the alternate method.
Equity and consistency of evaluation for all students in a program or course are clearly important
considerations in addressing any appeal. However, the powers of the GAAB, and by implication
the AAC, to order re-evaluation in any grade appeal are very broad. Section 3(b) states that the
GAAB may order a re-evaluation "of the student". It does not limit the GAAB to re-evaluation
of the paiticular assignn1ent. Further, and more importantly, s. 3(b) states that the GAAB may
order re-evaluation of the student "in such manner and on such terms and conditions as the Board

5

considers appropriate." In deciding which form of re-evaluation is appropriate, the GAAB and
the AAC must of necessity take into account the context of the particular appeal including the
situation of the student appealing the grade as well as the implications for other students in the
program or course. However, it is too narrow to state that it would never be appropriate or
within the AA C's jurisdiction to order an alternate method of evaluation.
Conclusion
The Chair therefore does not exercise his discretion to refuse to hold a hearing based on a lack of
jurisdiction. The Chair accepts the SGS submission that the implicit increase of the grade for the
team assignment is not within your Committee's jurisdiction. However, the Chair finds that your
Committee does have the jurisdiction to grant the Student her request to submit a paper in
substitution for the examination if it finds it appropriate in these pmiicular circumstances. As a
result, a hearing should be held in this appeal but only on the issue of substitution of a paper for
the November exam.

