Report #344

   DATE: September 1, 2010
   PARTIES: I.S.,Â  (the Student) v. UTM
   Hearing Date(s): June 23, 2010
   Committee Members:
   Professor Lorne Sossin, Chair
   John Stewart
   Professor Ellen Hodnett
   Dr. Joel Kirsh
   Jemy Joseph
   Appearances:
   For the Student Appellant:
   I.S. (the Student)
   For the UTM:
   Professor Angela Lange
   UTM â withdrawal without penalty â stress â family situation â airline
   complication â insufficient amount coursework returned by withdrawal
   deadline â previous withdrawal without academic penalty after deadline
   â UTM policy regarding withdrawal without academic penalty â three
   withdrawals after withdrawal deadline allowed â policy not in place at
   the time of the withdrawal â perception of inconsistencyÂ  â
   unpersuasive excuse for missed deadlineÂ  â appeal dismissed
   Appeal of a decision to deny the Student permission to withdraw without
   penalty from a course. The Student submitted that he had experienced
   stress and a family situation which prevented him from focusing on his
   studies. The Student further missed the deadline for withdrawal without
   penalty due to airline complications on the return flight from a trip
   to a relativeâs wedding. The Student further submitted he had only
   received 20% of their grade by the deadline which prevented him from
   making an informed decision about dropping the course. The Student also
   argued that he had previously withdrawn without academic penalty in
   other classes after the deadline. UTM confirmed that a policy was put
   in place permitting students late withdrawal in up to three classes.
   The Committee heard, though, that such a policy was not in place at the
   time the Student sought to withdraw. The Committee noted to UTM that
   the current policy permitting a number of late withdrawals creates a
   perception of inconsistency. The Committee agreed, though, with the
   Academic Appeals Board and found the Studentâs excuse for missing the
   deadline unpersuasive. Appeal dismissed.
   [1]View Report

References

   1. file:///media/12591
