Report 323

DATE:

   March 13, 2008

PARTIES:

   Dr. C.B. (the Student) v. the Faculty of Medicine

Hearing Date(s):

   February 15, 2008

Committee Members:

   Professor Emeritus Ralph Scane (Chair)
   Professor Jan Angus
   Professor Douglas Reeve
   Ms Lorenza Sisca
   Ms Maureen Somerville

Secretaries:

   Ms Nancy Smart, Judicial Affairs Officer
   Ms Mette Mai

Appearances:

For the Student:

   Dr. C.B. (the Student)

For the Faculty of Medicine:

   Ms Sari Springer (Counsel)
   Dr. David Tannenbaum
   Dr. K. Iglar

   Appeal from a recommendation of the Residency Program Committee of the
   Department of Family and Community Medicine that the Student be
   dismissed from the Family and Community Medicine Residency Training
   Program. Student received adverse evaluations indicating he fell below
   the expected level of first year residents and that he had
   confrontational problems with staff and a lack of insight as to his
   problems. The Committee stated that the policy that it cannot remark
   examinations or papers that have been evaluated by the examiners
   appointed by the University also applies for clinical assessments that
   are part of the evaluation process and the Committee cannot interfere
   with the judgment of the Faculty on the grounds that the judgment was
   wrong, if it had been fairly arrived at. The Committee found no
   evidence of bias or lack of objectivity which might make the
   evaluations of the Student unreliable. The Committee stated that it
   will not consider stress and its secondary manifestations as mitigating
   factors to poor academic performance when the stress arises from a
   studentâs awareness that she or he is receiving adverse evaluations
   which are putting the studentâs future at the University in jeopardy.
   The Committee considered the stressful and distracting effects of
   family problems which afflicted the Student during the residency
   periods and found that they could not excuse the types of performance
   difficulties noted by the Facultyâs evaluators. The Faculty breached
   s.5.2.5 of the Guidelines for the Evaluation of Postgraduate Trainees
   of the Faculty of Medicine at the University of Toronto requiring that
   all periods of remediation must include a written midâpoint evaluation.
   The Committee found that while deviation from a Board of Examiners
   stipulation as to a particular student is a grave matter, serious
   breaches do not necessarily warrant overturning an academic verdict.
   The Committee considered the other evidence submitted and found that
   the effect of the procedural breach by the Faculty was not a sufficient
   ground to reinstate the Student in the program. Appeal dismissed. The
   Committee recommended that if the Board of Examiners is to meet only at
   fairly distant intervals, the Faculty should establish a formal
   mechanism for dealing with situations, ordinarily dealt with by the
   full Board, which may arise when the Board is not scheduled to meet in
   the immediate future.
   [1]View Report

References

   1. file:///media/12575
