Case #543

   DATE: January 28, 2010
   PARTIES: University of Toronto v. M.H.
   Hearing Date(s): July 3, 2009
   Panel Members:
   Raj Anand, Chair
   Prof. Shadi Dalili, Faculty Member
   Elena Kuzmin, Student Member
   Appearances:
   Robert Centa, Assistant Discipline Counsel for the University
   Betty-Ann Campbell, Law Clerk, Paliare Roland Barristers
   Prof. Shafique Virani, Instructor
   Edith Szanto Ali-Dib, Teaching Assistant

   In Attendance:
   Lucy Gaspini, Academic Affairs Officer, UTM
   Nancy Smart, Judicial Affairs Officer, Office of the Governing Council

   Trial Division â s. B.I.1(d) and s. B.I.3(b) of the Code â plagiarism â
   verbatim or near verbatim excerpts â hearing not attended â reasonable
   notice of hearing provided â finding on evidence of guilt â little
   evidence relating to character of the Student â University submission
   on penalty accepted partially - need for rehabilitation â final grade
   of zero in the course; two-year suspension; two-year notation on
   transcript; and report to Provost

   Student charged with two offences under s. B.I.1(d) and s. B.I.3(b) of
   the Code . The charges related to the allegations that the Student
   plagiarized an essay. The Student allegedly submitted an essay that
   contained large excerpts that were obtained either verbatim or nearly
   verbatim from two website sources. The Student did not attend the
   hearing. The Panel was satisfied by the documentary evidence and
   submissions by Discipline Counsel that the Student had received
   notification of an earlier hearing date, that they had requested an
   adjournment of that date, and had been notified of the new date. The
   Panel found the charge under s. B.I.1(d) was made out by Discipline
   Counsel and the University had satisfied the burden of proof that the
   Student knew or ought to have known that they were representing ideas
   or expressions of another without proper citations or sources. The
   University withdrew the charge under s. B.I.3(b) . The Panel found that
   a two-year suspension for the first offence of plagiarism, even in
   cases where the paper in question is worth a small proportion of the
   course in question, is appropriate in the absence of mitigating
   factors. The Panel accepted the University submission on penalty counts
   except regarding the notation of the suspension on the Studentâs
   transcript. The University sought for a three-year notation on the
   studentâs transcript along with a two-year suspension. The Panel put
   the question to Discipline Counsel about the issue of matching the
   notification on the transcript and the length of the suspension.
   Discipline Counsel recognized that this was an area which had not often
   been explicitly considered in previous cases. The Panel noted that the
   Student was a first-year student and the essay was worth approximately
   25 percent of the course. The Panel further noted there should be some
   recognition of the need for rehabilitation. With this in mind, the
   Panel held that a two-year notation was sufficient. The Panel imposed a
   final grade of zero in the course, a two-year suspension, a two-year
   notation on the studentâs transcript, and that a report to the Provost
   be issued.

   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12850
