Report #347

   DATE: October 4, 2010
   PARTIES: L.L.Â  (the Student) v. University of Toronto
   Hearing Date(s): June 25, 2010
   Committee Members:
   Professor Ed Morgan, Chair
   Professor Ronald Kluger
   Professor Louise Lemieux-Charles
   Andrew Agnew-Iler
   Jemy Joseph
   Appearances:
   For the Student Appellant:
   L.L. (the Student)
   Deidre Neman, Counsel for the Student
   For the University of Toronto:
   Sari Spring, Cassels Brock Lawyers, Counsel for the University
   Professor Arlene Gehmacher, Course Instructor
   Professor Anne-Marie Brousseau, the Associate Dean of the Faculty of
   Arts and Sciences
   Elaine Ishibashi, Associate Faculty Registrar, Petitions
   University of Toronto â extension of time to complete coursework â
   Accessibility Services â reasonable accommodation â medical issues â no
   medical certificate â negotiated accommodations â Faculty rules for
   extensions of time to complete courseworkÂ  â financial matters â
   Studentâs responsibility to attend to financial aid matters â
   reasonable accommodation made for the Student â appeal dismissed
   Appeal of a decision to deny the Student their petition for an
   extension of time to complete term coursework in a course. The Course
   Instructor was notified approximately a month after the beginning of
   the course that the Student was registered with Accessibility Services
   and was entitled to certain accommodations including extensions for
   assignments. Accessibility Services had noted that the Student should
   not be given open-ended deadlines. The Student and the Course
   Instructor exchanged several e-mails regarding an upcoming project of
   the Student. During this correspondence, the Student never requested an
   extension of time. The Student was notified approximately fourteen days
   before the due date, and again one day before the due date that the
   coursework was due. Shortly before midnight of the due date, the
   Student replied to the Course Instructorâs e-mail and requested an
   extension until the end of the month due to medical reasons. The Course
   Instructor followed up replying that a doctorâs note would be necessary
   to verify the medical condition and indicated that if accessibility
   issues were a factor the Course Instructor would authorize an
   extension. In the subsequent meeting with the Course Instructor, the
   Student failed to provide a doctorâs note to the Course Instructor.
   Despite this, an extension was granted. After this initial meeting, a
   series of four subsequent requests for extensions were granted by the
   Course Instructor. The Student then petitioned the Registrar to the
   Committee on Standing requesting a further extension. The Studentâs
   coursework was not submitted by this deadline. The coursework was
   ultimately not submitted by the deadline but some four months after the
   initial due date, after the academic term had ended. The Committee
   disagreed with the Studentâs argument that their needs were not
   reasonably accommodated. The Committee also found that, as the term was
   over, there was no provision for submitting term work as the term had
   ended. The Committee held the Course Instructor could not have given a
   further extension under Faculty rules. The Committee heard that the
   Student also had financial matters, specifically, financial aid
   concerns, that contributed to their failure to meet the deadline. The
   Committee found that it was the Studentâs responsibility to attend to
   their financial aid matters in a timely manner, and that the real issue
   to be decided by the Committee was whether the accommodation required
   by Accessibility Services was granted to the Student. The Committee
   found every effort was made to make such accommodation. Appeal
   dismissed.
   [1]View Report

References

   1. file:///media/12593
