ACADEl\UC APPEALS COMMITTEE
GOVERL'I/ING COUNCIL

Report #347 of the Academic Appeals Committee
October 4, 2010
To the Academic Board
University of Toronto

Your Committee reports that it held a hearing on Friday, June 25, 2010, at which the
following members were present:
Professor Ed Morgan (Chair)
Professor Ronald Kluger
Professor Louise Lemieux-Charles
Mr. Andrew Agnew-Iler
Ms. Jemy Joseph
Secretary: Ms. Natalie Ramtahal, Coordinator, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty
Grievances
Appearances:
For the Student Appellant:

Ms. ~ ■G-(the Student)
Ms. Deidre Newman, Counsel for the Student
For the University of Toronto:

Ms. Sari Springer, Cassels Brock Lawyers, Counsel for the Division
Professor Arlene Gelunacher, Course Instructor
Professor Anne-Marie Brousseau, the Associate Dean of the Faculty of
Arts and Sciences
Ms. Elaine Ishibashi, Associate Faculty Registrar, Petitions

I.

The Appeal

L-

This is an appeal by Ms.
■ G . of the decision of the Academic Appeals Board
of the Faculty of Arts and Science dated April 23, 2009 dismissing an appeal for an
extension of time to complete the term work in the course entitled "Collecting Canada",
FAH485Hl F. For the reasons that follow, the Committee is unanimous in deciding that
the appeal is denied.

2

II.

The Facts

IJ

Ms.
G . has been pursuing a B.A. degree in Fine A.iis History with a minor in
Italian. The course in question, Collecting Canada, was a seminar course in which ten
students were enrolled. The course met in the fall term of 2007, beginning on September
13 th and ending on December 6th • Collecting Canada studies Canadian works of mi
housed in the Royal Ontario Museum and that meets in the museum. The course
instructor was Professor Ai·lene Gehmacher. Evaluation in the course was set out in the
syllabus as being comprised of class participation ( 15%) and a major research project
(85%). The grading of the research project was further broken down to include the
preparation of a preliminar bibliography (I Oo/':( due October 411\ oral presentation (25%)
given between October 25' 1 and November 22 11 , and the final written research paper
(50%) due two weeks after the student's oral presentation. The syllabus stipulated that
the penalty for lateness was two marks per day, and that late papers would not be
accepted after December 10, 2007.

6

On October 4, 2007, Professor Gehmacher distributed to all students in the seminar,
including Ms. II GIii, the dates for each oral presentation and the due dates for each
student's research paper. Ms. II Ola's oral presentation was scheduled for November
1st and her final paper was due on November 15 th . Ms. IJ G . submitted her
preliminary bibliography on October I 2'", some eight days after it was due to be
submitted. The bibliography was reviewed by Professor Gehmacher together with Ms.
LIG• on October 15 th .
On October 23 rd , Ms. IJ G . for the first time provided Professor Gehmacher with a
letter from Pearl Levey, a learning disability specialist at University of Toronto's
Accessibility Services. The letter advised that Ms. rJ G . is registered with
Accessibility Services, and that she is entitled to ce1iain accommodations including
"when necessary, extensions for assignments to be negotiated with professors." Between
receipt of the Accessibility Services letter and October 31s t, Professor Gehmacher and
Ms. II
exchanged several emails regarding Ms. IJ GIii's project. At no time
during these exchanges did Ms. 1J G . request an extension of time.

aa

oa

t

Ms. LI
made her oral presentation to the seminar as scheduled on November 1s •
Later that day, Professor Gehmacher sent Ms. LI
lengthy email reviewing her
th
presentation and reminding Ms. rjo■ that the final repmi was due on November 15 .
In this email, Professor Gehmacher specifically inquired as to whether Ms. LI
would require an extension of time. At no time did Ms. LI
request such an
extension.

oaa

oa

oa
II

On November 14'\ Professo1' Gehmacher again wrote to Ms.
G . asking her how her
paper was going and reminding her that it was due the next day. Again, Professor
Gehmacher asked Ms. LI oawhether she was having any difficulty meeting the
November 15th deadline. Shortly before midnight that night, Ms. LI
replied to
Professor Gehmacher's email, and for the first time requested an extension of the due
date for the paper until the end of the month. Her stated reason for the extension was that

oa

3
she was suffering an allergic condition and that some restrictions had been placed on her
library card which slowed her progress in completing the research.
Professor Gehmacher responded the following morning by email stating that she would
need to see a doctor's note verifying the allergic condition. She also indicated that if
th
Accessibility issues were a factor she would authorize an extension until November 28 .
Professor Gehmacher also reminded Ms.
G-that final marks for the course had to
th
be submitted by December 12 • That same clay, Professor Gehmacher sent Ms.
a second email offering to meet with her in order to go over the research project.

LI

LI oa

nd

A meeting was ultimately scheduled for November 22 . At no time did Ms. LI G supply Professor Gehrnacher with a doctor's note confirming the allergic condition, and
at no time did Ms.
G - advise Professor Gehmacher that Accessibility issues were
corning into play. Notwithstanding Ms. LIG-s silence, Professor Geluuacher granted
th
an extension of the clue date for the final research paper until November 28 •

LI

LI

Late in the evening on November 27''\ Ms.
oa;,ent Professor Gehmacher an email
indicating that she would not be able to submit the project the following clay. In her
email, Ms. LIO• stated that her lateness was due to "her condition", and that she was
aiming to submit the paper the following week. Despite the fact that the previously
requested doctor's note was never provided by Ms. LI G., Professor Gelunacher
granted a further extension for submitting the paper to December 6th .

oa

On December 61\ Ms. LI
did not submit the paper, but delivered to Professor
Gehmacher a note from Pearl Levey elated November 22, 2007 and another note from her
family doctor, Paula Nieuwstraten dated December 5, 2007. Ms. Levey's note stated that
Ms.
G . ' s difficulties include issues with timely completion of assignments, but
indicated that any extensions of time granted to Ms. II
should not be open-ended.
In view of these notes, Professor Gelrmacher granted Ms. LI G . a fmiher extension of
th
the clue elate to December I 0 .

LI

oa

LI oa

Ms.
did not submit the paper on December I 0th . As December I 2'" was the final
clay for instructors to submit grades for courses that term, Professor Gelrmacher granted
one last extension to Ms. LI
to December 11 th • Ms. LI
did not submit the
paper on the I I th • Rather, on December 2] 5', she filed a petition with the Registrar to the
Committee on Standing requesting an extension to February 8, 2008 for submitting her
paper. The paper was ultimately submitted to the Faculty on March 5, 2008, some four
months after the initial due date.

oa

oa

oa,

In addition to extensive testimony from Ms. II
the Committee also heard
testimony from Professor Anne-Marie Brousseau, the Associate Dean of the Faculty of
Arts and Sciences. Professor Brousseau advised the Committee that course instructors
have no authority to give extensions beyond the last day of exams for the term - i.e.
December 12, 2007. In other words, in granting a final extension to the encl of the clay on
December 11, 2007, Professor Gelrmacher did all that she could do to try to
acconrmodate Ms. LI
to 110 avail.

oa

4

III.

Decision
th

th

Ms. LI G . contends that the series of extensions from November I 5 to December 11
did not constitute reasonable accommodation of her needs. The Committee disagrees. If
anything, Professor Gehmacher was more pro-active than Ms. LI
in attempting to
ensure that the final paper be submitted on time. Professor Gelmmcher acknowledged that
Ms. LI
has a disability and is entitled to accommodations as recommended by
Accessibility Services; at the same time, Ms. LI
had a responsibility to act in a
conscientious manner in requesting and assisting with the accommodation process.
Throughout the relevant weeks, Ms. LI GIii failed to request any extensions until the
very last moment, while Professor Gehmacher was more than forthcoming in offering a
series of extensions even where they were not specifically requested.

oa

oa

oa

That said, the University, including both faculty and students, would be well served by
developing methods by which the accessibility needs of a student like Ms. LI G - can
be more thoroughly evaluated and addressed so that a situation like this could be avoided
in the first place. As it stands, if Professor Gehmacher can be faulted for anything it is
for being excessively generous and flexible in dealing with Ms. LI
inability to
complete the project on time. There is no question that the professor made every
reasonable effort to meet Ms. LI
accommodation needs, granting a series of
extensions right up until the last possible date in the term. What Ms. LI oaappears to
have wanted is precisely the kind of open-ended extension that the Accessibility Services
letter instructed her professor not to grant. In any case, there is no provision for
submitting term work after the ten11 ends, and Professor Gehmacher could not possibly
have given a futiher extension under F acuity rules.

oa·s

oa•s

As a final matter, Ms. II G.raises late in the day that there were also financial matters
that contributed to her failure to meet the course deadline in the fall of 2007. The
Committee admitted evidence submitted by Ms. II GIii in the form of a University of
Toronto Grant for Disability Expenses dated September 20, 2007. Counsel for the
Faculty of Atis and Sciences submits in response that the second part of this form relating
to financial information, which is the student's responsibility to fill out and submit, was
not submitted by Ms. 11 Ga until November 2007, and that this tardiness in submitting
the entire form is the reason that Ms.
financial aid application was late in
being processed that year.

IJ oa•s

The Committee is of the view that it is the student's responsibility to attend to her
financial aid matters in a timely matter. The real issue on this appeal is whether the
accommodation required by Accessibility Services was granted to Ms. LI oa. In the
Committee's view, every effoti was made to accommodate Ms. LI Ga and the
responsibility for failing to submit the final course project on time must be borne by her.

