Case 709 - Appeal

DATE:

   February 2, 2018

PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v. C.S. (âthe Student.â)

Hearing Date(s):

   November 2, 2017

Panel Members:

   Ms. Patricia D.S. Jackson, Chair
   Professor Allan Kaplan, Faculty Panel Member Ms. Wendy Wang, Student
   Panel Member
   Ms. Alena Zelinka, Student Panel Member

Appearances:

   Mr. Robert Centa, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland
   Barristers
   Mr. Darryl Singer, Counsel for the Student
   Ms. Nadia Condotta, Counsel for the Student

In Attendance:

   Ms. Tina Lie, Affiant

Not in Attendance

   The Student
   DAB Decision
   Note: See Tribunal case summary for detailed facts
   Appeal by the Student. from a Tribunal decision in which the Student
   was found guilty of one count of plagiarism contrary to s. B.i.3(d) of
   the Code and sentenced to a final grade of zero in the affected course,
   degree recall and cancellation, permanent notation on his transcript,
   removal of his thesis from the library, a recommendation of expulsion
   and that the case be published with the Studentâs name withheld. The
   Student appealed on the grounds that the Tribunalâs decision not to
   grant the Studentâs request for adjournment and proceeding with the
   hearing in his absence was a breach of procedural fairness; that his
   counselâs withdrawal denied him a fair opportunity to make submissions
   at the hearing; and that procedural fairness required that the Tribunal
   PanelÂ  adjourn before its determination of penalty.
   The Board referred to its broad powers to review a Tribunal decision as
   found in section E.7 of the Code , and noted that particular deference
   ought to be given to a Tribunalâs decisions concerning the conduct of a
   hearing and whether or not to grant a request for an adjournment. The
   Board stated that justice and procedural fairness can only be said to
   be infringed where the Panel exercised its discretion in an
   unreasonable or non-judicious fashion.
   The Board was referred to the case The Law Society of Upper Canada vs.
   Igbinosun , (2009 ONCA 484 at para. 37) which provided that factors
   that supported the denial of an adjournment include: a lack of
   compliance with prior court orders, previous adjournments that have
   been granted to the applicant, previous peremptory hearing dates, the
   desirability of having the matter decided and a finding that the
   applicant is seeking to manipulate the system by orchestrating delay.
   Factors in favour of granting of an adjournment include: the fact that
   the consequences of the hearing are serious, that the applicant would
   be prejudiced if the request were not granted, and a finding that the
   applicant was honestly seeking to exercise his right to counsel and had
   been represented in the proceedings up until the time of the
   adjournment request. In weighing these factors, the timeliness of the
   request, the applicant's reasons for being unable to proceed on the
   scheduled date and the length of the requested adjournment should also
   be considered. The Board found that all of the factors in favour of a
   denial of an adjournment existed in this case and the factors that
   might have allowed for the granting of an adjournment had in fact led
   to multiple adjournments in the proceedings prior to the hearing.
   The Student had six prior notices of hearing that warned him "if the
   panel finds you guilty, it will then be asked to determine an
   appropriate penalty", a warning that was reinforced in decisions on his
   multiple requests for adjournments.Â  The Board referred to Rule 17 of
   the Rules of Practice and Procedure which provide that a person who
   does not attend a hearing of which they have had notice is not entitled
   to further notice of different stages of the proceeding.Â  Â There
   could be no basis for a suggestion of non-disclosure to the Student as
   the University did not call additional evidence at the hearing.
   Further, the Student had been advised on several occasions that his
   general assertions of a âmental health issueâ were not a sufficient
   basis upon which to grant an adjournment and he had failed to provide
   evidence of a medical condition that prevented him from participating
   in the proceedings.
   The Board found that the Tribunalâs decision to recommend the
   cancellation and recall of the Student's degree was reasonable and
   appropriate, and that character evidence and letters of support could
   not reasonably be expected to make a difference to this sanction.
   Appeal dismissed.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/13079
