Case No.: 709

THE DISCIPLINE APPEALS BOARD OF THE UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
OF THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
IN THE MATTER OF charges of academic dishonesty made on March 12, 2013
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code ofBehaviour on Academic
Matters, 1995 (the "Code")
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Act, 1971, S.O. 1971, c. 56 as
amended S.O. 1978, c. 88
BETWEEN:

Appellant
- and-

THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
Respondent

REASONS FOR DECISION
Hearing date: November 2, 2017
Members of the Panel:

Ms. Patricia D.S. Jackson, Chair
Professor Allan Kaplan, Faculty Panel Member
Ms. Wendy Wang, Student Panel Member
Ms. Alena Zelinka, Student Panel Member
Appearances:

Mr. Robert Centa, Counsel to the Universit
Mr. Darryl Singer, Counsel to Dr. C
Ms. Nadia Condotta, Counsel to Dr.
In attendance:

Ms. Tina H. Lie, Affiant
Not in attendance:

Dr. C - S - Former Student

-2-

Charges
1.

This case concerns the disposition of charges, initially filed on March 12, 2013,

relating to the thesis submitted by Dr. C-81111(the "former Student" or the
"appellant") for the degree of Doctor of Education in 1996. Those charges were:

(i)

in 1996, you knowingly represented the ideas of another, or the expression

of the ideas of another as your own work in the thesis titled "The Effects of Sport
Participation on the Academic and Career Aspirations of Black Male Student
Athletes in Toronto High Schools" ("Thesis"), which you submitted in conformity
with the requirements for the degree of Doctor of Education, contrary to section
B.i.l{d) of the Code; and
(ii)

in the alternative, by submitting the Thesis, you knowingly engaged in a

form of cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or misrepresentation
not otherwise described in the Code in order to obtain academic credit or other
academic advantage of any kind, contrary to section B.i.3(b) of the Code.

Th.e Decision Below
2.

The hearing of the charges by the Panel below was the subject of multiple

adjournments, more fully described later in these reasons, all at the request of the former
Student. At a hearing on June 20, 2017, the former Student's counsel requested a further
adjournment. That adjournment was denied, and the Panel proceeded to hear the
evidence.

3.

The Panel found that with respect to the former Student's Thesis there were:
" ... portions taken verbatim, or virtually verbatim, from secondary
sources without attribution .... and the secondary sources with the
portions taken by [the former Student] without attribution were also
highlighted. There were 67 examples - far too numerous to list and
describe in this decision but which we attach in a chart prepared by
the University, attached as Appendix "C" [and attached to these

-3-

Reasons as Appendix "A"]. They range from examples that are
several sentences long, to some that are paragraphs long, to some
that are pages long - the longest being approximately 9 pages.
Even verbatim, or virtually verbatim, it was also clear that they had
been carefully reviewed and altered ( or "tailored" as the University
put it) to better fit into [the former Student's] Thesis - as opposed
to just thoughtlessly or carelessly inserted into [the former
Student's] Thesis without attribution. This manifested itself in
several ways. First, American spellings of words had often been
replaced with their Canadian equivalents ( e.g., "honour" for
"honor", "travelled" for "traveled"). Second, punctuation and
capitalization were frequently changed in [the former Student's]
Thesis from the original to what presumably [the former Student]
considered more appropriate. Third, American references were
frequently replaced with more Canadian or generic descriptions
(e.g., "African American" by "Black"). Fourth, when the secondary
source had a footnote in it, the style of the footnote in the secondary
source had been changed to match the style of footnote that [the
former Student] was using in his Thesis. Fifth, even though the
secondary source was reproduced verbatim or virtually verbatim
without attribution, [the fonner Student] would occasionally add a
few words, not to indicate that it was from a secondary source, but
to incorporate the unattributed words into his narrative (e.g., "in 1:11-Y
experience"). Moreover, not only were virtually all of these 67
examples not attributed at all (as opposed to merely being
incorrectly attributed), but many of the secondary sources were not
even listed at all in the bibliography to [the former Student's]
Thesis.

-4-

4.

The Panel also noted that, not surprisingly, the evidence indicated that if the extent

of the plagiarism had come to the attention of the University beforehand, the degree in
question would never have been conferred.
5.

The Panel unanimously concluded that the former Student had violated Section B.

i.1 (d) of the Code and held that not only ought the former Student to have reasonably
known he was committing plagiarism but that he knowingly did so.
6.

Upon that finding, the University withdrew the second charge of academic

misconduct, and the Panel proceeded to consider the appropriate sanction. The Panel
unanimously concluded that the former Student should be given a final course grade of 0
in the course in which the Thesis was submitted, recommended that the former Student's
degree be cancelled and recalled, that this be permanently noted on the former Student's
academic transcript, and that the University remove the former Student's Thesis from any
library, wherever it may be located.
7.

The majority of the Panel also recommended that the President of the University

recommend to Governing Council that the former Student be expelled. On this last
sanction, the Co-Chair dissented, being of the view that expulsion of a student who had
completed his studies and received the impugned degree more than 20 years ago was
unnecessary and therefore excessive.
Appeal

8.

The former Student appeals from this decision and asks that:
(i)

the decision on finding and penalty be overturned and that the allegations

against him be dismissed or remitted to a new Tribunal Panel for a new hearing; or
(ii)

in the alternative, the decision on penalty be set aside and the matter

remitted to a new Tribunal Panel for a new hearing on penalty; or
(iii)

in the final alternative, that the decision or penalty be set aside and a lesser

penalty substituted.

-5-

9.

In summary, the appellant's position was outlined as follows:
•

In light of the appellant's mental health status (described more fully below) the
Panel ought to have granted his request for an adjournment.

•

The appellant's counsel immediately withdrew and indicated that she did not have
instructions on the basis of which she could proceed. Thus, even if the decision to
deny the adjournment was reasonable, when counsel withdrew it became
unreasonable to proceed in the absence of the former Student or his counsel.

•

In any event, once the former Student had been convicted of the offence, the Panel
ought to have adjourned to enable the former Student to participate in the penalty
phase of the hearing, and the decision not to do so was unreasonable.

•

On the latter point, the former Student argues that an adjournment would have
permitted him to participate in the penalty phase of the hearing in a manner which
might well have influenced the result. In particular, his counsel urged that there
might have been mitigating factors with respect to the commission of the offence,
although candidly conceded he had no information in this regard, and indeed there
was no evidence to suggest that below or on the appeal. It also would have
allowed the former Student to lead evidence of the extraordinarily serious impact
on him of the penalty the University was seeking. He argues that because he had
had an illustrious 20 year career predicated on having the doctorate, its withdrawal
after 20 years had an inordinately serious and inappropriate impact, which might
have led the Panel not to recommend that result. 1

10.

For the reasons set forth below, we dismiss the appeal.

The History of the Proceedings Below

1 The appellant's factum also made some reference to the possibility that the Chair of the Tribunal Panel was biased
or that the proceedings were tainted by an alleged conflict arising from earlier representation of the former Student
by another member of the University counsel's firm. However, his counsel made clear during argument that neither
of these was being relied upon as a ground of appeal.

-6-

11.

In view of the emphasis in this appeal on the Panel's failure to adjourn all or a

portion of the hearing on June 20, 2017, it is important to review the history of the
proceedings in some detail, which are also summarized in a chronology prepared by the
University, attached as Appendix B.

Initial Requests for Delay-March 2013 to February 2014
12.

The former Student initially retained a lawyer, Jonathan Shime, to represent him.

In the period March 2013 to February 2014 the University through its counsel attempted
to schedule the hearing of the charges, but at the former Student's request, agreed to
delay the hearing until the fall of 2013, setting a tentative date of October 16, 2013. The
former Student's description (through his counsel) was that he was "very broken" and
"barely able to function" although it then came to the University's attention that he was
giving several media interviews during the period.
13.

About a week before the tentatively scheduled hearing date, the former Student's

counsel advised that the former Student had discovered documents he intended to use at
the hearing, and in light of this late development, the parties agreed to adjourn the
hearing tentatively scheduled for October.

First Motion/or Disqualification and Abuse of Process-March 2014 to December
2016
14.

In early February 2014, Mr. Shime advised that he was no longer acting for the

former Student and shortly thereafter a second lawyer, Selwyn Pieters, was retained.
15.

The former Student then ( approximately a year after the charges were filed by the

University) brought a motion seeking an order:
(i)

removing Paliare Roland as counsel for the University due to an alleged

conflict of interest because a partner of that firm had previously acted for the
former Student in connection with his employment (the "First Disqualification
Motion") and

-7-

(ii)

staying the proceeding as an abuse of process (the "First Abuse of Process

Motion").
16.

Because of the allegation of conflict of interest, the University retained a second

counsel, Ben Zarnett of Goodmans LLP, to argue the motions and deal with associated
matters. The University opposed the First Disqualification Motion and the relief sought
on the grounds that any conflict had been waived by the former Student prior to the
University retaining Paliare Roland, and (2) that he had been represented by prior
independent counsel for almost a year during which time he had full knowledge of the
facts that formed the basis of First Disqualification Motion and had not raised any
conflict on the part of the Paliare Roland.
17.

In July 2014, Chair Paul Morrison heard and decided a motion for directions from

the University and released a decision ordering the fonner Student to produce certain
documents and to comply with a protocol to address the question of potential privilege
associated with those documents.
18.

In October 2014, the fonner Student delivered a set of documents in response that

did not comply with the direction. There was a dispute over the scope of disclosure and
over the next several months the parties through their counsel attempted to resolve the
production issues.
19.

Those issues had not been resolved when in April of 2015 the fonner Student's

counsel, Mr. Pieters, sent the University a letter identifying a new issue described as the
"ultimate limitation period" which he said would have to be resolved before proceeding
with the other motions. The University's position was that the issue had no merit, and
was raised solely for the purpose of delay and should be dealt with as part of the pending
motions.
20.

This led to a case conference in August of 2015 at which Chair Morrison directed

the parties to file further materials regarding the outstanding issues.

- 8-

21.

The former Student never complied with this order. Shortly before he was to file

those materials, his counsel advised the University that he no longer represented the
former Student, and shortly thereafter the former Student sought an extension of time to
comply.
22.

Before a case conference could be held to resolve the issues of timing and

production, the former Student raised a suggestion that Chair Morrison was biased as a
result of the fact that his firm acted for the Ontario College of Teachers in the prosecution
of the former Student in August 2015.
23.

Shortly thereafter Chair Morrison withdrew. In a decision which recorded his

conclusion, he said he had been unaware of his firm's retainer for the College; that the
firm had erected a confidentiality screen so that he had no knowledge of the discipline
case whatsoever; and that on the basis of the applicable law with respect to bias he had no
hesitation in recording that he saw no basis for any suggestion of actual or apprehended
bias in his role as Chair. However, he concluded, it was in the interests of transparency
and that justice not only be done but seen to be done that he withdraw.
24.

In early 2016, Chair Fishbein was appointed to replace Chair Morrison and the

University requested a case conference to address production issues and pending motions.
In early February, the former Student advised the Tribunal that he had not yet retained a
lawyer, that he intended to pursue his motions but that (without further explanation) he
would not be available until late April or May of 2016. A case conference was therefore
scheduled for April 29, 2016, one of the dates on which the former Student indicated he
was available. In correspondence confirming this date, the Tribunal reminded the former
Student that there were 2 outstanding production orders made against him which should
be complied with by the date of the case conference.
25.

Two weeks before the scheduled case conference the former Student (who had not

yet complied with the production orders) wrote to the University and the Tribunal to
advise that he was "navigating 2 personal issues and therefore request[ ed] a 6-8 month

-9-

adjournment", which request was opposed by the University. The former Student
submitted in support of his request a medical note from a doctor stating, in its entirety:
[The former Student] is my patient. He has been unable to
work for medical reasons.
He is under a great deal of stress and he needs to disengage
for a period of time to get his professional activities in
order.
He will follow up with me as appropriate.

26.

On April 26th, 2016, over the objection of the University, Chair Fishbein granted

the former Student's request for an adjournment. In subsequently issued reasons, he
noted that the medical note submitted by the former Student was deficient in a number of
respects, in that it:
(i)

provided no information about the timing or the extent of the doctor's

treatment of the former Student;
(ii)

provided no medical diagnosis, information about treatment or prognosis.

It did not say what "period of time" would be required for the former Student to

"get his professional activities in order" or even define what the latter term meant.
Nor did it say what the former Student was doing or the relationship of stress to it;
(iii)

contained no information to suggest the doctor was told this note would be

used at the University Tribunal or for what purpose;
(iv)

provided no opinion of the fonner Student's inability to participate in the

case conference or in further proceedings, nor any information as to what
accommodations might alleviate any concerns ifthere were any; and
(v)

there was no reference to or substantiation in the note of the fonner

Student's reference to post-traumatic stress disorder, depression, or hopelessness.

- 10 -

27.

Chair Fishbein also noted that the hearing had been paralyzed by the former

Student's motions and cautioned as follows:
21. Again, notwithstanding that there may not be
immediate urgency in these proceedings, they cannot be
held in a state ofparalysis that they have been, whether
that has been [the former Student's] deliberate intention or
not. It is [the former Student] who has made the
disqualification motion. It is [the former Student] who has
failed to comply with the production order. It is [the
former Student] who has not yet retained counsel. All of
this notwithstanding frequent indulgences and extensions
granted to [the former Student]. Simple noncompliance by
[the former Student] with these directions and just
ignoring them cannot indefinitely prevent these
proceedings from continuing. I caution [the former
Student] that neither the Code nor any rule of law
necessarily requires [the former Student] be represented by
counsel for these proceedings (regardless of how preferable
that may be for everyone, not just [the former Student]). I
further caution that the Code explicitly envisages that the
Tribunal may proceed in his absence provided he has
proper notice. (Emphasis added.)

28.

The adjournment request was then granted on condition that the former Student

provide "better and sufficient" medical evidence by May 24, 2016, and that a further case
conference be scheduled within 3 months. Chair Fishbein specifically noted that the
further hearing would be peremptory and that, subject to whatever might arise out of the
doctor's note or completely unforeseen circumstances, no further adjournments or
indulgences would be granted to the fonner Student without the University's consent.
29.

In late May, 2016, the former Student provided 2 additional medical notes from

the same doctor, who appeared to be a general practitioner. The doctor noted that the
former Student had been under his care for a number of years, that multiple
circumstances including the t~reat of imminent disciplinary action were "triggers for
suicidal thoughts", that he was arranging mental health support to develop a diagnosis

- 11 -

and plan for the former Student and that he should "not participate in any disciplinary
hearings/proceedings at this time".
30.

On June 13, 2016, Chair Fishbein released an interim decision noting that most of

the deficiencies he earlier noted concerning the medical correspondence continued to
exist and that the former Student had repeatedly failed "to provide a compelling or
justifiable basis to indefinitely adjourn the proceeding". Nonetheless, he granted the
former Student a further adjournment to a scheduled case conference on August 29, 2016.
31.

On August 21, 2016, eight days before the scheduled case conference, the former

Student advised the Tribunal that he was scheduled for a psychiatric appointment on
September 13, 2016, and that he would provide a psychiatric assessment shortly
thereafter. The University took the position that in light of these repeated requests to
delay the proceeding, the former Student's motion should be treated as abandoned and
the Tribunal should schedule the Hearing on the merits.
32.

The case conference took place as scheduled on August 29, 2016, and the fonner

Student did not attend. Over the University's objection, Chair Fishbein granted a further
adjournment of the case conference to October 5, 2016, stating that the adjournment was
granted "as a last indulgence only because [the former Student's] psychiatric appointment
is only 2 weeks away". He made it clear that the October 5, 2016 date was peremptory
and directed the former Student to provide the results of the psychiatric assessment by
September 30, 2016.
33.

In September, the University brought a motion to be heard at the hearing

scheduled for October 5 to dismiss the First Disqualification Motion and the First Abuse
of Process Motion, or in the alternative an order that the motions be permanently stayed
or deemed abandoned.
34.

On October 2, 2016, three days before the case conference, the former Student

wrote to the Tribunal as follows:
"Dear Mr. Chair.

- 12 -

I have been diagnosed with "Major Depressive Disorder".
A full confidential report is available from my family
doctor. I will make arrangements to provide you with the
assessment and the accompanying note advising me not to
participate in these proceedings.
Given my precarious mental health I am doing the best I
can to meet your deadlines. Your continued patience and
understanding are appreciated."
35.

The former Student also attached a copy of a report from Dr. Ahmed Jehnaan

Illyas, which he did not provide to the University.
36.

On October 5, 2016, the day of the scheduled case conference, the fonner Student

sent a further email to the Tribunal which said:
"Dear Mr. Lang
Please pass these confidential documents on to the Chair.
I am drowning in depression and doing my best to respond
to this invasive scrutiny of the most intimate and private
details of my mental health.
I have attached the confidential psyc. assessment for the
Chair.
I am unable to participate in these proceedings."
37.

The former Student did not attend the October 5, 2016 case conference. The

University took the position that the Chair should not take into account any of the
documents and submissions that had not been provided to the University (and to which
the University could therefore not respond). However, again over the objections of the
University, Chair Fishbein adjourned the hearing to December 1, 2016. He also ordered
that the medical reports which the former Student relied upon to be provided to the
University. He concluded:
"Yet again, I have erred on the side of [the fonner
Student's] health - but [the fonner Student] is specifically
warned that, short of compelling medical reasons, his non-

cooperation, and continued ignoring or flaunting of the

- 13 -

Tribunal's procedural directions will not be permitted to .
result in a de facto indefinite stay of these charges against
him."
38.

On November 11, 2016 the University delivered materials in respect of the

scheduled case conference, including a report of Dr. Lisa Ramshaw, a forensic
psychiatrist at the Centre for Addiction and Mental Health, who had reviewed all the
medical documentation submitted by the former Student.
39.

Her report concluded that the medical documents were "insufficient to conclude

that [the former Student] is psychiatrically incapable of participating in the proceedings".
This conclusion was explained in part as follows:
In the letters and report there was no noted collateral
information from Dr. ~ s friends, family or recent
employer to either doc~ere were also no comments
about the reliability of his self-report. This is particularly
important in light of the disconnect between his apparent
ability to work in Chicago and travel, and his apparent
inability to attend at or participate in his hearings or to
produce the documents requested. Further, while his selfreported symptoms are in keeping with a Major Depressive
Episode, the symptoms are subjective. There was no
comment about how the depression had specifically
impacted his daily function. While Dr. Zizzo indicated that
he was unable to participate in the proceedings, it remains
unclear why this is the case, given his other abilities. It is
also unclear what the "guarded prognosis" is referred to in
Dr. Illyas' report, in the context of being untreated at that
time.
Further, the letters and the report do not describe or
consider important information that would be necessary to
conclude that [the former Student] is psychiatrically
incapable of participating in the proceedings, including (a)
information from his employer (including more details
about this start date and hours, his role and daily function,
and any problems he may be having); (b) further
information about his personality style, function, and
mental state from other collateral sources (including
family, friends and his therapist, Ms. Van Impe); (c)
whether he is taking the recommended medication and

- 14 -

whether he is engaged in the recommended non-medical
treatments; and (d) information about the impact of such
treatment on his depression and substance abuse problems.
40.

The day before the scheduled case conference, well after the deadline for

correspondence on behalf of the former Student, a letter was received from Warren
Kinsella of the Daisy Group, who described himself as a long-time advisor and friend to
the former Student, stating:
As you are perhaps aware, [the former Student] has been
diagnosed by several medical professionals to be in the
grip of deep depression - before, during and after his time
as the Director of the Toronto District School Board.
It was this impairment, this medically diagnosed deep
depression, that persuaded [the fonner Student's] doctors
to insist that he stay away from the U of T's process.
We are concerned that such a process may violate the.
principles of natural justice. We are concerned that it
denied [the former Student] the opportunity to be heard in a
way that did not worsen his mental and emotional state.
41.

Accompanying that letter was another letter from the former Student's doctor that

indicated the former Student had started a treatment plan and suggested as follows:
I would suggest that [the former Student] not participate in
the disciplinary hearing during his treatment phase as it
will possibly complicate his recovery.
I remain under the direction of the psychiatrist and will rerefer [the former Student] back to psychiatry ifwe require
further treatment recommendation or guidance. (Emphasis
added.)
42.

The December 1, 2016 case conference took place as scheduled. The former

Student did not attend. Chair Fishbein declined to grant a further adjournment on the
basis of allegations concerning the former Student's medical condition. He noted,
notwithstanding the comments of the Daisy Group, that it was not correct to suggest that
the former Student's doctors "insist he stay away from the U of T's process", and that
indeed no doctor had given such insistence. He noted that the doctor's letter that

- 15 -

accompanied the most request merely "suggested" that the former Student not participate
in the disciplinary hearing. Finally, Chair Fishbein noted the number of respects in which
Dr. Ramshaw had concluded, unequivocally, that the material provided by the former
Student was "insufficient to conclude that he is psychiatrically incapable of participating
in the proceedings". He noted that although the report on those deficiencies had been
provided to the former Student well before the December 1, 2016 hearing there had been
no response from the former Student or his doctors to rebut or answer any of the concerns
raised by Dr. Ramshaw. He concluded that in the circumstances he was no longer
prepared to continue adjourning the case conference over the objections of the University
as he had repeatedly done in the past.
43.

Chair Fishbein then dismissed all of the former Student's motions and shortly

thereafter released written reasons in which he held that:
(i)

the former Student was at best a former client of Paliare Roland when the

University sought to retain the firm in connection with the academic discipline
matter;
(ii)

the two Paliare Roland retainers dealt with separate and unrelated matters;

(iii)

Paliare Roland could not have had any confidential information about the

academic discipline matter;
(iv)

Paliare Roland imposed an ethical wall between the former Student's

former counsel and discipline counsel for the University, and there was no
evidence that this measure was ineffective or compromised;
(v)

Paliare Roland provided full disclosure of the unrelated retainer to the

former Student who immediately contacted his independent counsel, Mr. Shime,
who had been retained to represent him in the discipline matter;

- 16 -

(vi)

it was more than fair to say that the former Student had waived or

consented to any possible conflict and behaved in a manner to demonstrate that
waiver or consent;
(vii)

even on the record advanced by the former Student there was no conflict of

interest on the part of discipline counsel, Paliare Roland, and the First
Disqualification Motion should be dismissed on the grounds that it had been
abandoned and on the merits;
(viii) the First Abuse of Process Motion had been abandoned and there was in
any event no basis for an abuse of process motion that was ever clearly or
adequately set forth.
Hearing on Charges and Penalty - January to June 20, 2017

44.

Chair Fishbein also ordered the hearing on the merits to commence on February

16, 2017 and a Notice of Hearing to that effect was sent to the former Student. The
December 6, 2016 Notice explicitly provided that:
You may choose to attend the hearing with or without
representation, or not attend at all. Ifyou do not attend, the
hearing may take place without you and you will not be
entitled to further notice of the proceeding. ...
If the Panel finds you guilty, it will then be asked to
determine an appropriate penalty. (Emphasis in the
original.)
45.

On February 6, 2017, ten days before the scheduled hearing on the merits, the

fonner Student retained a third lawyer, Carol Shirtliff-Hinds. This counsel wrote to the
Tribunal advising that the former Student would be seeking an adjournment of the
hearing, a request opposed by the University.
46.

"With a great degree of reluctance" Chair Fishbein once again agreed to the

adjournment and rescheduled the hearing for April 18, 2017, a date agreed to by all
counsel. He also scheduled a case conference for February 28, 2017 (a date and time

- 17 -

agreed to by all counsel) to ascertain the scope of the dispute on the merits. Chair
Fishbein described his conclusion on the adjournment as follows:
It is difficult to say that the University will be substantially
prejudiced by a further 8-week delay, as unpalatable as it
.may be. The consequences to [the former Student] may be
extremely severe and, even if extremely belatedly and with
not much explanation for his delay, he has finally sought
counsel , which will not only be beneficial to him but of
assistance to the processing of these charges and certainly
the light in which their outcome will be viewed. If only
barely, I have decided to exercise my discretion to grant
this adjournment. But as was stressed to counsel the
hearing on April 18 will be regarded as peremptory
regardless of whether [the former Student] has counsel or
not (recognizing that I've already said this about previous
hearings even if it inadvertently was omitted from the
December 16th decision). Barring completely unforeseen
or unpredictable circumstances, the hearing will proceed on
the merits on that day. Counsel for [the former Student]
has repeatedly assured me that she will be able to proceed
on the merits on that day and has advised me that as she is
representing [the former Student] pro bona no issue of [the
former Student's] ability to afford a lawyer will be raised
as it has been in the past. (Emphasis added.)
47.

At the February 28, 2017 case conference, Ms. Shirtliff-Hinds advised that the

former Student intended to bring at least three applications before the hearing on the
merits. Chair Fishbein directed that the applications be filed in writing no later than
March 17, 2017 and that counsel for the former Student advise the University of any
witnesses or additional evidence proposed to be called. To accommodate the
applications, Chair Fishbein directed that the hearing on April 18, 2017 start at an earlier
time.
48.

A revised February 16, 2017 Notice of Hearing (Peremptory) was delivered on

March 2 to the former Student which stated in part:
As per the Chair's Case Management Interim Decision
dated February 15, 2017 ... this [April 18, 2017] hearing is
peremptory regardless ofwhether you have counsel or not.

- 18 -

You may choose to attend the hearing with or without
representation. If you do not attend the hearing may take
place without you and you will not be entitled to further
notice in the proceeding ...
If the Panel finds you guilty, it will then be asked to
determine an appropriate penalty. (Emphasis in the
original.)
49.

On March 17, 2017, the former Student filed the motions to be heard at the start of

the hearing. He sought:
(i)

the recusal of Chair Fishbein due to a reasonable apprehension of bias ("the

Recusal Motion");
(ii)

the disqualification of Paliare Roland as counsel for the University (the

"Second Disqualification Motion"); and
(iii)

an order staying the Tribunal proceedings as an abuse of process (the

"Second Abuse of Process Motion").
50.

The University advised that it intended to move to strike the former Student's

Second Disqualification and Abuse of Process Motions and asked that they be heard with
the Recusal Motion in advance of the April 18, 2017 hearing date.
51.

On March 28, 2017 a case conference was held at which Chair Fishbein scheduled

a hearing of the motions for April 6, 2017, subject to Ms. Shirtliff-Hinds consulting with
the former Student as to his availability for the hearing.
52.

The next day, Ms. Shirtliff-Hinds advised that the former Student would not make

himself available on April 6, 2017 but wanted to be present and asserted that it was his
right to do so. The University urged that the hearing proceed notwithstanding and that if
the former Student could not attend personally he could participate by Skype.
53.

This led to a further case conference at which Chair Fishbein rejected the former

Student's argument that the notice of the April 6, 2017 hearing was not reasonable or that
there would be unfairness or prejudice to participation by Skype. Nonetheless, he

- 19 -

decided "to extend the benefit of any limited doubt ... about any conceivable unfairness
to [the former Student]". He therefore directed the motions to be heard as expeditiously
as possible on April 18, 2017.
54.

As a result of a subsequent dispute about how the hearing would unfold on April

18, 2017 a case conference was held on April 12, 2017. At that time Chair Fishbein
concluded that the hearing on the merits should commence on April 18, 2017 (depending
on the outcome of the motions) and also that there "would only be a single evidentiary
hearing". In this respect he rejected the former Student's submission that the hearing of
the motion should be bifurcated to address any evidence relevant to the Second Abuse of
Process Motion separately from the evidence on the merits. At a hearing on April 18,
2017, with the former Student in attendance, Chair Fishbein heard and dismissed the
Second Disqualification Motion, and the Recusal Motion, and allowed the Second Abuse
of Process Motion to proceed as part of the hearing on the merits.
55.

In reasons released subsequently, Chair Fishbein:
(i)

rejected the argument that the use of certain language (for example

"torture" or "tortuous") in prior decisions disclosed cumulatively a reasonable
apprehension of bias, noting that there was not (nor could there be) any allegation
that the impugned language was inaccurate;
(ii)

noted that in all but one case the former Student had succeeded in hearings

before him over the vigorous opposition of the University, a strong indication that
he had no bias against the former Student; and
(iii)

relied upon the case law that established adjudicators have a duty not to

yield to unfounded claims of bias and repeated adjournment requests with the
resultant delay and additional cost to litigants and the system.
56.

Chair Fishbein also granted the University's motion to dismiss the Second

Disqualification Motion on the grounds that it had been previously considered and
decided.

- 20 -

57.

Finally, he held that the Second Abuse of Process Motion had not been fully

argued and determined in the earlier proceedings and therefore should proceed as part of
the hearing on the merits.
58.

After consultation with the parties, Chair Fishbein scheduled June 20, 21, 22 and

26, 2017 for a hearing on the merits.
59.

Again, a April 19, 2017 Notice of Hearing - Continuation was delivered to the

former Student which said, in part:
You may choose to attend the hearing with or without
representation. Ifyou do not attend, the hearing may take
place without you and you will not be entitled to further
notice of the proceeding. ....
If the Panel finds you guilty, it will then be asked to
determine an appropriate penalty. (Emphasis in the
original.)

The former Student applies for judicial review and seeks an adjournment
60.

On May 18, 2017 the former Student commenced an application for judicial

review challenging Chair Fishbein's decisions on the motions. In the factum delivered in
support of this application he said that he should be allowed to re-litigate the issue in the
Disqualification Motion on the basis that he should be able to have "it actually be argued
by him now that he is mentally able to deal with the matter".
61.

Shortly thereafter, the former Student gave an interview to a former Chair of the

Toronto District School Board which was posted online. During the-course of the
interview he said: "I'm on the mend and, again, inspired by the outpouring of support
from family and friends and supporters. So I'm -I'm ready to fight ... " concerning his
thesis, while acknowledging some problems he indicated he intended to "vigorously
defend" his thesis to the University and again noted "I'm here today doing this video and
fighting back. As I said, I'm on the mend."

- 21 -

62.

Subsequently, the former Student took the position that the hearing on the merits,

scheduled for June 20, 2017, should be adjourned pending the outcome of the judicial
review application. The University opposed this request and characterized it as a ploy to
further delay the Tribunal hearings.
63.

At a case conference on June 1, 2017, Chair Fishbein denied the request for an

adjournment and in reasons subsequently released June 8, 2017. In the subsequent
reasons, Chair Fishbein held that "adjudicative efficiency and an appropriate allocation of
resources, particularly in long-delayed proceedings like these, in my view dictate no
adjournment".
The Former Student unsuccessfully asks the Divisional Court to stay the Tribunal
Proceeding

64.

The former Student then retained another lawyer who advised that he intended to

bring an urgent motion to the Divisional Court on June 16, 2017 to stay the Tribunal
proceeding. In response, the University brought a cross-motion to quash the application
for judicial review.
65.

It is to be noted that nowhere in the Divisional Court materials did the fonner

Student suggest he was incapable of attending the hearing or instructing counsel and
there was no suggestion that he was incapable of swearing to the truth of the contents of
the affidavit filed in support of the proceeding.
66.

The former Student's motion to stay and the University's cross-motion was heard

on June 16, 2017. On June.19, the day before the Tribunal hearing was scheduled to
start, the court advised counsel that the former Student's motion to stay had been
dismissed and the University's cross-motion to quash allowed, with reasons to follow.
67.

In the result, the hearing on the merits was set to proceed the next day, June 20,

2017, as set forth in the Notice previously delivered to the former Student.

- 22 -

The Hearing on the Merits - June 20, 2017

68.

On June 20, 2017 the former Student did not attend the hearing. His counsel did

and advised that the former Student had "mental health issues" and that she now had
conflicting and therefore not clear instructions. She requested an adjournment, saying
she was unable to continue. She advised that if the Panel decided to proceed with the
hearing she would not participate because she believed that she could not ethically do so.
She said that the former Student "continues to see a doctor", but that although she had
asked for additional medical documentation she had not received any.
69.

As it noted in its subsequently released reasons, the Panel pressed counsel for

more information as to the nature of the medical issue, but counsel was not able to
provide any further information than the medical notes and assessment that had been
provided earlier in 2016 (that Chair Fishbein had previously determined to be an
inadequate basis for an adjournment).
70.

The Panel then adjourned briefly to allow counsel to contact the former Student to

determine how soon he could provide medical information to support the adjournment
request. After speaking with the former Student, counsel advised that he had had "an
anxiety attack yesterday" and could perhaps provide substantiation that he was unable to
proceed by the end of the week.
71.

After recessing to consider the submissions, the Panel unanimously determined

not to grant the adjournment.
72.

The reasons for this decision are contained in the Panel's reasons for decision on

liability and penalty, all of which were dated July 10, 2017.
73.

The Panel did not accept counsel's attempt to conflate "mental health 'issues"'

with an actual disability or incapacity to participate in the proceedings. They did not
doubt that the proceedings would engender anxiety, stress or some degree of depression
in the former Student. That the proceedings have raised "mental health issues" for him
had been a repeated refrain from the fonner Student, his counsel, and/or his

- 23 -

representatives. However, on every occasion where the former Student had been granted
an indulgence or an adjournment to medically substantiate that he was actually disabled
or incapacitated to such a degree that he was unable to participate in the proceedings he
failed adequately or satisfactorily to do so (as detailed above).
74.

The Panel also noted that not only had the former Student been able to swear an

affidavit in support of his unsuccessful motion to stay this proceeding before the
Divisional Court, no issue of the former Student's health or ability to give instructions
was raised in those proceedings.
75.

Finally, the Panel noted that it had not been advised in the face of explicit

questions that the former Student was hospitalized or under immediate medical
supervision but only told that no medical corroboration could be obtained for almost five
days, with no indication of the form or nature of whatever medical corroboration might
be forthcoming. Indeed, the Panel noted that the fact that "no medical corroboration
could be obtained for almost five days [led] to the not unreasonable inference that he was
neither under immediate medical supervision nor suffering from any acute crisis". The
Panel also noted that waiting until the end of the week for medical corroboration would
lead to the cancelling of at least three scheduled days of hearing, and would virtually
assure that the hearing would not resume for several months. The Panel concluded:
12. In the end, absent any (let alone clear and compelling)
medical evidence (and in reviewing the history of the prior
proceedings and interlocutory decisions [the former
Student] could not possibly say he was unaware of both the
need for such medical evidence or the required contents of
such medical evidence), in all of the circumstances, we
were not prepared to exercise our jurisdiction to grant an
adjournment.
76.

After the Tribunal announced its decision not to adjourn, counsel for the former

Student withdrew.
77.

The Tribunal proceeded to hear evidence and make the conclusions on liability

and penalty that have been detailed at the outset of these Reasons for Decision.

- 24-

Our Decision on the Appeal
78.

The Code provides wide powers for the Discipline Appeals Board to modify a

decision imposed by a Tribunal Panel:
E.7. The Discipline Appeals Board shall have the power,
(a)
to dismiss an appeal summarily and without formal hearing
if it determines that the appeal is frivolous, vexatious or without
foundation;
(b)
in circumstances which the Tribunal members hearing the
appeal consider to be exceptional, to order a new hearing; and
(c)
in any other case, to affirm, reverse, quash, vary or modify
the verdict, penalty or sanction appealed from and substitute any
verdict, penalty or sanction that could have been given or imposed
at trial.
79.

Notwithstanding these broad powers, Discipline Appeals Board cases have

generally analyzed decisions under appeal to examine whether the Tribunal Panel made
an error in the application of general administrative law, the interpretation or application
of a large body of University Tribunal and Appeals Board cases, or in fact-finding
particularly where the findings are unsupported by any evidence.
80.

In other words, the jurisdiction on appeal is broader than simply asking the

question whether the decision below was unreasonable. It extends to examining whether
the decision below represents a significant error of principle or law, including with
respect to the application of established principles drawn from the Tribunal's trial and
appellate jurisprudence.
81.

In the result, Discipline Appeal Board Panels have made decisions based on these

principles, rather than whether they would have decided cases differently themselves.
82.

This deference to the findings of a Tribunal Panel is particularly appropriate in

relation to the conduct of the hearing and in particular the decision whether or not to
grant a request for an adjournment. The decision to grant or deny one falls squarely

- 25 -

within the discretion of the panel hearing the case. Natural justice and procedural
fairness can only be said to be infringed where the Panel exercised its discretion in an
unreasonable or non-judicious fashion. 2
83.

In any event, in this case we conclude that the decisions complained of on this

appeal were not unreasonable, contrary to legal principle, unsupported by the evidence,
or injudicious. Indeed, even ifwe were to ask ourselves the question of whether we
would have granted the adjournment, for the reasons elaborated below we would come to
the same conclusion as the Panel.

(a) The Decision not to Adjourn all or part of the June 20, 2017 Hearing
84.

The former Student argues that:
(i)

the June 20, 2017 hearing was the first peremptory hearing date and given

the "medical evidence that attendance at the hearing would be harmful to his
health" the Panel ought not to have proceeded in his absence, and to do so was a
breach of procedural fairness and natural justice;
(ii)

in any event, once his counsel withdrew and he was thus unrepresented it

could not possibly have been reasonable to proceed. The effective result was to
deny the former Student a fair opportunity to make submissions on either the
alleged academic misconduct or the penalty imposed; and
(iii)

in any event, procedural fairness required the Panel to adjourn before its

determination of penalty. Not to do so was unreasonable and in breach of
procedural fairness. It was "no secret what the University would be asking for" in
the way of penalty, so that the Panel must have been aware that the former
Student's career would be entirely in jeopardy. He should therefore have been
given the opportunity to lead evidence of mitigating factors with respect to the

2

See for example Senjule v. LSUC, 2013 ONSC 218 (Div. Ct.) at paras. 20-22

- 26 -

commission of the offence and/or the draconian and serious impact on him of the
revocation of the degree which it was known the University would ask for.
85.

The Court of Appeal has given a useful and "non-exhaustive list of procedural and

substantive considerations" that may factor into a decision to grant or refuse an
adjournment:
A non-exhaustive list of procedural and substantive considerations
in deciding whether to grant or refuse an adjournment can be
derived from these cases. Factors which may support the denial
of an adjournment may include a lack of compliance with prior
court orders, previous adjournments that have been granted to the
application, previous peremptory hearing dates, the desirability of
having the matter decided and a finding that the applicant is
seeking to manipulate the system by orchestrating delay. Factors
which may favour the granting of an adjournment include the fact
that the consequences of the hearing are serious, that the applicant
would be prejudiced if the request were not granted, and a finding
that the applicant was honestly seeking to exercise his right to ,
counsel and had been represented in the proceedings up until the
time of the adjournment request. In weighing these factors, the
timeliness of the request, the applicant's reasons for being unable
to proceed on the scheduled date and the length of the requested
adjournment should also be considered. 3 (Emphasis added)
86.

As set forth above, and referred to further below, all of the factors supporting the

denial of an adjournment exist in this case, and the factors which might favour the
granting of an adjournment had in fact led to multiple adjournments of the proceedings
prior to the June 20th hearing.
87.

As set forth in the history of proceedings above, and contrary to the former

Student's submissions, the June 20, 2017 hearing was not the first peremptory hearing
date he had been given. Indeed, the evidence indicates he had been given numerous
indulgences and adjournments, in many cases on the express statement that the next
hearing date (which the fonner Student missed) was peremptory, and frequently with
descriptions that effectively amounted to the same warning. In virtually every case, the

3

The Law Society of Upper Canada vs. Igbinosun, 2009 ONCA 484 at para. 37

- 27 -

former Student was also specifically advised that general statements that he had "mental
health issues" or that his medical condition meant that participation would be harmful to
him was not a sufficient basis upon which to obtain an adjournment. He was specifically
advised on more than one occasion (for example see paragraphs 26, 30, 39 and 42 above)
of the medical evidence that would be required to demonstrate his inability to participate
in the proceedings. The need for clear and compelling medical evidence of the inability
of the former Student to participate in the proceedings was only reinforced by the number
of times the former Student claimed his condition precluded attendance, but was
unwilling or unable to demonstrate that and yet requested further adjournments. Yet
when the peremptory hearing commenced on June 20, not only was there no hint of any
such evidence, the most the fonner Student could proffer was that something might be
forthcoming five days later.
88.

The former Student has never, even to date, provided medical evidence that he had

a medical condition which incapacitated him from participating in the proceedings.
89.

We share the view of the Panel that it is not surprising that the seriousness of these

proceedings and the potential consequences for the former Student were such that they
caused him great stress and anxiety, and that stress and anxiety would be lessened ifhe
were not required to attend to answer to the charges. But that is not a basis upon which
the proceedings could be adjourned - let alone continuously adjourned.
90.

This conclusion is not affected by his counsel's decision to withdraw when the last

requested adjournment was not granted. In the first place, we are not prepared to
conclude, as the former Student appeared to invite us to do, that the former Student was
not aware that if the adjournment was granted his counsel would not remain in
attendance. In the absence of any evidence one way or the other we must assume that
counsel had advised the client that this would be the result of a failure to obtain an
adjournment and (apparently) a failure to provide instructions on what was to be done
once the adjournment was not granted.

- 28 -

91.

Moreover, the former Student had repeatedly been advised, most recently in the

Notice for the June 20, 2017 hearing, that he could choose to attend the hearing with or
without representation, but that ifhe did not attend, the hearing might take place without
him and he would not be entitled to any further notice. He had received multiple similar
warnings with respect to previously scheduled hearings.
92.

We also conclude that it was neither erroneous nor unreasonable for the Panel to

proceed to the sanction phase of the hearing, following its determination that the former
Student was guilty of the charge.
93.

The hearing scheduled for June 20 th was to deal with both the liability and, if the

former Student was convicted, penalty phase of the proceeding.
94.

The Tribunal's Rules ofPractice and Procedure make clear that a person who

does not attend a hearing of which they have had notice is not entitled to further notice of
different stages of the proceeding:
Rule 17
Where notice of an oral hearing, electronic hearing, or written hearing has
been given to a person in accordance with this rule, and the person does
not attend at or does not participate in the hearing, the Panel may proceed
in the absence of the person or without the person's participation and the
person is not entitled to any further notice of the proceeding. (Emphasis
added.)
95.

Even more importantly, the former Student had multiple instances of notice that

the penalty hearing would proceed immediately after the hearing of the charges. The six
Notices of Hearing he had been given, including the Notice of Hearing for the June 20,
2017 hearing warned him that "if the panel finds you guilty, it will then be asked to
determine an appropriate penalty" 4 • In addition, on multiple occasions Chair Fishbein's
decisions reinforced the same warning.

In addition to the examples set forth at paragraphs 43, 48 and 59 above, Notices of Hearing dated June 10, 2014
and March 2, 2017 contained the same notification that upon conviction the Panel would proceed to consider
penalty.

4

- 29 -

96.

Moreover, the University did not call any additional evidence in support of its

argument on penalty, so there could be no basis for a suggestion of non-disclosure to the
fonner Student. As well, with the Notice of Hearing he was given a copy of the Code
which set out the sanctions the Panel could impose upon him, and a link to the website
containing past Tribunal decisions that would permit him to assess the potential penalty
he would be facing.
97.

We conclude there is no reasonable basis for an argument that the former Student

was not afforded reasonable notice before the Tribunal considered his penalty, as he
alleged, or the opportunity to research analogous cases to examine penalties imposed and
determine whether his penalty was reasonable, as he also alleges.
98.

In any event, the former Student has failed to demonstrate a basis upon which it

could be concluded that if the Panel had not proceeded directly to a hearing on sanction a
variation of the penalty might be imposed.
99.

In his written submissions, the former Student asserted that if he had been given

the opportunity he would have called character evidence and provided letters of support
at the penalty phase of the hearing. In oral submissions, his counsel candidly agreed that
he was unable to provide any such evidence, or particulars of what that evidence would
be. Nor did he provide any authority to suggest that such evidence would warrant a
different penalty from the one imposed.
100.

He did argue that the former Student had achieved "illustrious things" and a "lofty

position" with the result that the revocation of his PhD would have a much greater impact
than had the plagiarism been discovered when it first occurred. In our view, this amounts
to an argument that a student who succeeds in concealing an offence for a long period of
time is entitled to a lesser penalty than one whose offence is discovered immediately. We
do not find this argument persuasive. Indeed, one might reasonably say that a student
who has had 20 or more years of benefit arising from the plagiarism he initially
committed should receive a greater penalty than one whose offence is discovered
immediately and before that benefit arises.

- 30 -

101.

We find the Panel's conclusion to recommend the cancellation and recall of the

former Student's degree not unreasonable and indeed appropriate. We agree with the
University that character evidence and letters of support could not reasonably be expected
to make a difference to this sanction.
102.

Plagiarism, particularly plagiarism of the nature and extent found in the former

Student's thesis is a very serious offence. However, apart from admitting to plagiarism at
his initial meeting with the Dean's designate, as the Panel noted, the former Student has
not demonstrated any real remorse or an appreciation of the gravity of his misconduct
that might persuade the Panel to mitigate the usual and regular sanctions imposed by the
Tribunal in these circumstances.
103.

Indeed, in all cases before the Tribunal where plagiarism was found at a graduate

level thesis the decisions have recommended cancellation of the student's degree, except
in the one case where the plagiarism was discovered before the degree was conferred and
expulsion was recommended. That this would be the expected result of a conviction on a
charge of this sort was in effect acknowledged by the former Student, whose counsel
acknowledged that there could be "no surprise about the seriousness of the penalty the
University would be asking for".
104.

The propriety of the cancellation of the degree was reinforced by the unequivocal

evidence of Professor De Nil that had plagiarism been detected before the former Student
received his degree, the degree would never have been conferred. This seems to us to be
absolutely unsurprising.
105.

In all of the circumstances we conclude that the Panel's decision to proceed to

assess the penalty, and to determine that the fonner Student should be given a final
course grade of 0 in the course in which the thesis was submitted and to recommend that
the former Student's degree be cancelled and recalled was neither procedurally unfair nor
unreasonable. Indeed, we think it was correct.

- 31 -

106.

As noted above, a majority of the Panel also recommended that the President of

the University recommend to Governing Council that the former Student be expelled due
to the egregiousness of the former Student's academic misconduct. The Co-Chair
dissented, viewing expulsion of a student who completed his studies and received the
impugned degree more than 20 years ago unnecessary, and therefore excessive. We
cannot say that either of these conclusions is unreasonable. We leave them undisturbed
for further consideration by Governing Council.
F ebruaryJ , 2018
.S. Jackson, Chair
a of the Appeals Board

APPENDIX A

Outline of plagiarism allegations contained in highlighted Thesis - prepared by the Provost

Allegation

Thesis
Page
Number

Source

Is Source
Cited for
this
passage?

Is Source
Listed in
Bibliography?

1

Note

1.

2-3

Alladin (Tab 1)

No

No

2.

7-8

Coakley & White (Tab 2)

No

No

3.

9

Spreitzer (Tab 3)

No

No

4.

10

Troyna (Tab 4)

Yes

Yes

5.

11

Troyna (Tab 4)

Yes

Yes

6.

18-19

Harris (Tab 5)

No

Yes

7.

19

Sellers (Tab 6)

No

No

19-20

Harris (Tab 5)

No

Yes

9.

20

Sellers (Tab 6)

No

No

10.

22

Sellers (Tab 6)

No

No

11.

23-27

Harris (Tab 7)

No

No

Cite in thesis is to
different Harris article.

12.

28-32

Harris (Tab 7)

No

No

Cite in thesis is to
different Harris article.

13.

33

Fejgin (Tab 8)

No

No

14.

34

Fejgin (Tab 8)

No

No

15.

36

Fernandez-Balboa (Tab 9)

Yes

Yes

16.

36-37

Snyder & Spreitzer (Tab
10)

No

Yes

Cite in thesis (to Gaston
and Edwards) appears
to be incorrect.

17.

39

Edwards (Tab 11)

No

No

Cite in thesis is to
different Harris article.

18.

44-45

United Church of Canada
(Tab 12)

No

No

Cites in thesis (to
Novogrodsky) appear to
be incorrect.

19.

54

Velez & Fernandez (Tab
13)

No

No

20.

59

Holland (Tab 14)

No

No

8.
~

2126456

Cite in thesis is to a
different Sellers article.

Outline of plagiarism allegations contained in highlighted Thesis - prepared by the Provost

Allegation

Thesis
Page
Number

Source

Is Source
Cited for
this
passage?

Is Source
Listed in
Bibliography?

2

Note

21.

59

Ascher (Tab 15)

No

No

22.

60

Ascher (Tab 15)

No

No

23.

61

Ascher (Tab 15)

No

No

24.

61

Ascher (Tab 15)

No

No

25.

62

Ascher (Tab 15)

No

No

26.

62

Ascher (Tab 15)

No

No

27.

63

Ascher (Tab 15)

No

No

28.

64

Ascher (Tab 15)

No

No

29.

65

Slavin and Madden (Tab
16)

Yes

Yes

30.

65

Cummins (Tab 17)

No

No

Cite in thesis is to a
different Cummins
article.

31.

65-69

Harris (Tab 7)

No

No

Cite in thesis is to a
different Harris article one para. is block
quoted with correct page
reference, but not to the
source article (which
does not appear in
bibliography)

32.

69

Edwards (Tab 18)

No

No

33.

69-70

Sailes (Tab 19)

Yes

Yes

34.

74

Spreitzer & Snyder (Tab
20)

No

No

35.

74-75

Edwards (Tab 18)

No

No

Cite in thesis is to a
different Edwards article

36.

75

Ebony (Tab 21)

No

No

Cite in thesis is to
Edwards.

37.

75-76

Harrison (Tab 22)

No

Yes

38.

77-78

Harrison (Tab 22)

Yes

Yes

2126456

Cite in thesis (to Ogbu)
appears to be incorrect.

Outline of plagiarism allegations contained in highlighted Thesis - prepared by the Provost

Allegation

Thesis
Page
Number

Source

Is Source
Cited for
this
passage?

Is Source
Listed in
Bibliography?

39.

80

Gaston (Tab 23)

No

Yes

40.

82

Sailes (Tab 24)

No

No

41.

84

Marsh (Tab 25)

No

No

42.

144

Holland and Andre (Tab
26)

No

No

43.

146

Holland and Andre (Tab
26)

No

No

44.

146

Spreitzer (Tab 3)

No

No

45.

147

Spreitzer (Tab 3)

No

No

46.

153

Eitzen and Purdy (Tab 27)

No

No

47.

153

Harrison (Tab 22)

No

Yes

48.

153-154

Messner (Tab 28)

No

No

49.

155

Good (Tab 29)

No

No

50.

156

Good (Tab 29)

No

No

51.

156-157

Mccombs (Tab 30)

No

No

52.

157-158

Harrison (Tab 22)

No

Yes

53.

158

Troyna (Tab 4)

Yes

Yes

54.

161

Harrison (Tab 22)

No

Yes

55.

161-162

Harrison (Tab 22)

Yes

Yes

56.

164-165

Essed (Tab 31)

No

Yes

57.

167-169

Sellers (Tab 6)

No

No

58.

169-170

Fernandez-Balboa (Tab 9)

No

Yes

59.

171-172

Eitzen and Purdy (Tab 27)

No

No

2126456

3

Note

An article by Brophy &
Good appears in the
Bibliography, but it does
not appear to be this
article.

Outline of plagiarism allegations contained in highlighted Thesis - prepared by the Provost

Allegation

Thesis
Page
Number

Source

Is Source
Cited for
this
passage?

Is Source
Listed in
Bibliography?

4

Note

60.

172

Eitzen and Purdy (Tab 27)

No

No

61.

174

Nocera (Tab 32)

No

No

62.

177-178

Eitzen and Purdy (Tab 27)

No

No

63.

178

Eitzen and Purdy (Tab 27)

No

No

64.

178

Edwards (Tab 11)

No

No

Cite in thesis is to a
different Edwards article

65.

179

Eitzen and Purdy (Tab 27)

No

No

Cite in thesis (to
Edwards) appears to be
incorrect

66.

184

Siegel (Tab 33)

No

No

67.

189

Winbush (Tab 34)

No

No

2126456

Cite in thesis is to a
different Eitzen article

APPENDIX B

Chronology of proceedings in U of T and ~ ~ - References to Tina Lie Affidavit

March 12, 2013

Provost files charges under the Code ofBehaviour on Academic Matters (Ex 2)

March 13, 2013

Dr. ~ requests that the Provost delay the proceedings so that Dr. ~ can
"deal with an urgent family matter". (Ex 3-4)

April to May 2013

Dr. ~ • s first lawyer, Jonathan Shime, requests that the matter be put on hold
due to Dr. - • s health issues (Ex 5-6)

June 2013

Provost attempts to schedule hearing on the charges. Dr. ~-■ asks to schedule
the hearing for a date in October 2013 and Provost agrees (Ex 7-9)

July 25, 2013

Dr. - g i v e s interviews to the media, which include references to his ongoing
job search (Ex 11-12)

August 2013

Parties agree to hold October 16, 2013 for a hearing on the charges (Ex 15-16)

October 8-9, 2013

Dr. ~ provides new information and documents, which results in adjournment
of October 16, 2013 hearing (Ex 17)

October 2013 to
January 2014

Provost conducts further investigations due to new information received from Dr.
~ and parties discuss potential joint retainer of forensic document examiner

Mid February 2014

Provost attempts to schedule hearing for March or April 2014 (Ex 21, 23)
Mr. Shime advises the Provost that he and Dr. S - have "amicably ended [their]
relationship" (Ex 22)

February 24, 2014

Dr. -retains his second lawyer , Selwyn Pieters, who advises that Dr.
intends to raise conflict of interest allegation against Paliare Roland ·
Provost denies allegation (Ex 24-25)

March 17, 2014

Dr. S - brings motion before Tribunal for disqualification of Paliare Roland as
counsillor the University and for a stay (on the grounds of abuse of process) (Ex
26)

April to May 2014

Parties attempt to reach agreement on protocol for Dr.
motion.

Sllllllll's disqualification

No agreement is reached. The Provost brings a motion for directions to obtain
documents necessary to respond to Dr. Sllll's disqualification motion. The
motion for directions is scheduled for July 15, 2014 (Ex 28-29)
Mid to Late July
2014
July 25, 2014

Chair of Tribunal, Paul Schabas, withdraws as Chair of Tribunal (Ex 31)
New Chair, Paul Morrison, is appointed as Chair of Tribunal (Ex 32)
Case conference is held with Chair Morrison to address procedural issues. Chair
Morrison releases Case Management Direction, directing motion for directions to
be heard in writing (Ex 33)

Chronology of proceedings in U of T and

S - - References to Tina Lie Affidavit

Date

Event

September 8, 2014

Chair Morrison releases Motion Decision on motion for directions, ordering Dr.
~ to produce documents and to comply with protocol for assertions of
privilege, which required Dr. ~ t o provide a list of documents over which he
asserted privilege and a brief statement of the basis for the claim of privilege (Ex
34)

October 16, 2014

Dr. ~ produces documents in response to Motion Decision of September 8,
2014
Provost has concerns with scope of disclosure and privilege assertions

Late October 2014
to February 2015

Parties attempt to reach a resolution on production and privilege issues

March 25, 2015

Provost suggests "streamlined" approach to deal with issues relating to Dr.
~ ' s disqualification motion (Ex 35)

April 23, 2015

Dr. S - raises a new defence based on the "ultimate limitation period" for the
first time and suggests that issue should be addressed first (Ex 36)

May 8, 2015

Provost writes to Dr. S - to respond to the new "ultimate limitation period"
issue (Ex 37)

July 8, 2015

Provost requests case conference with Chair Morrison to address Dr. ~ ' s
failure to disclose certain documents and his assertion of privilege of documents
ordered produced by Chair Morrison (Ex 39)

August 25, 2015

Case conference held with Chair Morrison

August 27, 2015

Chair Morrison releases Case Management Decision directing Dr. - t o
provide further materials to substantiate his assertion of privilege over documents
and that he do so by October 19, 2015 (Ex 40)
To this day, Dr. S-has never complied with this Case Management Direction

October 5, 2015

Mr. Pieters advises that he no longer represents Dr. ~ (Ex 41)

October 19, 2015

Dr. S - advises he intends to pursue disqualification motion but needs an
extension (Ex 43)
Provost requests case conference with Chair Morrison (Ex 44)

November 11, 2015

Chair Morrison withdraws as Chair because of allegation raised by Dr. SIIII of a
reasonable apprehension of bias (Ex 46)

January 2016

New Chair, Bernard Fishbein, appointed as Chair of the Tribunal. Chair Fishbein
requests dates from parties for a case conference (Ex 47-49)

Chronology of proceedings in U ofT a n d ~ S--References to Tina Lie Affidavit

Date

Event

February 2016

Dr. -advises he intends to pursue disqualification motion but is unavailable
until late April or May 2016 for case conference (Ex 50)
At the same time, Dr. written (Ex 51)

gives interview to media about a new book he has

Case conference is ultimately scheduled for April 29, 2016
April 18, 2016

Dr. -requests 6-8 month adjournment of case conference because he has
been unable to retain counsel and is navigating "two personal issues" (Ex 52)
Provost opposes adjournment request (Ex 53)

April 20, 2016

Dr. provides medical note in support of adjournment request (note from Dr.
Zizzo atea April 14, 2016)(Ex 54)
Provost continues to oppose adjournment request on the basis that the medical note
is inadequate and is insufficient to justify an adjournment (Ex 55)

April 26, 2016

Over Provost's objection, Chair Fishbein grants adjournment of case conference
scheduled for April 29, 2016 (Ex 56)

May 4, 2016

Chair Fishbein releases Adjournment Decision, directing Dr. to provide
better doctor's note by May 24, 2016, ifhe wishes a further adjournment (Ex 57)

May 24 and 31,
2016

Dr. -provides further medical notes in support of adjournment request (notes
from Dr. Zizzo dated May 16 and 30, 2016) (Ex 58-59)
Provost takes position that the further medical notes are inadequate to justify
continued adjournment of hearing (Ex 60)

June 13, 2016

Chair Fishbein releases Interim Decision finding that Dr. S. . . has failed to
provide sufficient basis to indefinitely adjourn the proceedings. Chair Fishbein
schedules case conference for August 29, 2016 (Ex 62)

August 21, 2016

Dr. S ~ writes to Tribunal, advising that he is scheduled for psychiatric
appointment on September 13, 2016 (Ex 63)

August 23, 2016

Provost takes the position that Dr. S
s disqualification motion should be
treated as abandoned and parties should proceed to schedule hearing on the charges
(Ex 64)

August 29, 2016

Case conference is held with Chair Fishbein. Dr.
does not attend. Over
Provost's objection, Chair Fishbein declines to proceed in Dr. S
sabsence

September 1, 2016

Chair Fishbein releases Interim Decision, granting a further adjournment to
October 5, 2016 and directing D r . ~ to file psychiatric assessment by
September 30, 2016 (Ex 65)

Chronology of proceedings in U ofT and ~ S - References to Tina Lie Affidavit

September 27, 2016

Provost brings motion for an order dismissing Dr. - ' s disqualification motion
returnable at the hearing on October 5, 2016 (Ex 71)
D r . ~ does not comply with deadline to file psychiatric assessment by
September 30, 2015

October 2 and 5,
2016

Dr. ~ writes to Tribunal, advising that he has been diagnosed with major
depressive disorder and is unable to participate in the proceeding, and attaching
medical report (reports from Dr. Illyas dated September 13, 2016) (Ex 67-69)

October 5, 2016

Case conference is held with Chair Fishbein. Dr. ~does not attend. Over
Provost's objection, Chair Fishbein grants a further""acU'ournment of the case
conference and the hearing of Provost's motion to dismiss

October 19, 2016

Chair Fishbein releases Interim Decision on adjournment, directing parties to file
submissions and adjourning hearing of October 5, 2016 to December 1, 2015 (Ex
70)

November 11, 2016

Provost files responding medical report (report of Dr. Ramshaw dated November
10, 2016) (Ex 71)
Dr. -

November 30, 2016

does not file reply materials within deadline (Ex 77)

Advisor to Dr. ~(Warren Kinsella) writes to Tribunal on Dr. ~ s
behalf, advising that Dr. S - will not attend hearing on Decembe~ 6 and
attaching additional medical note (note from Dr. Zizzo dated October 31, 2016)
(Ex 73)

December 1, 2016

Case conference is held with Chair Fishbein. Dr. ~does not attend. Chair
Fishbein orders hearing to proceed in Dr. ~'sabsence and dismisses Dr.
~ • s disqualification motion and order=tearing on the charges to proceed
o~ruary 17, 2017 (Ex 75-76)

December 19, 2016

Chair Fishbein releases Interim Decision on dismissal of Dr. ~ • s
disqualification motion (Ex 77)

January 16-17,
2017

D r . ~ gives media interviews (Ex 78-79)

February 6, 2017

Dr. 811111111 retains his third lawyer, Carol Shirtliff-Hinds, and requests
adjournment of February 17, 2017 hearing (Ex 80)

tolls

Provost opposes request for adjournment (Ex 81)
February 13, 2017

Case conference is held with Chair Fishbein
adjournment request. Over
Provost's objection, Chair Fishbein grants Dr.
's request, directing case
conference to be held on February 28, 2017, an a ~ouming hearing of the charges
to April 18, 2017 (Ex 82-83)

Chronology of proceedings in U of T and

S--

References to Tina Lie Affidavit

February 15, 2017

Chair Fishbein releases Case Management Interim Decision on the adjournment
request (Ex 82)

February 28, 2017

Case conference is held with Chair Fishbein. D r . ~ advises that he intends to
bring at least three applications before the hearing onthe charges

March 1, 2017

Chair Fishbein releases Case Management Interim Decision, directing earlier start
time for hearing on April 18, 2017 to accommodate Dr. ~ • s applications (Ex
84-85)

March 17-21, 2017

Dr. brings motion seeking ( 1) recusal of Chair Fishbein; (2)
disqualification of Paliare Roland; and (3) a stay of proceedings due to an abuse of
process created primarily by delay (Ex 86)
Provost requests case conference to schedule motions to strike Dr. - s
disqualification and abuse of process motions as an abuse of proces~9)

March 28, 2017

Case conference is held with Chair Fishbein, who directs that outstanding motions
will be held on April 6, 2017, subject to Dr. - ' s availability (Ex 90)

March 29, 2017

Case conference is held with Chair Fishbein because Dr. •claims he
unavailable on April 6, 2017, and he refuses to participate
pe. Chair
Fishbein denies Provost's request to continue with motions on April 6, 2017, but
provided directions for the hearing of the motions on April 18, 2017 (Ex 92)

April 12, 2017

Case conference is held with Chair Fishbein. Chair directs that hearing on the
charges will start on April 18, 2017, after the outstanding motions ( depending on
outcome of motions) (Ex 95)

April 18, 2017

Hearing is held. Chair Fishbein dismisses Dr. - ' s recusal motion, grants
Provost's motion to strike Dr. ~ ' s disqualification motion and allows Dr.
- • s abuse of process motion to proceed as part of hearing on the charges.
Hearing dates for the charges set for June 20, 21, 22 and 26, 2017 (Ex 96)

May 17, 2017

Chair Fishbein releases Interim Decision on motions (Ex 97)

May 18-31, 2017

Dr.
informs Provost that he intends to bring application for judicial review
and heanng on the charges should not proceed while application is pending (Ex 98)

S-

Provost opposes adjournment request (Ex 100)
May 23, 2016

Dr. - g i v e s interview, which is posted online (Ex 105-106)

June 1, 2017

Case conference is held to address Dr. ~ • s request to adjourn hearing
scheduled for June 20, 2017. Chair Fishbein denies adjournment request

June 6, 2017

Dr. -informs Provost and Divisional Court that he intends to bring an urgent
motion for stay of the Tribunal proceeding on June 16, 2017 (Ex 103)

Chronology of proceedings in U ofT a n d ~ SIii- References to Tina Lie Affidavit

Date

Event

June 8, 2017

Chair Fishbein releases Interim Decision on adjournment request (Ex 102)

