Case #820

   DATE: May 12, 2016
   PARTIES: University of Toronto v H.M.
   Hearing Date(s): March 15, 2016
   Panel Members:
   Paul Morrison, Chair
   Chris Koenig-Woodyard, Faculty Member
   Adam Wheeler, Student Member
   Appearances:
   Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel
   Kristi Gourlay, Manager, Office of Academic Integrity, Faculty of Arts
   and Science
   In Attendance:
   Donald Dewees, Deanâs Designate for Academic Integrity, Office of the
   Dean, Faculty of Arts and Science
   Tracey Gameiro, Associate Director, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty
   Grievances
   Virginia Fletcher, Law Clerk, Paliare Roland Rosenberg Rothstein LLP
   Stavroula Andreopoulos, Course Coordinator and Instructor
   Trial Division â s. B.i.1(b) , s. B.ii.1(a) , s. B.ii.2 of the Code â
   unauthorized aid â Student posted contents of Exam to Facebook during
   the Exam â hearing not attended â finding on evidence â finding on
   guilt â grade assignment of zero in the Course; 2-year suspension; the
   earlier of either a 3-year notation on the Studentâs academic record
   and transcript, or a notation until his graduation from the University;
   case reported to Provost for publication
   Student charged under s. B.i.1(b) , s. B.ii.1(a) , s. B.ii.2 , and s.
   B.i.3(b) of the Code . The charges related to allegations that the
   Student was in possession of a cell phone during the Exam and that he
   posted the contents of the Exam to Facebook, where it was available to
   other students enrolled in the Course, including students who were
   writing the Exam at the time and other students who had not yet written
   the Exam. The Student was not present at the hearing. The Panel ordered
   that the hearing proceed in the Studentâs absence.
   Student found guilty of one count of unauthorized aid/assistance,
   contrary to s. B.i.1(b) , s. B.ii.1(a) , and s. B.ii.2 of the Code .
   The Panel took into account affidavit evidence of suspicious behaviour
   by the Student from Exam invigilators and evidence about the Facebook
   post from students in the Course in concluding that the Student, who
   had written the Exam in a private carrel due to medical accommodations,
   was guilty. The Panel imposed a grade assignment of zero in the Course;
   a 2-year suspension; the earlier of either a 3-year notation on the
   Studentâs academic record and transcript, or a notation until his
   graduation from the University; and that the case be reported to the
   Provost for publication.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12905
