1
Case No. 1609

THE UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
IN THE MATTER OF charges of academic dishonesty filed on February 29, 2024,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters, 2019,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Act, 1971, S.O. 1971, c. 56 as am. S.O. 1978, c. 88

B E T W E E N:
UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
- and H

G

REASONS FOR DECISION

Hearing Date: June 20, 2024, via Zoom
Members of the Panel:
Cynthia Kuehl, Chair
Professor Marvin Zuker, Faculty Panel Member
Cameron Miranda-Radbord, Student Panel Member
Appearances:
Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg Rothstein LLP
Sonia Patel, Co-Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg Rothstein LLP
Chew Chang, Representative for the Student, Chang Legal & Notary Public
Hearing Secretary:
Karen Bellinger, Associate Director, Office of Appeals, Discipline & Faculty Grievances
Christopher Lang, Director, Office of Appeals, Discipline & Faculty Grievances
In Attendance:
H
G

2
1.

The Trial Division of the University Tribunal was convened on June 20, 2024, by

Zoom, to consider charges of academic dishonesty (the “Charges”) brought by the
University of Toronto (the “University”) against H

G (the “Student”) under the

Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters, 2019 (the “Code”). The Student was informed
of the Charges by letter dated February 29, 2024.
Liability
The Charges
2.

At all material times, the Student was enrolled at the University of Toronto

Mississauga. In the Charges, the University made the following three allegations:
(i)

On or about April 23, 2022, the Student knowingly had someone personate
him during an online assessment in CSC309H5S: Programming on the Web
(“the Course”), contrary to section B.I.1(c) of the Code.

(ii)

In the alternative, on or about April 23, 2022, the Student knowingly used
or possessed an unauthorized aid or aids or obtained unauthorized
assistance during an online assessment in the Course, contrary to section
B.I.1(b) of the Code.

(iii)

In the further alternative, on or about April 23, 2022, the Student knowingly
engaged in a form of cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud
or misrepresentation not otherwise described in the Code in order to obtain
academic credit or other academic advantage of any kind in connection with
an online assessment in the Course, contrary to section B.I.3(b) of the
Code.

3.

The University advised that it would withdraw Allegations 2 and 3, which were

charged in the alternative, if a finding of guilt was made on Allegation 1. Ultimately,
Allegations 2 and 3 were withdrawn.
4.

Detailed particulars in support of the allegations were provided in the Charges.

3
5.

At the hearing, the Student pleaded guilty to the Charges.
The Evidence on Liability

6.

The evidence in the hearing was presented in the form of an Agreed Statement of

Facts (“ASF”). No witnesses gave evidence either orally or in writing.
7.

The Student had been a student at the University of Toronto Mississauga since

Fall 2019 and had earned 22 credits with a cumulative GPA of 3.19 as of April 10, 2024.
8.

The Charges arise from the Student’s participation in a course, CSC309H5S:

Programming on the Web (the “Course”) in Winter 2022. The ASF set out in detail the
Course requirements. Key among them was a three-phase coding project for a social
media website for restaurants. During each phase of the project, the students worked
towards the end product, which was intended to be a fully functional website. Students
were allowed to work in groups of two or three. Each phase was graded through an
interview with a TA, during which the TA worked through the website to check if the code
had been implemented correctly. The TA asked questions about each student’s role and
the portions of the code that they had implemented. The students were permitted to keep
their cameras off during the interviews.
9.

Changes to computer code are called “commits”. Additions, modifications or

deletions in a file in a repository create a record of changes so that the history of the
project’s development can be maintained.
10.

The Student was in a group of three. However, the history of the commits for phase

3 of the project showed that changes were made by four separate email addresses.
11.

The interview for phase 3 of the project took place on April 23, 2022, over Zoom.

12.

On the Zoom call were the TA and three other participants, all of whom were

logged into Quercus, the University’s main online teaching and learning platform. The
Zoom platform serves as a “virtual classroom”. During the Zoom interview, all the
participants started with their cameras turned off.

4
13.

The TA noted that the commits included four email addresses, and questioned why

the Student’s commits were made by an email address different than the Student’s name.
The individual on the Zoom interview advised that they had used a friend’s computer to
write part of their code. The TA then asked for proof that the person on the Zoom call was
in fact the Student, asking them initially to log into ACORN, the University’s student
information system. The individual did not do so, instead refreshing the Quercus page.
The individual was also unable to answer questions about the purpose and use of
ACORN.
14.

The TA then asked the individual to send him an email using their own computer.

However, the individual did not do so for over four minutes after which the individual
advised the TA that the email had been sent. The TA did not receive it and asked the
individual to turn on their camera. Instead of turning on their camera, however, the
individual exited the Zoom platform. The TA reported this conduct.
15.

The Student met with the Dean’s Designate for Academic Integrity on August 11,

2023. After receiving a warning about the potential implications of any admission to the
Dean’s Designate, the Student subsequently acknowledged to the Dean’s Designate for
Academic Integrity that he had asked his friend to present phase 3 for him and that it was
his friend who had attended the interview as the Student. The Student explained that he
was suffering from depression at the time and could not present or concentrate. He had
not told the professor or the TA of any health concerns.
16.

The Student also explained that his friend was a family friend from China who had

initially helped tutor him on some concepts. The friend had not participated in previous
phases of the project but did write some of the coding content for phase 3.
17.

The Student acknowledged that the course syllabus contained a section on

academic integrity, emphasizing its importance to the pursuit of learning and scholarship
in any university and to ensuring that a degree from the University of Toronto Mississauga
is a strong signal of their academic achievement. The syllabus provided examples of
potential offences under the Code, which included obtaining unauthorized assistance and
misrepresenting the student’s identity on a test or exam.

5
18.

As noted above, the Student pleaded guilty to personation and, in the alternative,

to receiving unauthorized assistance.
Decision of the Tribunal on Charges
19.

After considering the evidence presented in the ASF and the fact that the Student

pleaded guilty, the Panel found the Student guilty of knowing personation.
20.

In addition to the Student’s admissions, the Panel was particularly struck by the

significant evidence arising from the Zoom interview, the video for which was provided to
the Panel. It was apparent that the individual who attended the interview was not
knowledgeable of the University’s systems, including Quercus and ACORN, which would
have been well known to any student who had been at the University for two years at that
time. The failure of the individual to identify themself by turning on the camera was
consistent with the fact that the Student was not present at the Zoom meeting but rather
had another individual attending in their stead. This was confirmatory of the Student’s
admission that he had his family friend personate him for the purpose of the Zoom
meeting. The Charge of personation was clearly established on the evidence.
21.

Having found the Student guilty of personation, the University withdrew the other

Charges set out in allegations 2 and 3.
Sanction
Areas of Dispute
22.

During the sanction phase of the hearing, no additional evidence was led by either

party. The Panel relied solely on the evidence in the ASF, the jurisprudence presented to
it, and the submissions of counsel.
23.

The University sought the following penalties:
(a)

A final grade of zero in the Course;

6
(b)

A suspension from the University for a period of five years from the date of
this order; and

(c)

A notation of the sanction on the student’s academic record and transcript
from the date of the order to the date that he graduates from the University.

24.

The Student agreed to receipt of a zero in the Course and to the notation of the

sanction; however, the Student, through his representative, argued that the suspension
should be for four years, as opposed to five. This was the only matter of contest between
the University and the Student.
25.

In addition, it was agreed that the case would be reported to the Provost for

publication of a notice of the decision of the Tribunal and the sanctions imposed, with the
name of the Student withheld, as is done in the normal course.
The Submissions on Sanction
26.

In considering the appropriate length of the suspension, the Panel heard

submissions from both counsel for the University and the representative for the Student
and reviewed previous decisions of the Tribunal involving cases of knowing personation.
27.

The University’s submissions focused on these previous decisions, which were

summarized in a chart provided to the Panel. Counsel for the University noted that, in
cases of personation, the sanction was almost always a recommendation for expulsion
or, in circumstances of cooperation of the student, a five-year suspension. The only
decision in which less than a five-year suspension had been ordered was in a case in
which the Tribunal found that the student’s father had both contrived the idea of
personation and pressured the student to engage in it. Noting these specific
circumstances and the student’s mental health condition, the Tribunal ordered a
suspension of four years and eight months in that case.
28.

Although the representative for the Student argued for a four-year suspension, no

cases were cited. The representative’s submissions focused on the fact that this was the

7
Student’s first offence and the Student was very cooperative. The representative also
noted that, given that the Student had completed all of his credits to otherwise graduate,
a lengthy suspension was a particularly harsh penalty. There would also be financial
repercussions as the Student would need to return to China and then come back to
graduate in five years. In the interim, it would be difficult for the Student to seek
employment.
29.

In the submissions of the University, however, none of these were sufficiently

compelling given the various factors to warrant a deviation from the case law, all of which
supported a five-year suspension in the circumstances of this case.
Decision of the Tribunal on Sanctions
30.

In making its decision, the Panel carefully considered the factors set out in

University of Toronto and Mr. C (Case No. 1976/77-3, November 5, 1976) as follows:
(a)

The character of the Student.

There was no evidence before the Panel regarding the Student’s character other
than the facts relating to this offence, and the fact that the Student had not
committed any previous offences under the Code. The facts, however, were very
concerning as the Student engaged another person in the commission of the
offence.
(b)

The likelihood of a repetition of the offence.

There is no evidence that this offence would likely be repeated in the future, nor
was it presumed that the Student would engage in an academic offence again if
given the opportunity to do so. The Panel accepted the submissions of the
representative that the Student was remorseful for his conduct.
(c)

The nature of the offence committed.

Together with deterrence, this is the most significant factor affecting the Panel’s
decision. Knowing personation is one of the most serious of academic offences. It

8
involves a high degree of dishonesty and a significant degree of planning to
execute. Here, the Student had a friend both personate him on the attendance of
the Zoom meeting and also assist him in the completion of the coding for phase 3.
To give effect to this personation, the Student had to engage another individual to
be involved in this academic offence. This was not a rash decision, made in the
moment. This was a deliberate decision, executed with planning. Students must
understand that engaging in such conduct will have significant repercussions,
consistent with a high degree of dishonesty.
(d)

Any extenuating circumstances surrounding the commission of the offence.

The only extenuating circumstances is that the Student acknowledged immediately
that he had engaged in academic misconduct both to the Dean’s Designate, and
in the creation of a detailed ASF which included a specific plea. This was
specifically considered by the Panel in the course of coming to its decision as to
the appropriateness of a five-year suspension, in lieu of a recommendation for
expulsion.
(e)

The detriment to the University occasioned by the offence.

The University has had to become increasingly vigilant about the potential for
abuse by students of a virtual classroom. Students cannot be allowed to use the
opportunity to learn virtually, especially with their cameras turned off, as a means
by which to engage in an academic offence.

The University must be able to trust that its students will participate in
examinations, tests, and project reviews with academic integrity. This trust is
betrayed when students knowingly engage others in personation. This conduct
undermines the integrity that the broader community puts on the University and
threatens the value that the community places on a degree from the University.
(f)

The need to deter others from committing a similar offence.

9
General deterrence is an important factor in these cases. The University provided
a number of relevant cases in which knowing personation had occurred. This type
of cheating strikes at the heart of academic integrity and, as noted above, has been
considered to be a significant form of dishonesty in the academic setting. It is
appropriate to send a strong message to students that this type of misconduct will
be treated most seriously.
31.

The determination of an appropriate penalty depends on the assessment of these

principles and factors in light of the individual circumstances. There also should be a
general consistency in the approach of the Tribunal to sanction to ensure the fair,
equitable and predictable treatment of students. This was significant to the Panel. While
the Panel appreciated the submissions of the Student’s representative that a five-year
suspension would be particularly harsh given that the Student was on the verge of
graduation, the fact is that the conduct at issue took place in 2022 and the Student has
benefited from the last two years of his university education while he was afforded
appropriate and necessary due process. In the circumstances, the Student should not
fare better than the other students who have come before this Tribunal having also
engaged in knowing personation.
32.

There is no basis, aside from the Student’s early participation and plea, which

would warrant a deviation from the usual outcome in this case, which is most often a
recommendation for expulsion. Because of this participation, the Student is being allowed
to graduate, although in five years, as opposed to the four years for which the Student’s
representative made submissions. There is no reason here to deviate from the usual
length of suspension in this case.
33.

Accordingly, at the conclusion of the hearing and recognizing that the sanction was

not being contested by the Student save for the issue of the length of the suspension, the
Panel made the following order:
(i)

The Student is guilty of one count of personation in connection with the
online assignment in CSC309H5S on April 23, 2022, contrary to B.I.1(c) of
the Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters;

10
(ii)

The following sanctions shall be imposed on the Student:
1)

a final grade of zero in CSC309H5S in Winter 2022;

2)

a suspension from the University for five years from the date of the
order; and

3)

a notation of the sanction on the student’s academic record and
transcript from the date of the order to the date that the Student
graduates from the University.

(iii)

This case shall be reported to the Provost for publication of a notice of the
decision of the Tribunal and the sanctions imposed, with the name of the
Student withheld.

Dated at Toronto this 3rd day of September, 2024.
Original signed by:
Cynthia Kuehl, Chair
On behalf of the Panel

