Case 1609

   DATE:

   September 3, 2024

   PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v. H.G. ("the Student")

   HEARING DATE:

   June 20, 2024, via Zoom

   PANEL MEMBERS:

   Cynthia Kuehl, Chair

   Professor Marvin Zuker, Faculty Panel Member

   Cameron Miranda-Radbord, Student Panel Member

   APPEARANCES:

   Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg
   Rothstein LLP

   Sonia Patel, Co-Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg Rothstein LLP

   Chew Chang, Representative for the Student, Chang Legal & Notary Public

   IN ATTENDANCE:

   The Student

   HEARING SECRETARY:

   Karen Bellinger, Associate Director, Office of Appeals, Discipline and
   Faculty Grievances

   Christopher Lang, Director, Office of Appeals, Discipline & Faculty
   Grievances

   The Student was charged with one count under section B.i.1(c) of the
   Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters, 2019 (the "Code") for knowingly
   having someone personate them during an online assessment in connection
   with a course. In the alternative, the Student was charged with one
   count of knowingly using or possessing an unauthorized aid or aids or
   obtained unauthorized assistance, contrary to section B.i.1(b) of the
   Code. In the further alternative, the Student was charged with one
   count of the Student knowingly engaging in a form of cheating, academic
   dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or misrepresentation not otherwise
   described in the Code in order to obtain academic credit or other
   academic advantage, contrary to section B.i.3(b) of the Code.

   The hearing proceeded on the basis of an Agreed Statement of Facts
   ("ASF") submitted by the University and the Student. At the hearing,
   the Student pleaded guilty to the charges. The charges arose from the
   Student's participation in a course, in which the student was required
   to complete a three-phase coding project for a social media website.
   Students enrolled in the course were permitted to work in groups and
   each phase was to be graded by a Teaching Assistant upon interviewing
   the students as to their role and the portions of the code that they
   had implemented. The Student worked in a group of three. A Teaching
   Assistant (the "TA") in the course noticed that the code that the Group
   had produced had been modified by four individuals. During the phase 3
   interview on Zoom, the TA asked an individual purporting to be the
   Student to provide an explanation as to why four individuals had
   modified the code and to provide proof of identification. The
   individual refused to turn on their camera and exited the Zoom call.
   The TA subsequently reported this conduct.

   The Student acknowledged to the Dean's Designate for Academic Integrity
   that he had asked his friend to present phase 3 for him and that it was
   his friend who had attended the interview as the Student. The Student
   explained that he was suffering from depression at the time, but did
   not notify the Course instructor or the TA. The Student pleaded guilty
   to personation and, in the alternative, to receiving unauthorized
   assistance.

   After considering the evidence presented in the ASF and the fact that
   the Student pleaded guilty, the Panel found the Student guilty of
   knowing personation. As a result, the University withdrew the
   alternative charges.

   During the sanction phase of the hearing, no additional evidence was
   led, and the Panel relied solely on the evidence in the ASF, relevant
   past jurisprudence of the Tribunal and the submissions of each party.
   The Student and University agreed that the Student should receive a
   zero in the Course and a notation of the sanction on their transcript.
   The Student however argued that the suspension should be four years, as
   opposed to the five-year suspension sought by the University. In making
   its decision, the Panel considered the factors set out in University of
   Toronto and Mr. C (Case No. 1976/77-3). With respect to the character
   of the Student and the likelihood of a repetition of the offence, the
   Panel noted that the Student had no prior offences, was remorseful for
   their conduct, and that there was no evidence that the Student would
   engage in an academic offence again if given the opportunity. With
   respect to the nature of the offence committed and the need for
   deterrence, the Panel confirmed that knowing personation was one of the
   most serious academic offences, as it involved significant planning and
   a high degree of dishonesty, and therefore deserving of significant
   repercussions. The Panel noted that the only extenuating circumstance
   was the Student's immediate acknowledgement of their academic
   misconduct to the Dean's Designate, and their creation of the ASF.
   Finally, with respect to the need for general deterrence and the
   detriment to the University occasioned by the offence, the Panel
   reiterated that personation strikes at the heart of academic integrity
   and warranted a serious sanction to send a strong message to students.

   The Panel concluded, on its review of the Tribunal's past decisions and
   the Mr. C factors, that there was no basis, aside from the Studentâs
   early participation and plea, to deviate from the usual outcome in
   similar cases, which is most often a recommendation for expulsion.Â
   Accordingly, the Panel imposed the following sanction: a final grade of
   zero in the course; a five-year suspension; a notation on the Student's
   academic record and transcript until graduation; and a report to the
   Provost for publication.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/31825
