Case 1141

   DATE: July 16, 2021
   PARTIES: University of Toronto v. M.H. ("the Student")

   HEARING DATE: April 19, 2021, via Zoom

   Panel Members:
   Ms. Erin Dann, Chair
   Professor Lynne Howarth, Faculty Panel Member
   Mr. Branden Cave, Student Panel Member

   Appearances:
   Mr. Robert Centa, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland
   Rosenberg Rothstein LLP
   Ms. Sonia Patel, Articling Student, Paliare Roland Rosenberg Rothstein
   LLP
   Ms. Jean-Pierre D'Angelo, Downtown Legal Services, Representative for
   the Student

   Hearing Secretary:
   Mr. Christopher Lang, Director, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty
   Grievances

   Not in Attendance: The Student

   The Student was chargedÂ underÂ s. B.i.1(b) of theâ¯Code of Behaviour
   on Academic Matters, 1995â¯(the âCodeâ) on the basis
   thatÂ sheÂ knowinglyÂ usedÂ or possessed anÂ unauthorizedÂ aid, namely,
   index cards whichÂ containedÂ information relevant to the
   courseÂ during a make-up test. In theÂ alternative, the
   StudentÂ knowingly engaged in a form of cheating, academic dishonesty
   or misconduct,Â fraudÂ or misrepresentation in order to obtain academic
   credit or other academic advantage, contrary to s. B.i.3(b) of the
   Code.

   TheÂ StudentÂ did not attend the hearing;Â however, their
   representative attended on their behalf.Â At the outset of the hearing,
   the Panel sought confirmation from the Studentâs
   representativeÂ whether he hadÂ instructionsÂ to proceed without the
   Student. The Studentâs representative confirmed that he had
   instructions to proceedÂ in the Studentâs
   absence.Â TheÂ UniversityÂ and the StudentÂ submitted an Agreed
   Statement of Facts (âASFâ) and Joint Book of Documents (âJBDâ).Â The
   ASF and JBD explained that the StudentÂ hadÂ received permission to
   write a make-up test for the courseÂ and was notÂ permitted to have any
   aids with her during the test.Â The Student asked a question of the
   invigilator at which time the invigilatorÂ turned to the cover page of
   the test booklet to answer the Studentâs question and the index
   cardsÂ slid out of the test paper.Â The Student admitted that she
   prepared the index cards and that they contained material relevant to
   the course and the make-up test. The Student further admitted that she
   knew she was not permitted to have index cards with her during the
   make-up test.Â The Panel found that the evidence contained in the ASF
   and JBDÂ provide a clear basis for a finding of guilt,Â on a balance of
   probabilities. Therefore,Â the Panel concluded that theÂ first charge
   had been proven and accepted the guilty plea of the Student in respect
   to theÂ chargeÂ under s. B.i.1(b) of the Code.Â The University
   withdrewÂ the alternative charge.

   TheÂ PanelÂ received a Joint Submission on Penalty (âJSPâ). The Panel
   noted that, as set out inÂ The University of Toronto and M. A.Â (Case
   No. 837, December 22, 2016), a joint submission on penalty canÂ only be
   rejected in circumstances in which it would be contrary to public
   interest or would bring the administration of justice into
   disrepute.Â The Panel considered the nature of the offence, the
   detriment to the University, the need to deter other students from
   acting in a similar manner, the character of the Student, and the
   circumstances surrounding the commission of the offence. The Panel
   noted that this offence is serious; cheating on a test
   isÂ profoundlyÂ unfair to other students. Moreover, this was not the
   Studentâs firstÂ offence,Â but the Panel alsoÂ consideredÂ that the
   Student admitted guilt at the earliest opportunity and cooperated
   throughout the process, includingÂ entering intoÂ the ASF and JSP.Â All
   of these taken together demonstrate insight and remorse.Â In light
   ofÂ all the circumstances, the submissions of the parties and the cases
   provided in support of the JSP, the Panel determined that the penalty
   sought in the JSP was appropriate and reasonable.Â The Panel imposed
   the following sanctions: a finalÂ grade of zero in the
   course;Â aÂ three-year suspension;Â a notation on the transcript for
   just over 48 months; and a report to the Provost forÂ publication.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/29945
