Case No.: 1141
THE UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
IN THE MATTER OF charges of academic dishonesty filed on January 11, 2021.
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters, 1995,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto, Act, 1971, S.O. 1971, c. 56 as amended S.O.
1978, c. 88.

B E T W E E N:
UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO (the “University”)
- and M

H

(the “Student”)

REASONS FOR DECISION
Date of Hearing: April 19, 2021, via Zoom
Members of the Panel:
Ms. Erin Dann, Chair
Professor Lynne Howarth, Faculty Panel Member
Mr. Branden Cave, Student Panel Member
Appearances:
Mr. Robert Centa, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland, Rosenberg, Rothstein LLP
Ms. Sonia Patel, Articling Student, Paliare Roland Rosenberg Rothstein LLP
Mr. Jean-Pierre D'Angelo, Downtown Legal Services, Representative for the Student
Hearing Secretary:
Mr. Christopher Lang, Director, Office of Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances,
University of Toronto
Not in Attendance:
The Student

-2-

Charges and Hearing
1.

This Panel of the University Tribunal held a hearing, by Zoom, on April 19, 2021 to
consider the charges brought by the University against the Student under the Code of
Behaviour on Academic Matters, 1995 (the “Code”).

2.

The charges against the Student are as follows:
(a)

On or about January 10, 2020, the Student knowingly used or possessed an
unauthorized aid or obtained unauthorized assistance in connection with a make-up
test written in POL242Y5Y 2019(9) (the “Course”), contrary to section B.I.1(b) of
the Code.

(b)

In the alternative, on or about January 10, 2020, the Student knowingly did or
omitted to do something for the purpose engaging in a form of cheating, academic
dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or misrepresentation not otherwise described in the
Code in order to obtain academic credit or other academic advantage of any kind
in connection with the final examination in the Course, contrary to section B.I.3(b)
of the Code.

3.

In brief, the allegations are as follows: At the material times, the Student was a registered
student at the University of Toronto Mississauga and was enrolled in the Course. On
January 10, 2020, the Student wrote a make-up test. The Student knew she was not
permitted to use or possess any unauthorized notes during the test. Nevertheless, the
Student was found to be in possession of index cards, that contained information relevant
to the Course, during the make-up test.

4.

The Student did not appear at the hearing but was represented by Downtown Legal
Services, who was present. At the outset of the hearing, Mr. D'Angelo, a law student at
Downtown Legal Services, confirmed that he had informed instructions to proceed in the
Student’s absence. Ms. Patel on behalf of the University had no objection to proceeding in
the absence of the Student, who is currently living in another time zone.

5.

The hearing proceeded on the basis of an Agreed Statement of Facts (the “ASF”) contained
within a Joint Book of Documents (the “JBD”) presented by the parties. The Panel
reviewed the documents in the JBD before and during the course of the hearing to be
satisfied that they supported the facts agreed to in the ASF. A summary of the agreed facts
follows.

Evidence and Findings
6.

The Student first registered as a student at the University of Toronto Mississauga (“UTM”)
in Fall 2015. In Fall 2019, the Student enrolled in the Course, which was taught by Randy
Besco.

7.

The Student received permission to write a make-up test in the Course on January 10, 2020.
She was not permitted to have any aids with her during the test. The Student was the only
person writing the make-up test. Approximately 20 minutes into the test, the Student raised

-3-

her hand to ask the invigilator a question. When the invigilator approached, the Student
asked whether she was allowed to use a calculator for the test. The invigilator asked in
response, “what does it say on the top of the test.” The invigilator then reached for the test
to turn to the first page and two index cards slid out of the test paper and onto the desk.
8.

A copy of the index cards was included in the JBD. The Student admitted that she prepared
the cards and that they contained material relevant to the Course and the make-up test. The
Student further admitted that she knew she was not permitted to have the index cards with
her during the make-up test.

9.

The Student immediately accepted responsibility. On January 10, 2020, she sent an email
to the invigilator apologizing for the incident. On October 8, 2020, she met with Professor
Catherine Seguin, Dean’s Designate for Academic Integrity at UTM. The Student was
accompanied by counsel. During the meeting, she admitted knowingly possessing
unauthorized aids (the index cards) during the make-up test. The Student also provided
Professor Seguin with a written statement. The written statement was included in the JBD.
In it, the Student acknowledged committing an academic offence and expressed remorse
for her conduct. She also explained the serious mental health issues she was experiencing
at the time of the make-up test, and the significant consequences she faced given her
immigration status in Canada.

10.

Following deliberations and based on the admissions made by the Student, the ASF and
the materials in the JBD, the Panel concluded that the first charge had been proven with
clear and convincing evidence on a balance of probabilities, and accepted the guilty plea
of the Student in respect of that charge. The Panel was advised that if the Tribunal
convicted the Student on that charge, the University would withdraw the second charge
(the alternative charge) and that charge was so withdrawn.

Penalty
11.

The Student and University submitted a Joint Submission on Penalty (“JSP”) in support of
the following penalty:
(a)

A final grade of zero in POL242Y5Y;

(b)

A suspension from the University from April 30, 2021 to April 30, 2024; and

(c)

A notation of the sanction on her academic record and transcript from the day the
Tribunal made its order to April 30, 2025.

12.

The parties also submitted that this case shall be reported to the Provost for publication of
a notice of the decision of the Tribunal and the sanction imposed, with the name of the
Student withheld.

13.

As the Tribunal has stated in many cases, absent exceptional circumstances, panels are
expected to accept and implement joint statements on penalty. As set out in the Discipline
Appeals Board decision in The University of Toronto and M. A. (Case No. 837, December

-4-

22, 2016), a joint submission on penalty “may be rejected by a panel only in circumstances
where to give effect to it would be contrary to the public interest or would bring the
administration of justice into disrepute” (para 25).
14.

In the Panel’s view, the joint submission in this case is reasonable and appropriate. In
arriving at this decision, the Panel took into consideration the nature of the offence, the
detriment to the University occasioned by the offence, the need to deter other students from
acting in a similar manner, the character of the Student, and the circumstances surrounding
the commission of the offence.

15.

This is a serious offence. Cheating on a test is profoundly unfair to other students. As this
Tribunal has previously noted, “the integrity of examinations is a cornerstone of academic
life” (The University of Toronto and Y.Y. (Case No. 851, March 1, 2017(Sanction))).

16.

Moreover, this was not the Student’s first academic offence. On November 25, 2019, the
Student was sanctioned for submitting altered documents in a petition for special
consideration in four courses. She received a final grade of zero in each of the four courses,
a 12-month suspension and a 12-month notation on her academic record and transcript.
Given that the Student had been sanctioned in relation to academic misconduct just two
months prior to the make-up test, her decision to bring in the authorized aids cannot be
characterized as a one-time lapse in judgment.

17.

However, there were also important mitigating factors to consider. The Student admitted
guilt at the earliest opportunity and has cooperated throughout the process, including
entering into the ASF and JSP. These actions demonstrate insight and remorse, as did the
Student’s written statement to Professor Seguin.

18.

Furthermore, the Student tendered evidence, which the Provost did not challenge, in
support of the JSP. That evidence included a letter from the Student’s doctor relating to the
migraine symptoms experienced by the Student on January 10, 2020 and a letter from a
doctor at the UTM Health and Counselling centre dated September 15, 2020. The letter
from the counselling centre describes the Student as experiencing significant mental health
symptoms at the time of the offence.

19.

Finally, as an international student, the suspension from the University will have significant
consequences for the Student’s immigration status.

20.

In all of the circumstances, and having reviewed the cases provided by the parties in support
of the JSP, at the conclusion of the hearing, the Panel issued the following Order, which is
hereby confirmed:
(a)

THAT the Student is found guilty of one count of using or possessing an
unauthorized aid contrary to section B.I.1(b) of the Code of Behaviour on
Academic Matters;

(b)

THAT the Student shall receive a final grade of zero in POL242Y5Y;

-5-

(c)

THAT the Student be suspended from the University from April 30, 2021 to
April 30, 2024;

(d)

THAT a notation shall be placed on the Student’s academic record and transcript
from the date of the order to April 30, 2025; and

(e)

THAT this case shall be reported to the Provost for publication of a notice of the
decision of the Tribunal and the sanction or sanctions imposed, with the name of
the Student withheld.

Dated at Toronto this 16th day of July, 2021.

_____________________
Erin Dann, Chair
On behalf of the Panel

