Case No.: 907
THE UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
¡N THE MATTER OF charges of academic dishonesty made on December 19,2016,

AND N THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters, 1995,
f

AND lN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Act, 1971, S.O. 1971, c. 56 as amended S.O. 1978,
c. 88

BETWEEN
UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO

-andY

L

REASONS FOR DECISION
Date of Hearing: April 28, 2017

Members of the Panek

Ms. Amanda Heale, Chair
Professor Michael Saini, Faculty Panel Member
Ms. Amanda Nash, Student Panel Member

Appearances:
Mr. Robert Centa, Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg Rothstein LLP
Ms. Emily Home, Articling Student, Paliare Roland Rosenberg Rothstein LLP
L
Mr. Nathan Korenberg, agent for Juslaw Legal Seruices, paralegal for Ms. Y
ln Attendance:

Ms. Krista Osbourne, Administrative Clerk and Hearing Secretary, Office of the Appeals,
Discipline and Faculty Grievances
Mr. Sean Lourim, lT Support, Office of the Governing Council

Not in Attendance:
Ms. Y
L , the Student

2

Introduction

1.

A hearing before the University Tribunal (the "Tribunal") was convened on April 28,

2017 to consider the Charges (as defined below) against the Student, Y

L

(the

"Student").

The Charqe

2.

The charges against the Student (the "Charges") are as follows

(a) On or about December 18,2015, you knowingly forged or in any other

way altered or falsified a document or evidence required by the University
of Toronto, or uttered, circulated or made use of any such forged, altered
or falsified document, namely, a University of Toronto Verification of
Student lllness or lnjury form, dated December 15,2015, which you
submitted in support of your petition request for a deferred examination in
CSC108H5F (20159), contrary to Section 8.1.1(a) of the Code.

(b) ln the alternative, you knowingly engaged in a form of cheating, academic
dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or misrepresentation in order to obtain
academic credit or other academic advantage of any kind, which violated
section 8.1.3(b) of the Code.

Particulars

3.

The particulars of the offences charged are as follows

(a) At all material times you were a student at the University of Toronto
Mississauga.

(b) On December 15, 2015, you submitted a petition request for a deferred

examination in CSC108H5F (20159) on the basis of an illness, which you
described as "fever and the influenza".

(c)

ln support of your request, on December 18, 2015, you submitted a
University of Toronto Verification of lllness or lnjury form dated December
15,2015 (the .VOl"). The VOI was purportedly prepared and signed by
"Dr. John P. Winston" with CPSO registration number 77179.

(d) CPSO registration number 77179 is not associated with a "Dr. John P
Winston" and the CPSO registry does not contain any doctors by that
name.

(e) You knew that the VOI was forged or altered and contained false

J

information when you submitted it.

(f)

You knowingly submitted the VOI:
understanding that the University of Toronto required evidence to be
presented in order to obtain the academic accommodation you sought.

with the intention that the University of Toronto rely on it in considering
whether or not to provide you with the academic accommodations you
requested;
in an attempt to obtain an academic advantage.

Aqreed Statement of Facts

4.

The hearing proceeded on the basis of an Agreed Statement of Facts (the "ASF"),

which was marked as Exhibit 1. The parties also presented a Joint Book of Documents
(the "JBD") that is referred to in the ASF, which was marked as Exhibit 3. A summary of
the agreed facts follows.

5.

On December 15, 2015, The Student submitted a petition to request to defer her

final exam for CSC108H5F 2015(9). The petition, which was given file number 45957,
and the supporting documents submitted by The Student were included in the JBD at Tab

4 ("Petition").

6.

ln support of the Petition, the Student submitted, among other documents, a

Personal Statement and a University Verification of Student lllness or lnjury Form, dated

December 15,2015 which was purportedly signed by Dr. John P. Winston ("December
15 Form"). The Personal Statement contained statements that she knew to be false when

she submitted it.

7.

The Student was not seen by Dr. Winston on December 15, 2015, or at any other

time. She paid $100 to have a false and forged medical note created for her to circulate

to the University in support of her request for academic accommodation. The Student
knew that the December 15 Form had been forged or altered and contained false
information when she submitted the December 15 Form to the University.

4

8.

The Student admitted that she knowingly submitted the documents described

above understanding that the University of Toronto required evidence to be presented in

order to obtain the academic accommodation she sought, with the intention that the
University of Toronto rely on them in considering whether or not to provide her with the

academic accommodations she requested, and in an attempt to obtain an academic
advantage.
Findinqs on Charges

L

Following deliberations and based on the ASF and the JBD, the Panel concluded

that the first charge (as outlined in paragraph 2 above) had been proven with clear and
convincing evidence on a balance of probabilities, and accepted the guilty plea of the
Student in respect of that charge. The Panel was advised that if the Tribunal convicts the
Student on the first charge, the University would withdraw the alternative charge.
Penaltv

10. The University and the Student submitted an Agreed Statement of Facts and Joint
Submission on Penalty (the "JSP"), which was marked as Exhibit 3. In the JSP, the parties
submitted that the Tribunal should impose the following sanctions on the Student:

a) a final grade of zero in CSC108H5, 2015 (9);
b) a suspension from the University for three years from May 1,2017 to April
30,2020; and

c) a notation of the sanction on her academic record and transcript until April
30,2021.

11. The parties also submitted that this case shall be reported to the Provost for
publication of a notice of the decision of the Tribunal and the sanction imposed in the
University newspapers, with the name of the Student withheld.

12. Counsel for the University provided submissions on the high threshold required for

a Tribunal to deviate from a joint submission on penalty. As set out in the Discipline

5

Appeals Board decision in S.F. and The University of Toronto (Case No. 690 - Appeal,
dated October 20,2014), only truly unreasonable or "unconscionable" joint submissions

should be rejected (para 22).

13. ln the Panel's view, the joint submission in this case is reasonable. ln particular,
the Panel took into consideration the seriousness of the offence; the Student in this case
not only submitted a forged orfalsified record to the University, but paid to do so. Offences

of this nature compromise the integrity of the academic process. The Panel also
considered that this was not the Student's first offence. As reflected in the JSP, the
Student had previously been sanctioned for the possession of an unauthorized aid while
writing a final examination.

14. However, there were also mitigating factors to consider. The Student had
cooperated in the process and entered into the ASF and JSP, thereby showing that she
had accepted responsibility for her conduct. She is only four credits away from graduation

from the University.

15. Having regard to the above, and based on its review of similar cases presented by

counsel to the University, the Panel agreed that the recommended sanctíons are
appropriate in the circumstances, and made the following order:

a) The Student is guilty of the academic offence of falsifying evidence, contrary
to section B.1.1(a) of the Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters.

b) the following sanctions shall be imposed on the Student:

i. a final grade of zero in CSC108H5, 2015 (9);
ii. a suspension from the University for three years from May 1, 2017
to April 30, 2020; and

iii. a notation of the sanction on her academic record and transcript until
April 30, 2021.

c) this case shall be reported to the Provost for publication of a notice of the
decision of the Tribunal and the sanction or sanctions imposed, with the
name of the Student withheld

6

Dated at Toronto,

this20th of June, 2017,

Ms. Amanda Heale,

ir

