Case #907

   DATE:Â Â June 20, 2017
   PARTIES:Â University of Toronto v. Y. L. (âthe Studentâ)

   Hearing Date(s): April 28, 2017

   Panel Members:
   Ms. Amanda Heale, Chair
   Professor Michael Saini, Faculty Panel Member
   Ms. Amanda Nash, Student Panel Member

   Appearances:
   Mr. Robert Centa, Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg
   Rothstein LLP
   Ms. Emily Home, Articling Student, Paliare Roland Rosenberg Rothstein
   LLP
   Mr. Nathan Korenberg, agent for Juslaw Legal Services, paralegal for
   the Student

   In Attendance:
   Ms. Krista Osbourne, Administrative Clerk and Hearing Secretary, Office
   of the Appeals,
   Discipline and Faculty Grievances
   Mr. Sean Lourim, lT Support, Office of the Governing Council

   Not in Attendance:
   The Student

   Trial Division â s. B.i.1(a) of the Code â forging or falsifying
   information in a petition for accommodation â purchase of forged
   medical certificates from third party â Student not present â Agreed
   Statement of Facts â Joint Submission on Penalty â prior offence â
   sanction â a final grade of zero in the affected course, a suspension
   from the University for three years, an order on the Studentâs record
   and transcript for four years, and a report to the Provost for
   publication

   Student was charged with one charge of forging or falsifying
   information contained in her petition for academic accommodation
   contrary to s. B.i.1(a) of the Code , or in the alternative, one charge
   of academic dishonesty under s. B.i.3(b) of the Code . In an Agreed
   Statement of Facts (ASF), the Student admitted to committing the
   offence of forging or falsifying information for her petition for
   academic accommodation contrary to s. B.i.1(a) of the Code . Upon the
   Panelâs acceptance of the Studentâs guilty plea, the University
   withdrew the alternative charge of academic dishonesty.

   The charge related to information contained in the Studentâs Personal
   Statement and accompanying University Verification of Student Illness
   or lnjury Form submitted in support of the Studentâs petition to have a
   final exam deferred. In these documents, the Student purported to have
   visited a clinic and received advice from âDr. John Winstonâ who had
   signed her Verification of Student Illness or Injury Form. A later
   investigation turned up that Dr. Winston did not exist. The Student
   admitted to purchasing the forged Verification of Student Illness or
   lnjury Form from a third party.

   The parties submitted a Joint Submission on Penalty (JSP) of a final
   grade of zero in the affected course, a suspension from the University
   for three years, a notation on the Studentâs record and transcript for
   four years, and a report to the Provost for publication. The Panel
   found the JSP to be reasonable in these circumstances, where the
   offence at issue was serious plus the Student had been previously
   sanctioned for using an unauthorized aid. The Panel also considered the
   mitigating factors the Student was only four credits away from
   graduation and that she had cooperated with the discipline process by
   submitting an ASF and a JSP.Â  The Panel accepted the JSP and ordered a
   final grade of zero in the affected course, a suspension from the
   University for three years, a notation on the Studentâs record and
   transcript for four years, and a report to the Provost for publication.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12943
