1

Case No. 1278
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL

IN THE MATTER OF charges of academic dishonesty made on October 12, 2021,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters,
1995,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Act, 1971, S.O. 1971, c. 56 as amended
S.O. 1978, c. 88
B E T W E N:
UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
- and –
H

Z

REASONS FOR DECISION
Hearing Date: November 30, 2022, and January 9, 2023, via Zoom
Panel Members:
Cynthia Kuehl, Chair
Professor George Cree, Faculty Panel Member
Nik Khakhar, Student Panel Member
Appearances:
Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg Rothstein LLP
William Webb, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg Rothstein LLP
Daniel Goldbloom, Counsel for the Student, Goldbloom Law
H
Z
Hearing Secretary:
Christopher Lang, Director, Office of Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances

-2-

1.

This hearing of the Trial Division of the University Tribunal was convened on November

30, 2022, and continued on January 9, 2023, by Zoom, to consider charges of academic dishonesty
(the “Charges”) brought by the University of Toronto (the “University”) against H

Z

(the

“Student”) under the Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters, 1995 (the “Code”). The Student
was informed of the Charges by letter dated October 12, 2021.
The Charges
2.

At the material times, the Student was registered as a student in the Faculty of Arts &

Science at the University.
3.

In the Charges, the Provost made the following two allegations:
(i)

On or about October 18 and 19, 2020, the Student knowingly used or
possessed an unauthorized aid or obtained unauthorized assistance in
Assessment #2 in ECO101H1F (20209) (the “Course”), contrary to section
B.I.1(b) of the Code;

(ii)

In the alternative, on or about October 18 and 19, 2020, the Student
knowingly engaged in a form of cheating, academic dishonesty or
misconduct, fraud or misrepresentation or otherwise described in the Code
in order to obtain academic credit or other academic advantage of any kind
in connection with Assessment #2 in the Course, contrary to section B.1.3
(b) of the Code.

4.

The Provost advised that it would withdraw Allegation 2 if findings were made on

Allegation 1. Ultimately, Allegation 2 was withdrawn.
5.

Detailed particulars in support of the allegations were provided in the Charges.

The Evidence
(a)

Summary of Issue and Finding

6.

The Student and the Provost provided a detailed Agreed Statement of Facts (“ASF”), which

set out much of the background to the allegations, the result of which was that the hearing
proceeded on a single issue only. That issue was whether the Student was, in fact, the person who
participated in an online review session conducted during the time set aside for the completion of

-3-

an assignment in the Course. There was no dispute that, if the Provost established on a balance of
probabilities that the Student did participate, then Allegation 1 would be established.
7.

The Tribunal found that the Provost had met its burden.

(b)

Evidence at the Hearing

8.

The Student was enrolled in the Course, taught by Professor Gazzale and Professor

Farhoodi. The syllabus for the Course directed students to review the Code, which included a
specific direction that students were not to receive any assistance on or during any assessment or
activity that counted towards the course grade. In addition, students were required to sign
academic integrity statements for the Course, which the Student signed.
9.

Assessment #2 in the Course was an asynchronous assignment, worth 10.5% of the final

grade. It, therefore, fell within the scope of the direction in the Course, requiring that students not
receive any assistance in respect of it.
10.

For Assessment #2, Professor Gazzale wrote 77 different questions, 40 of which were

multiple choice and 37 required that students provide a numeric answer. They were organized into
17 question pools, according to subject matter, each pool containing anywhere from 3 to 10
questions. Quercus then randomly selected one or more questions from each pool and assigned
those questions to a student. Each student ultimately received 23 questions.
11.

All students in the Course were required to write Assessment #2 on October 18 and 19,

2020. As an asynchronous assignment, students were given 90 minutes from the time they chose
to start to write the assessment and its completion. All assignments had to be completed between
October 18, 2020, at 7:00 p.m. and October 19, 2020, at 7:00 p.m. (the “submission window”).
12.

Assessment #2 was open book and had very specific instructions that the students were not

permitted to discuss the assessment with anyone while the submission window was open.
13.

After the close of the submission window, Professor Gazzale was alerted by another

student in the Course that Easy EDU, a commercial tutoring service, had held a review session
during the submission window during which Easy EDU provided solutions to questions that were
near identical to the questions on Assessment #2 (the “Review Session”). The students (of which

-4-

there were 180) in attendance at the Review Session received a study package of 22 questions,
each one of which corresponded directly to one of the questions that Professor Gazzale had written
for Assessment #2, with very minor modifications that were inconsequential to the substantive
questions being asked.
14.

By correlating the 22 questions in the study package to the assessment files for every

student in the Course, Professor Gazzale was able to identify a student, Y.L., as being the one who
had been assigned each of the 22 questions. Y.L. confirmed on October 22, 2020, that he had paid
a tutor to check his answers during the submission window.
15.

In the interim, Professor Gazzale, as well as the Student Academic Integrity Office, the

Office of the Governing Council, the Department Chair and several other professors received an
email from another student, now writing on behalf of a group of students in the Course, and stating
that they were concerned about academic integrity and Assessment #2. That student provided
details about Easy EDU, including that it had promoted the Review Session and required payment.
The student also provided a link to the YouTube video of the Review Session, which confirmed it
was held on October 18, 2020, at 9:08 p.m., during the submission window. Repeated references
were made to the actual test during the Review Session. The 22 questions that had been assigned
to Y.L. were answered.
16.

The Review Session was held over Zoom. One of the names that appears in the Review

Session video is the name of the Student (the “Student Zoom Account”). The name of the Student
appears in the box on the Zoom platform in which participants are able to self-identify, and remains
visible throughout the video. The Student is the only student with that name in the Course.
17.

The Student Zoom Account participated quite extensively in the Review Session by typing

in a number of comments, some of which were in Mandarin, the translation of which were agreed
to by the parties. The Tribunal was provided with a list of all the comments made by the Student
Zoom Account. Most of the comments were directed at providing answers to the questions that
were being taught by Easy EDU as part of the review for Assessment #2, and included:
•

comments about opportunity costs, marginal costs and marginal benefit;

•

comments about absolute advantage and comparative advantage;

-5-

•

comments about absolute advantage alone; and

•

comments about surplus and willingness to pay.

In addition, there was one instance where the Student Zoom Account typed the name of “Lee
Bailey” in relation to a question about a professor of the University of Toronto Mississauga
campus who taught ECO100. The Student had not had Professor Bailey as a professor and this
singular comment was the focus of evidence and speculation at the hearing.
18.

The Student Academic Integrity Office scheduled a meeting with the Student to discuss

the allegations that he had committed an academic offence in respect of Assessment #2. That
meeting took place with Professor Graeme Hirst on July 9, 2021. The Student denied attending
the Review Session and committing an academic offence. Rather, he said that a friend, X R had
attended the session using the Student’s Zoom account on the Student’s gaming computer and
without his knowledge. The Student and Mr. R were former roommates and the Student advised
Prof. Hirst that he had loaned his gaming laptop to Mr. R.
19.

Mr. R also spoke to Prof. Hirst. Mr. R advised that he had been seeking employment with

Easy EDU as a “TA” (a teaching assistant), and had used the Student’s gaming computer and
account to attend the Review Session at the suggestion of Easy EDU that he attend a session as a
trial.
20.

According to Easy EDU webpage submitted in evidence, Easy EDU tutors have “a strong

understanding of the major courses of various departments in recent years, as well as the current
status and niche of the entire major….All EZ Edu tutors have 3-5 years of teaching experience,
with a cumulative teaching time of 800,000 hours”. There is no dispute that Mr. R does not meet
this criteria.
21.

In addition, the Easy EDU webpage included job descriptions for course instructor,

instructor assistant, internal assistant, and course consultant. An instructor assistant’s role, which
was likely the one that corresponded most closely to TA, was to “assist course instructors in
completing teaching tasks, answer and explain questions raised by students, and collect, organize
and create course materials”. Mr. R’s evidence, however, was that he was told that he just had to
attend sessions and mark papers. He admitted in cross-examination, however, that students paying

-6-

money for TA assistance would expect him also to be able to answer questions about the
substantive material in the course.
22.

The Student admitted that he knew or ought to have known that attending the Review

Session would have constituted obtaining unauthorized assistance and be contrary to the Code.
23.

The hearing proceeded, therefore, on the sole issue of whether it was the Student or Mr. R

who attended the Review Session. If the Tribunal found that the University established, on a
balance of probabilities, that it was the Student who had attended, then the academic offence in
Allegation 1 would be established.
24.

In addition to the fact that the name of the Student appeared on the Zoom screen and

therefore visible throughout the Review Session; that the Student was the only student with that
name in the Course; and the Student Zoom Account participated extensively in answering the
questions that would be posed on the test in a manner that the Tribunal found was consistent only
with someone interested in and knowledgeable about the Course materials (i.e.., a student in the
Course), the University also led evidence from Professor Gazzale as to similarities between the
work that was presented during the Review Session and the rough work that was provided by the
Student on Assessment #2. These similarities included:
•

the use of vertical lines to indicate absolute value, something that Prof. Gazzale did not
teach in the Course;

•

the use of the acronym TB and the idea of total benefit, which Prof. Gazzale said in
examination in chief that he did not introduce in the Course. On cross-examination,
Professor Gazzale acknowledged that the language of “total benefit” did appear in one
of the questions on the examination;

•
25.

the use of the acronym E to denote elasticity.

In addition, Professor Gazzale indicated that there was at least one question for which the

Student got the right answer in a multiple choice format but did not draw a graph. A graph would,
according to Professor Gazzale, be necessary to answer the question correctly (the suggestion
being, unless the Student knew the answer from the Review Session).

-7-

26.

The Student’s evidence on this point was that he had simply guessed between two options,

having otherwise logically eliminated some of the other answers. There was no explanation as to
why the Student had not even tried to use a graph. Of note, in a similar type question, the Student
guessed the other option in an effort to at least get 50% on these questions.
27.

In addition, the Student explained that he had learned the symbol for absolute value in high

school. He could not explain where he learned the concept of total benefit, although he said it
could have been used in the Course, in other online study guides or from another student. Though
counsel’s final submissions suggested using E would be obvious, there was no evidence on that
point.
28.

In the singular and without the benefit of the overall context, any one of these explanations

may have been plausible to the Tribunal. However, when reviewed together and in light of the
striking similarity of the Student’s rough work to that prepared by Easy EDU in the Review
Session, the Tribunal does not accept these explanations.
29.

The evidence of Professor Gazzale was challenged in respect of his interest in the outcome

of this hearing as a result of the fact that he, together with the University, are currently involved
in a lawsuit against Easy EDU for the copyright infringement of Professor Gazzale’s intellectual
work. The Statement of Claim references the fact that there have been numerous charges of
academic misconduct that arose from Easy EDU’s conduct. In cross-examination, Professor
Gazzale denied that he was motivated by the lawsuit when giving his evidence. The outcome of
this particular hearing would not affect the lawsuit itself, which was premised on Easy EDU’s use
of his work. No student, including Y.L, was named as a defendant.
30.

Having reviewed the Statement of Claim, the Panel did not accept that Professor Gazzale’s

evidence was tainted by the fact that he and the University have commenced this action. The
evidence is that 180 students attended the Review Session. Given that the allegations do not relate
to a particular finding of academic offence by any individual student, there does not appear to be
a gain that would actually be generated as a result of a particular outcome in this hearing.
31.

Importantly, much of Professor Gazzale’s evidence consisted of a comparison between the

Student’s work and the Review Session. While not looking for material that exonerated the
Student, he admitted that not all similarities between the Student’s work on Assessment #2 and

-8-

Easy Edu’s tutoring could be attributed to the Student’s attendance at the Review Session. Rather,
there would be answers that the Student could get right without producing rough work. While he
did not accept the Student would just guess between two possibly right answers and therefore did
not need to do rough work, the Panel did not find that this affected his overall credibility. Rather,
his evidence was based on a comparison, which was visual and attached to his affidavit, of the
rough work in particular between the Student’s work and that of Easy EDU.
32.

Professor Hirst also gave evidence with respect to his academic meeting. That included

the disparity of the evidence between Mr. R and the Student at the hearing, compared to what he
would have been advised. Overall, the Tribunal was less troubled by these minor discrepancies as
much as the evidence of Mr. R at the hearing which, for reasons described below, was not accepted.
33.

Both the Student and Mr. R gave evidence. They were consistent with respect to how they

had lived together in the summer of 2020 in a condominium, before the Student moved into
residence in September 2020. Their evidence was that the Student left behind a gaming laptop so
as not to be distracted from his work, which Mr. R continued to use after September 20202. They
testified that they had an oral agreement that the gaming laptop would be sold to Mr. R, and
produced some financial records of an e-transfer for $950 in November 2020 (i.e. after the Review
Session). Their evidence was that this was repaid to Mr. R when he departed for China in
December 2020 in cash so that he could use that cash to convert to Chinese Yen at the airport. Mr.
R did not take the gaming laptop with him to China, leaving it instead in storage at the
condominium. The Student later retrieved it from there.
34.

The Student denied that he participated in the Review Session. His evidence was that he

found out in December 2020 that there was some concern of academic misconduct. He then
contacted a number of his friends. When it was put to him in cross-examination that he did so to
find out if they were also in trouble, like him, he acknowledged that it was for “something like
that”. This did not include Mr. R, who was not in the Course. It was suggested to, but denied by
him, that the Student was trying to find a friend who would agree to say it was them who
participated so as to exonerate the Student.
35.

At some time in December 2020, he, Mr. R and another friend (who did not attend to give

evidence) were out for dinner during which the Student disclosed to Mr. R that he was being
investigated for academic misconduct. Mr. R then advised that he had been applying for a job

-9-

with Easy EDU as a TA. Though their evidence was not clear, the gist of it was that there was
some question as to whether Mr. R had used the Student’s gaming laptop to attend an Easy EDU
session, which they later confirmed was the case. This was the explanation, therefore, for why the
Student’s name appeared on Zoom, even though it was Mr. R who had attended.
36.

Mr. R explained that he had completed part of ECO100 with Professor Lee Bailey, but then

had dropped the course. He had no other economics background. However, he was trying to find
a part-time job and his father suggested that he contact Easy EDU, because of some family
connection with D

M , who he understood was affiliated with the company. According to

Mr. R, he got in touch with Mr. M

in May or June and sent him his transcript. At that time, the

transcript would have likely revealed that he had no economic courses (having dropped ECO100),
three courses with a grade below 65, and his highest mark in Sociology (a 74). In respect of
MAT136 (a course for which he had engaged in academic misconduct himself), it would, at best,
not have been on the transcript or possibly would have been a zero or a F. However, according to
Mr. R, as he had partially completed ECO100, Mr. M

suggested that he could be an Economics

TA. All of these discussions took place over We-Chat, the log for which has subsequently,
according to Mr. R, been deleted, because he switched phones. He was not able to produce any
other evidence of any of these discussions, nor did he provide particular details of how his family
actually knew Mr. M .
37.

These initial discussions took place in May or June 2020. Mr. M

then suggested that Mr.

R could observe one of the courses as a trial, following which he could provide some feedback to
them about the course. This would be an introduction to Easy EDU and part of the process towards
possible employment as a TA.
38.

Mr. R then did not hear from Mr. M

Session. He said he just assumed Mr. M

until shortly before the October 2020 Review

would get in touch with him and he did not want to

bother him, so he never reached back out to Mr. M . In the meantime, he was still looking for
part-time work.
39.

As requested by Mr. M , he then attended the Review Session. For reasons that he did not

provide, he used the gaming laptop rather than this own. During the Review Session, he realized
that he was logged in as the Student. He did not think it would be an issue, and said that he was
not sure how to change the Zoom name. His evidence was that he was the one who entered in all

- 10 -

the comments onto the Session. He has no reason for his participation other than “for the heck of
it”. He also said that he answered the question with respect to Professor Bailey as he knew him
from ECO100. He denied ever telling the Student about Professor Bailey, who had never taught
the Student. In cross-examination, however, he admitted that Professor Bailey was known at UTM
(where the Student had attended) for being a hard grader. The Tribunal accepted this as an
explanation for how the Student would have known the name of a professor that had taught his
former roommate.
40.

He never did contact Easy EDU after that, because he was concerned that doing so may

make the situation worse for the Student.
41.

He also confirmed the evidence of the Student with respect to the intention to purchase the

gaming laptop, and the return of the funds.
Panel’s Decision on Findings
42.

Having considered the ASF, the affidavit and oral evidence, the Tribunal found that the

Student had committed an academic offence, in that he obtained unauthorized assistance in the
Course contrary to section B.I.1(b) of the Code.
43.

The Tribunal was convinced on the balance of probabilities that the Student Zoom Account

was the same person as the Student who is the subject of these charges. Only the Student was
motivated to attend this session, and the Student was the only person with that name in the Course.
The Tribunal was struck by the level of participation by the Student Zoom Account. That person
clearly was interested in understanding the course content and participating in a manner that was
educative in nature. The Tribunal also noted that it was on this assignment that the Student did
best overall in the Course, by a significant margin. Though the Student’s explanation was that this
was because it was multiple choice or numeric and did not require long essay questions, the
Tribunal did not accept this explanation given all the evidence that pointed to the Student’s
attendance at the Review Session.
44.

The Tribunal also noted that there were a number of similarities including specific

idiosyncratic notations between the Review Session and the Student’s rough work. While the
Student provided some explanation for those responses (i.e. he learned absolute value), he gave no
evidence with respect to all the notations, including the use of “E” for elasticity. The appearance

- 11 -

of the rough work that was completed in the Review Session and that was completed by the Student
on Assessment #2 could not be ignored by the Tribunal.
45.

In coming to its decision, the Tribunal considered all of the evidence, including that of Mr.

R and the Student with respect to Mr. R’s explanation that he was the one who attended the Review
Session. Put bluntly, Mr. R’s evidence was not credible, and at times bordering on the incredible.
The Tribunal rejected his evidence on the following bases:
(a)

It made no sense that a person who wanted to obtain a job would wait from May or
June 2020 until October 2020, without any contact, to follow up;

(b)

Mr. R’s academic transcript and his knowledge of economics made him unsuitable
for the role of a teaching assistant in economics. Put simply, he was not qualified
for the job that he purported to be trying to obtain;

(c)

If part of the job interview was to attend the course and provide feedback, he failed
in two respects:
(i)

by not using his own computer which presumably had his own name on the
Zoom platform (which he identified as “robinren”) or by not changing the
Student’s name to his own while in the Review Session, he denied himself
the opportunity for Easy EDU to know that he had attended the session as
required by Mr. M

There was no indication to Easy EDU, his prospective

employer, that he was taking the course and observing, which was required
as part of the job interview process;
(ii)

he ultimately provided no feedback whatsoever. Although Mr. R said he
did not contact Easy EDU again because it may cause a problem for the
Student, that explanation was not credible to the Panel. Mr. R and the
Student both testified that Mr. R did not know of any problems for the
Student relating to the Review Session until their dinner in December 2020,
almost two months after the Review Session. It makes no sense if, as Mr.
R claims, he was to attend the Review Session and provide feedback, that
he did not do so at any point between October 18, 2020 and the dinner with
the Student in December 2020.

- 12 -

(d)

Whomever logged in participated extensively, in answering questions relative to
the content of the Course. Though Mr. R said it was him, there was no evidence
given by him as to how he would actually understand any of the content that was
given, given he had never taken the course, nor had he completed ECO100. While
there was a suggestion by counsel in submissions that the courses would have a lot
of similar introductory concepts, there was no evidence to that effect;

(e)

There was no credible explanation for his participation. There was no requirement
that he participate and the fact he was there to observe. The level of participation
is that of somebody who would have wanted to be educated from the Course and to
understand the concepts in the Review Session. It is important that this was not
one or two notes, but an extensive amount of participation and back and forth with
the Easy EDU tutor.

46.

The Tribunal rejected Mr. R’s evidence. In the absence of there being any explanation as

to who else may have attended, the Tribunal is left with the evidence of the name of the Student
on the Zoom Account, the participation of the Student Zoom Account in the Review Session, the
fact that only students in the Course would be interested in the Review Session, the similarities
between the rough work of the Student and the Review Session tutor, and the Student’s improved
grade in Assessment #2. Taken together, this evidence is sufficient to establish Allegation 1.
47.

Having been advised of these findings, the University withdrew Allegation #2.

Penalty
48.

The University and the Student provided a joint submission on penalty which provided for

the following sanctions to be imposed on the Student:
(a)

a final grade of zero in ECO101 H1F in fall of 2020;

(b)

a suspension from the University for two years and four months commencing on
January 1, 2023; and

(c)

a notation of the sanction on the Student’s academic record and transcript for four
years from the date of this order until graduation, whichever comes first.

- 13 -

49.

The parties also agreed that the case should be reported to the Provost for publication of a

notice of the Tribunal’s decision and the sanctions imposed, with the Student’s name withheld.
50.

In circumstances of a joint submission of penalty, the Panel is to accept the joint submission

unless, to do so, would bring the administration of justice into disrepute. That high threshold is
simply not met in this case.
51.

The Tribunal considered the range of penalties that have been imposed in other cases where

there have been allegations or unauthorized assistance or plagiarism. The University had provided
a summary of cases, as well as 15 cases themselves that had set out the appropriate range in the
circumstances. This included the case of University of Toronto v. X.Z (Case #1274, April 19,
2022), in which another student who participated in this Review Session had been found guilty of
unauthorized assistance and received a 2.5 years suspension.
52.

In addition, the Tribunal was directed to the decision of University of Toronto v. Y.Y. (Case

#851, July 8, 2026), in which this Tribunal noted that, generally, the penalty for cheating during
exams by receiving unauthorized aids includes a suspension of at least two years for a first offence.
In this case, however, there is some jurisprudence, including the decision of X.Z., in which the
Tribunal has noted that the use of a commercial provider, like here, justifies consequences over
and above the typical two years suspension for unauthorized assistance. In other words, the use
of a commercial provider is considered to be an aggravating factor.
53.

In this case, the Tribunal accepted the length of suspension, as being within the range and

not reaching the threshold necessary to justify a more significant misconduct penalty. That said,
the Tribunal was troubled by the fact that there was an attempt to cover up the Student’s
misconduct in this case by involving another former student in an elaborate story. But for the joint
submission on penalty, that may have yielded a different result. While the Tribunal accepts that
the Student’s decision to defend himself is not (and should never be considered) an aggravating
factor, the fact that another student was involved in creating this type of story was of grave concern
to the Tribunal.
54.

In addition to the reasonable range of outcomes established by the cases, the Tribunal had

regard to the factors set out in University of Toronto v. Mr. C. (Case #1976/77-3, November 5,
1976) as follows:

- 14 -

(a)

The character of the Student.

This was a first offence by the Student. The Tribunal noted, in particular, that this was a
situation where at least 180 students attended the EASY EDU session. That said, as noted
above, the Tribunal was concerned that there was negative reflection of the character on
the Student by the means by which he elected to defend himself in this hearing, namely by
the creation of an elaborate story to explain his conduct.
(b)

The likelihood of repetition of the offence.

The Student did not have a prior record of academic offences. Although the Student
defended himself in this hearing, it was clear that the Student did understand the
significance of the allegations made against him and, in particular, admitted and
acknowledged that, if the person who attended the Review Session was him, that would be
an academic offence. This type of recognition of what constitutes an offence is, in the view
of the Tribunal, an important factor that reduces the likelihood of repetition.
(c)

The nature of the offence committed; and

(d)

Any extenuating or mitigating circumstances.

As noted in X.Y., the University has to be able to trust that asynchronous testing will be
completed with the same academic integrity as if the test was administered in person. This
places significant responsibility on students to ensure that their academic performance is
their own and that they not engage in unauthorized assistance. The type of warning that
was provided by Professor Gazzale in this course could not have been more clear.
The Student submitted that an additional mitigating factor is the fact that the Student is an
international student and this decision may have an effect on his immigration status. The
Tribunal accepts the advice of Counsel for the Provost that, in previous cases, the
Discipline Appeals Board has made clear that one does not adjust the sanction based on
immigration status. In any event, this factor would not have affected the Panel’s
consideration of the joint submission on penalty, which was otherwise in the reasonable
range of outcomes.

- 15 -

(e)

The detriment to the University occasioned by the result.

There is a real risk that the University’s integrity will be affected whenever there is a mass
cheating incident such as this. It reflects poorly on the University and its safeguards in the
asynchronous learning environment.
(f)

The need to deter others from committing a similar offence.

Abuse of asynchronous/online testing is an ongoing issue at the University and, as
exemplified by the cases presented to the Tribunal, has been of particular concern in the
last several years. It is appropriate, particularly in these times but at all times, to send a
very strong message to students that the use of unauthorized assistance is academic
misconduct to be treated very seriously.
55.

In light of these circumstances and the cases, the Tribunal accepted the joint submission

on penalty.
56.

Accordingly, at the conclusion of the hearing, the Tribunal made the following order:
(i)

THAT the Student is guilty of one count of unauthorized assistance,
contrary to section B.I.1(b) of the Code of Behaviour and Academic
Matters;

(ii)

THAT the following sanctions shall be imposed on the Student:
(A)

a final grade of zero in ECO1010H1F in fall 2020;

(B)

a suspension from the University for 2 years and 4 months
commencing on January 1, 2023; and

(C)

a notation of the sanction on the Student’s academic record and
transcript for four years from the date of this order until graduation,
whichever comes first.

(iii)

THAT this case be reported to the Provost for publication of the notice of
the Tribunal’s decision and the sanctions imposed, with the name of the
Student withheld.

- 16 -

Dated at Toronto this 23rd day of March, 2023.

Original signed by:
Cynthia Kuehl, Chair
On behalf of the Panel

