Case 1278

   [1]Case 1278 - Appeal

DATE:

   March 23, 2023

PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v. H.Z. ("the Student")

HEARING DATES:

   November 30, 2022 and January 9, 2023, via Zoom

PANEL MEMBERS:

   Cynthia Kuehl, Chair
   Professor George Cree, Faculty Panel Member
   Nik Khakhar, Student Panel Member

APPEARANCES:

   Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg
   Rothstein LLP
   William Webb, Assistant Discipline Counsel,Â Paliare Roland Rosenberg
   Rothstein LLP
   Daniel Goldbloom, Counsel for the Student, Goldbloom Law
   The Student

HEARING SECRETARY:

   Christopher Lang, Director, Office of Appeals, Discipline and Faculty
   Grievances

   The Student was charged with one count of knowingly using or possessing
   an unauthorized aid or obtaining unauthorized assistance in an
   assessment, contrary to section B.i.1(b) of the Code. Alternatively,
   the Student was also charged with one count of knowingly engaging in a
   form of cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or
   misrepresentation or otherwise described in the Code in order to obtain
   academic credit or other academic advantage of any kind in connection
   with the assessment, contrary to section B.i.3 (b) of the Code.

   The Panel considered the partiesâ Agreed Statement of Facts(âASFâ). It
   noted that the issue before it was whether the Student was the person
   who had participated in an online review session conducted during the
   time set aside for the completion of the assignment. The Panel
   considered evidence that one of the course professors was alerted by a
   student in the course that Easy EDU, a commercial tutoring service, had
   held a review session during the submission window during which Easy
   EDU provided solutions to questions that were nearly identical to the
   questions on the assignment. The 180 students who had attended Easy
   EDUâs review session had received a study package of 22 questions,
   which corresponded directly to questions the professor had written for
   the assessment. Another student, writing on behalf of other students in
   the course, had emailed that professor raising concerns about academic
   integrity and that assignment. That student provided evidence,
   including a YouTube link, showing the Studentâs name on a Zoom screen
   during the session held by Easy EDU. Based on the evidence, the Panel
   concluded that the Student had participated extensively during the
   review session. The Panel found the Student guilty of committing an
   offence under section B.i.1(b) of the Code, and the University withdrew
   the alternative charge.

   In determining the sanction, the Panel considered the partiesâ joint
   submission on penalty (âJSPâ). It was troubled by the attempt to cover
   up the Studentâs misconduct in this case by involving another former
   student in an elaborate story. While this was the Studentâs first
   academic offence, the Panel was concerned that there was a negative
   reflection of the Studentâs character. The Panel saw the Studentâs
   recognition as an important factor that reduces the likelihood of
   repetition.

   The Studentâs submitted that an additional mitigating factor was that
   they were an international student and the Panelâs decision could
   affect their immigration status. In response, the Panel accepted the
   Universityâs submission that the Discipline Appeals Board had made
   clear that one does not adjust the sanction based on immigration
   status. Additionally, the Panel noted that this factor would not have
   affected its consideration of the JSP because it was otherwise in the
   reasonable range of outcomes. The Panel also considered the risk to the
   Universityâs integrity when a mass cheating incident occurs and noted
   that it reflects poorly on the University and its safeguards in the
   asynchronous learning environment. The Panel commented that abuse of
   asynchronous/online testing is an ongoing issue at the University and
   has been of particular concern in the last several years. According to
   the Panel, it is appropriate to send a very strong message to students
   that the use of unauthorized assistance is academic misconduct to be
   treated very seriously. The Panel accepted the JSP.

   The Panel imposed the following sanctions: a grade of zero in the
   course; a two-year and four-month suspension; a four-year notation on
   the Student's transcript until their graduation, whichever comes first;
   and a report to the Provost for publication .

   NOTE: The case was appealed. The Discipline Appeals Board dismissed the
   appeal.
   [2]View Case

References

   1. https://governingcouncil.utoronto.ca/case-summary/case-1278-appeal
   2. file:///media/31028
