UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
GOVERNING COUNCIL
REPORT NUMBER 264 OF THE ACADEMIC APPEALS COMMITTEE
August 21 and 24, 2000
To the Academic Board
University of Toronto
Your Committee reports that it held a hearing on Monday, August 21, 2000, continuing
on Thursday, August 24, 2000, at which the following were present:
Professor Ralph Scane, Acting Chair
Mr. Muhammad Ahmad
Professor Emmet Robbins
Ms Susan Scace
Professor Donna Wells
Secretary: Ms Margaret McKone
In attendance:
For the Appellant;
Mr. Frank Genesee, Counsel for the
Appellant Ms R.E., Appellant (the Student)
For the Faculty of Pharmacy:
Dean Wayne Hindmarsh
This is an appeal from the decision of the Appeals Committee of the Faculty of Pharmacy, dated
March 31, 2000, dismissing an appeal from a decision of the Faculty to fail the Student in the
Fourth Year (1999-2000) of the B.Sc.Phm. program, and refusing to allow the Student to write a
supplemental examination in the subject PHM425H1 in order to give her an opportunity to attain
the required average to permit her to continue with the second term of her Fourth Year.
The Fourth Year of the B.Sc.Phm. program places all academic courses in the Fall Term. In the
Spring Term, students must complete two "Structured Practical Experience Programs" (SPEPS).
To qualify to proceed to the SPEPS, the Faculty requires that students obtain a minimum
sessional GPA of 1.7. A student who attains this sessional GPA, but fails subjects, may write
supplemental examinations, subject to certain limitations, but the regulations do not provide for
supplemental examinations for students whose sessional GPA is less than 1.7. They fail the
year,but may repeat it once.
The Student obtained a sessional GPA of 1.54 in the examinations at Christmas, 1999. She
requested and was granted rereads of the final examinations in all her courses. There were some
minor upwards adjustments, but these did not raise her sessional GPA. Accordingly, she failed,
and could not proceed with her SPEP courses in the Spring Term. At this time, she is eligible to
repeat the Fourth Year, commencing in September, 2000.
The Student has a problem with anxiety in examination situations, dating back to her prePharmacy undergraduate program at the University of Waterloo, where she received some
counselling which appears to have helped her. She received counselling from this University's

Report Number 264 of the Academic Appeals Committee

2

Counselling and Learning Skills Service in the Spring Term of 1997. When she failed an
examination at the end of her First Year, the Faculty of Pharmacy's Board of Examiners was
concerned about her ability to cope with a supplemental examination, given the information
about her anxiety attacks with which they had been supplied, and requested a professional
opinion as to her ability to bring her anxiety under control, before permitting the supplemental
examination. Failing that, the student was offered the option of enroling as a Special Student to
retake the course in the following year. The Student was unable to see a psychiatrist or
psychologist for this purpose. She did secure an opinion from her family doctor that she was
presently stable and had no behavioral disorder. On this basis she was permitted to write the
supplemental examination, and passed it.
The following year, the Student received counselling from the Academic and Learning Skills
Centre at Erindale for her anxiety attacks and insomnia. She successfully completed Second Year
in the Pharmacy program.
At the beginning of the Third Year, concerned that her anxiety situation was worsening, the
Student met with the Co-ordinator of the University's Services for Students with Disabilities,
who referred her to Health Services for psychiatric support. She received "Cognitive Therapy" in
a group for a month at the end of the 1998 Fall Term, but was unable to continue with it in the
following term due to time conflicts. The doctor in charge of the therapy reported (in January,
2000) that the Student "presented with insomnia and anxiety. Her anxiety included school related
and academic anxiety issues."
During the Fall Term of her Fourth Year, the Student did not re-enrol for therapy. Because of her
experience with waiting lists for therapists, she felt that she was unlikely to receive timely
benefit for the Fall Term examinations. She did call the psychologist at the University of
Waterloo who had assisted her when she was at that institution.
At the hearing, your Committee heard evidence from two classmates of the Student in the
Pharmacy program, two persons who had been in residence with her, and her mother and father.
Her contemporaries testified as to her diligence in studying, and their observations as to what
they considered an abnormally high level of anxiety over examinations. Her parents testified as
to her anxiety levels, and also as to business problems of the father and medical problems of the
mother, which would increase the level of stress affecting the Student during her program. While
this evidence offered some lay corroboration of the Student's own evidence as to the stress and
anxiety she underwent during her time in the Pharmacy program, your Committee did not
consider that, in itself, this evidence would justify allowing this appeal.
However, there is also medical evidence in this case which your Committee found compelling,
although the most cogent was not, by its nature, available to the Appeals Committee.
First, the psychologist at the University of Waterloo who had counselled the Student when she
attended there, Dr. J. B. Reis, wrote to the Co-ordinator of this University's Services for Students
with Disabilities on November 5, 1998. He therein stated that the Student had been diagnosed by
him as suffering from a "specific phobia" in "situations of evaluation". These would lead to
"significant levels of debilitating anxiety and panic". He felt that she had improved under
counselling there, but that this had terminated at the end of the term, and she had not then
overcome all her difficulties. She had been considered eligible to receive examination
accommodation consisting of an additional 20 minutes per hour of examination time. He felt that
it would be appropriate for the University of Toronto to extend similar accommodation, and that
the Student should “engage in a counselling arrangement to address her anxiety issues”.

Report Number 264 of the Academic Appeals Committee

3

It is important to note that, whether for policy reasons or through inadvertence, this letter was not
brought to the attention of either the Student or the Faculty of Pharmacy. Nor, if any decision
was made by the University at that time with respect to accommodation on examinations, was
such decision conveyed to either the Student or the Faculty. The letter surfaced during the
hearing before the Appeals Committee, either in response to enquiries made by the Chair of that
Committee after the first hearing session, or to enquiries made by or on behalf of the Student for
purposes of that appeal, or both. The Student testified that, if she had been made aware of the
terms of Dr. Reis' letter when it was received, and had understood that she had been diagnosed
with a "specific phobia", she would have immediately sought "one on one" professional
treatment. Of course, the Faculty, aware of neither the letter nor of any accommodation which
may have been granted, could not make any accommodation.
At the hearing before your Committee, Dr. A. Cheok gave oral evidence. He is a psychiatrist
affiliated with the Centre for Addiction Research and Mental Health - Clark Division, and with
the University's Health Service. He specializes in anxiety disorders. He commenced assessment
and treatment of the Student only in July of this year, so his evidence would not have been
available to the Appeals Board. He testified that the Student suffers from a medical condition
recognised by both U.S.A. and Canadian psychiatric societies as "test anxiety disorder", and that
the Student's case was a severe one. The condition is one of a group of identified "social anxiety
disorders." It is a combination of biological and psychological factors. Those afflicted encounter
difficulty in "encoding" and recalling information. Dr. Cheok testified that, while persons not
suffering from this disorder typically might employ 80% of their cognitive capacity during an
examination, a sufferer might only be able to employ 60%. The effect of the disorder might wax
and wane according to the external stresses to which the person in question was subject. Dr.
Cheok also expressed the belief that a person with this condition might do somewhat better on an
examination if an accommodation such as some extension of time were afforded, because of the
reduction in anxiety that might be expected. He emphasised that this medical condition should
not be considered as merely a severe case of the type of anxiety that is almost endemic among
students around examination time.
Your Committee believes that the presence of this condition justifies allowing the appeal. As
mentioned, the powerful evidence of Dr. Cheok was not available to the Appeals Committee. It
seems probable that the letter of Dr. Reis, whose opinion seems consistent with that of Dr.
Cheok, was before that Committee, at least by its second meeting. However, your Committee
does not have the benefit of the Appeals Committee's appraisal of it, as it is not referred to in the
decision. Your Committee believes that it is probable that the condition described by Dr. Cheok
and Dr. Reis was present and operating to some degree during the Student's examinations at the
end of the Fall Term in 1999, and that, if this condition had been known to the Student and the
Faculty and been accommodated, there is a reasonable chance that the Student might
have achieved at least the minimum sessional GPA to permit her to proceed to the SPEPS in the
second term of her Fourth Year.
As this appeal opened, the Student's position was that she proposed to exercise her right to repeat
her Fourth Year, but, if her appeal to be allowed a supplemental examination was allowed, and
she did write it and obtained the required sessional GPA of 1.7, would not complete the repeat
term, as it would be unnecessary. She would simply proceed to her SPEPS as soon as placements
could be arranged. If she did not obtain the necessary increase in her average, she would
continue and complete the Fall Term in 2000. Given Dr. Cheok's evidence that she would
require eight to twelve weeks of therapy from the date of the hearing to learn to cope with her
condition, members of your Committee expressed the opinion that such a course of action was a

Report Number 264 of the Academic Appeals Committee

4

recipe for disaster. The increased stress of keeping up with the heavy Fall Term program in
Fourth Year, plus preparing for the supplemental examination, would put both projects in
extreme jeopardy. If she did not succeed in raising her sessional GPA from the previous year to
the necessary 1.7 level, and also failed to achieve that level on her second attempt at the Fall
term of her Fourth Year, she would be terminated from the program under the Faculty rules.
After discussion with her counsel, the Student agreed that, if she were granted the relief she asks
from your Committee, she would not also seek to proceed with a repeat of the Fall Term of her
Fourth Year in September, 2000. This is a condition of the relief granted by your Committee.
Your Committee therefore allows the appeal, subject to the foregoing condition, and directs:
(1) The Student may write a supplemental examination in the course PHM425H1. This
course is evaluated not only by a final examination, but also by an assignment.
"Supplemental examination", for the purpose of this decision, includes all evaluation
components normally included in computing the final grade for this course. In the case of
the assignment, students usually work in groups. It is understood that this may not be
practicable in this case, and the Student may have to work alone.
(2) The supplemental examination must be completed by the end of the normal final
examination period for Fall Term 2000 courses at the Faculty. Your Committee sets this
deadline because both Faculty and Student need closure for this matter. The date has been
extended this far to give the Student maximum opportunity to benefit from treatment
from Dr. Cheok. He estimated that it might take eight to twelve weeks of therapy to
achieve full benefit from the counselling the Student is currently undergoing.
(3) The Student may not use her examination anxiety disorder as a ground of appeal from
the final grade awarded on the supplemental examination.
(4) The Student may apply to the appropriate University authorities for consideration for
accommodation due to her medical condition, in satisfying the evaluation requirements of
the supplemental examination.
(5) If the Student succeeds in raising her sessional GPA for the Fall Term, 1999-2000 to
1.7 by means of the supplemental examination, she is eligible to proceed to her SPEP
placements in the Spring Term, 2001. However, it is understood that her placement
cannot be guaranteed at this time. Placements are normally arranged near the beginning
of the Fall Term. Because of the uncertainty as to whether the Student will be able to
raise her GPA sufficiently to allow her to proceed to her SPEPS, arrangements for her
must be delayed. The Faculty has indicated that it will use its best efforts to assist her in
arranging timely placements, once she qualifies, but the risk of delay must be accepted by
the Student.
(6) If the Student fails to raise her sessional GPA sufficiently, she will have failed her
Fourth Year in the 1999-2000 academic year, but under the Faculty's policy, may repeat
it in the academic year commencing in September, 2001.
Margaret McKone
Acting Secretary
August 21 and 24, 2000

Professor Ralph Scane
Acting Chair

