Report #264-1

   DATE: August 21 and 24, 2000
   PARTIES: Ms. R. E. (the Student) v the Faculty of Pharmacy
   Hearing Date(s): August 21 and August 24, 2001
   Committee Members:
   Professor Ralph Scane, Acting Chair
   Mr. Muhammad Ahmad
   Professor Emmet Robbins
   Ms. Susan Scace
   Professor Donna Wells
   Secretary:
   Ms. Margaret McKone
   In Attendance:
   For the Appellant:
   Mr. Frank Genesee, Counsel for the Appellant
   Ms. R. E., Appellant (the Student)
   For the Faculty of Pharmacy:
   Dean Wayne Hindmarsh
   Faculty of Pharmacy â appeal from a failure in Fourth Year of program
   and request to write supplemental examination â anxiety problems in
   examination situations â oral evidence of family and peers offered lay
   corroboration of claims but did not justify relief â previously
   undiagnosed test anxiety disorder â probable that condition was present
   and operating during examinations in courses and if condition had been
   known and accommodated the Student might have proceeded in program â
   condition of relief that Student would not seek to proceed with a
   repeat of the First Term of her Forth Year at the same time as
   preparing for her supplemental exam due to concerns that Student would
   jeopardize both projects â appeal allowed â Student to be permitted to
   write a supplemental examination in the course to be completed by the
   normal final examination period of the subsequent term so that the
   Student had the maximum opportunity to benefit from treatment â The
   Student was barred from using her medical condition as a ground of
   appeal from the final grade awarded in the supplemental examination
   Appeal from a failure in the Fourth Year of the B.Sc.Phm. program and a
   request to write a supplemental examination in one course. The Student
   claimed that she had a history of problems with anxiety in examination
   situations. The Student had received psychiatric support from the
   Facultyâs Health Services.Â  The Committee considered the oral evidence
   of the Studentâs family and peers regarding the Studentâs study habits
   and her high level of anxiety, as well as the familyâs financial and
   medical problems, and found that while the evidence offered lay
   corroboration of the Studentâs claims, it did not in itself justify
   relief. The Committee considered the medical evidence submitted and
   found that the Student suffered from a previously undiagnosed severe
   case of âtest anxiety disorderâ that was probably present and operating
   during the Studentâs examinations in the courses in question, and that,
   if the condition had been known to the Student and the Faculty and been
   accommodated, there was a reasonable chance that the Student might have
   achieved at least the minimum sessional GPA to permit her to proceed to
   the second term of her Fourth Year. The Committee considered the
   medical evidence presented by the Studentâs psychiatrist and found that
   if the Student was granted relief, the increased stress of keeping up
   with her First Term program in Fourth Year, in addition to preparing
   for the supplemental examination requested, would put both projects in
   jeopardy. The Committee ordered that as a condition of the relief
   granted, the Student would not seek to proceed with a repeat of the
   First Term of her Forth Year at the same time as preparing for her
   exam. Appeal allowed. The Committee ordered that the Student be
   permitted to write a supplemental examination in the course and that
   supplemental examination for the purpose of the decision included all
   evaluation components normally included in computing the final grade
   for the course. The supplemental examination was to be completed by the
   normal final examination period of the subsequent term so that the
   Student had the maximum opportunity to benefit from the treatment she
   was undergoing. The Student was barred from using her medical condition
   as a ground of appeal from the final grade awarded in the supplemental
   examination. The Student could apply to the University for
   consideration for accommodation due to her medical condition. If the
   Student succeeded in raising her sessional GPA by means of the
   supplemental examination then she would be eligible to proceed to the
   Second Term of Forth Year. If the Student failed to raise her sessional
   GPA, then she would be entitled, as per the Facultyâs policy, to repeat
   it in the following academic year.
   [1]View Report

References

   1. file:///media/12692
