Case #727

   DATE: October 14, 2014
   PARTIES: University of Toronto v A.L.
   Hearing Date(s): June 10, 2014
   Panel Members:
   William McDowelll, Chair
   Ernest Lam, Faculty Member
   David Kleinman, Student Member
   Appearances:
   Tina Lie, Assistant Discipline Counsel
   Samuel Greene, Case Worker for the Student
   In Attendance:
   The Student
   Natalie Ramtahal, Coordinator, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty
   Grievances
   Lucy Gaspini, Mananger, Academic Integrity & Affairs, UTM
   Trial Division â s. B.i.1(d) of the Code â plagiarism â Agreed
   Statement of Facts â prior offence â admission of guilt â Deanâs
   Designate meeting â extenuating circumstances â Joint Submission on
   Penalty â grade of zero in course; three-year suspension; notation on
   transcript until graduation; report to Provost for publication
   The Student admitted to two counts of having represented the ideas of
   another as her own in one course contrary to s. B.i.1(d) of the Code at
   a Tribunal hearing. The University withdrew alternate charges and the
   parties filed an Agreed Statement of Facts (ASF). The Student had a
   prior plagiarism offence for which she received a zero on the
   assignment and a warning that further offences would be referred to the
   Tribunal.
   The ASF stated that the Student had missed four tutorials in the
   course. She explained her absence to the instructor that she had been
   involved in a car accident for which she provided documentation. The
   instructor allowed the Student to make up the assignments for the
   tutorials. The Student submitted the assignments and the Teaching
   Assistant determined that there were verbatim or nearly verbatim
   passages from sources that were uncited and no quotation marks were
   used. Â The Student was also required to submit an âanalysis
   assignmentâ for the course. To assist students a model assignment was
   distributed, though the instructor made it clear that the model was not
   a blueprint for the assignment. When the instructor received the
   Studentâs assignment she determined that it contained passages either
   verbatim or nearly verbatim from the model. In a meeting with the
   Deanâs Designate the Student admitted to having committed two counts of
   plagiarism contrary to s. B.i.1(d) of the Code and signed an admission
   of guilt in respect of both counts.
   Counsel for the Student referred to the principles of the Mr. C case on
   determining penalty with an emphasis on extenuating circumstances.
   While the Student did not address the Tribunal she wrote a letter
   stating her apology, acknowledgement of wrongdoing, and that she seeks
   to be the first member of her family to graduate university. She also
   included a letter from a lay supervisor at her parish vouching for her
   character and a note from the parish priest. The University submitted
   that the Student has a risk of repetition and referred to a similar
   case in which the student received a three-year suspension.
   The Panel accepted a Joint Submission on Penalty from the parties and
   ordered a penalty of a grade of zero in the course, a suspension from
   the date of order until August 31, 2017, a notation be placed on her
   academic record until graduation, and that the case be reported to the
   Provost for publication.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/13028
