Case 135

THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
THE GOVERNING COUNCIL
REPORT NUMBER 334 OF THE ACADEMIC APPEALS COMMITTEE
May 7, 2009

To the Academic Board
University of Toronto.
Your Committee reports that it held a hearing on Wednesday, April 22, 2009, at which the
following members were present:
Professor L. Sossin (Chair)
Mr. Grant Gonzales (Student)
Professor Ellen Hodnett
Mr. John Stewart
Professor Cindy Woodland
Secretary: Ms Nancy Smart
Appearances:
For the Student Appellant:
Ms. T.D. (the Student)
Mr. Michael Hamilton (Downtown Legal Services)
For the School of Graduate Studies:
Mr. Robert Centa

This is an appeal from a decision of the Graduate Academic Appeals Board (“GAAB”)
dated March 14, 2008, dismissing an appeal of the Student from a decision of Professor Susan
Pfeiffer, Dean of the School of Graduate Studies (“SGS”), dated July 27, 2006 (the “July 2006
Revocation Decision”). Dean Pfeiffer’s decision was that because the Student had withheld
material information from her admission application, SGS was “revoking and canceling” the
Student’s “offer of admission and/or registration” in the Master of Health Science Program (the
“Program”).

-1-

Case 135

Dean Pfeiffer also indicated that she was requesting that the Provost lay a charge against
the Student under the Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters (the “Code”). The Provost did not
lay such a charge, and the Vice Provost, Academic, subsequently confirmed in a letter dated
September 24, 2008, that Dean Pfeiffer’s decision to revoke the Student’s “admission and/or
registration” was not imposed as a sanction under the Code. Therefore, the Student could not
appeal the decision under the Code.
GAAB, in its March 14, 2008 decision, concluded that it lacked jurisdiction to hear an
appeal from the July 2006 Revocation Decision because it was an admissions decision.
GAAB also separately considered its jurisdiction to hear an appeal from the Student
against a decision of the School of Graduate Studies, dated February 2, 2006, which terminated
the Student from the Master of Health Science Program due to failures in three separate courses
(the “February 2006 Termination Decision”). GAAB concluded that the appeal from this decision
was moot due to the subsequent decision of SGS to revoke the Student’s admission to the
Program.
While this decision relates to the question of the jurisdiction of your committee, it is
important to provide a brief background of how the Student has come to be in this situation.
Background
The Student had applied for admission to the Program in January of 2005 and was
admitted in May of 2005. She registered in the Program in the Fall of 2005. After completing the
Fall semester, on February 2, 2006, the Student was notified that she had failed three of the five
classes in which she had enrolled, and as a result, she was notified that her registration was being
terminated because of poor academic performance. The Student was also notified of her right of
appeal the February 2006 Termination Decision to GAAB, and on March 26, 2006, the Student
filed her appeal.
Prior to a GAAB hearing on the appeal of the February 2006 Termination Decision, SGS
became aware of information which had been omitted from the Student’s application to the
Program. This information related to certain courses the Student had taken at Ryerson University
and the grades received in those courses.
On July 17, 2006, the Student was notified in writing that she was to attend a meeting with
Dean Pfeiffer to investigate a possible Code violation. The meeting took place on July 19, 2006,
and in that meeting, the Student indicated that she did not intend to mislead the University and she
did not admit any guilt in the allegations of academic dishonesty raised by Dean Pfeiffer.
Following this meeting, on July 27, 2006, the Student was informed of the Dean’s decision to
revoke her admission.
After argument before the Chair of GAAB (exercising his authority to determine whether
an appeal is outside the jurisdiction of GAAB), GAAB concluded that,

-2-

Case 135

After the Dean’s decision, the University must treat the Student as never having been a
student in the Program, or, treating the decision as a revocation or cancellation of
registration in the Program, as having been removed from the Program by a penalty
purportedly imposed under the Code. The Board must accept the Dean’s decision as a valid
decision, so long as it has not been reversed or amended by some agency, within or
without the University, with the ability to do so… the Board is not such an agency.
(Emphasis in original)
In short, GAAB accepted that there is no appeal from the July 2006 Revocation Decision,
as admission decisions by the University are not within the jurisdiction of GAAB. Having reached
the conclusion that GAAB lacked the jurisdiction to hear an appeal from the July 2006 Revocation
Decision, GAAB found the prior, pending appeal on the February 2006 Termination Decision,
while clearly within GAAB’s jurisdiction, to be moot, as it could have no practical consequences
for a student whose admission has been revoked.
The Student sought an appeal to your Committee both on the grounds that GAAB does
have jurisdiction to hear the appeal from the July 2006 Revocation Decision, and that, irrespective
of how the jurisdiction issue is decided, GAAB should consider the Student’s appeal against the
February 2006 Termination Decision on its merits.
The Chair of your Committee, after a pre-hearing consultation with the parties, concluded
that your Committee would first hold a hearing to determine GAAB’s jurisdiction to hear an
appeal from the July 2006 Revocation Decision. Only if the Student were successful on this
hearing would it be necessary to remit the merits of the July 2006 Revocation Decision back to be
dealt with by GAAB. The Chair also concluded that your Committee could decide whether,
irrespective of the outcome of the jurisdiction issue, GAAB should proceed to hear the merits of
the appeal from the February 2006 Termination Decision.
Analysis
The Jurisdiction Issue
GAAB concluded that the decision of SGS “revoking and canceling” the Student’s “offer
of admission and/or registration” was an admissions decision. Your Committee does not believe
GAAB erred in this finding. While the July 2006 Revocation Decision also purports to deal with
the Student’s registration status, and while a referral of a possible Code violation to the Provost
was mentioned in the same letter, neither of these aspects of the decision alters the fact that the
Student’s admission was revoked by SGS as a result of Dean Pfeiffer’s decision. The question,
therefore, is whether GAAB (and, by extension, your Committee) has any role in the
accountability of the University for admissions decisions.
The Terms of Reference of GAAB authorize it to:
hear and determine appeals of students registered in the School of Graduate Studies
concerning grades in a course or component of a grade in a course, or concerning

-3-

Case 135

any other decision with respect to the application of academic regulations and
requirements to a student…
The Terms of Reference make no mention of admissions decisions. The SGS Calendar
observes that graduate students may “dispute substantive or procedural academic matters,
including grades, evaluation of comprehensive examinations and other program requirements …
Decisions related to admission to an academic program, including admission to the doctoral
program for current master’s students, are not subject to appeal.” (Emphasis added.) Further, the
policy of Governing Council regarding appeals within academic divisions, notes that an Academic
Appeal is an appeal by a student of the University against a University decision as to his or her
success in meeting an academic standard or academic requirement or as to the applicability of an
academic regulation, but that no appeal lies from an admissions decision. In light of these policies,
it is clear that the University has not conferred on GAAB or your Committee the jurisdiction to
review a decision by the University relating to admissions.
The Student has raised the concern that by relying on the revocation of admission after the
Student had been admitted, registered, and completed a full semester of classes, the University is
seeking to terminate the Student in a fashion which deprives her of the procedural protections she
would have been afforded had the University relied on its termination of the Student for her poor
academic performance, or had the University pursued the allegations against the Student for
violation of the Code. The University has submitted that this course of action is not improper, and
has emphasized that admissions decisions are subject to a different framework of accountability
from academic decisions.
Accountability of University for Admissions Decisions
The basis for the revocation of the Student’s admission was a provision of the Ontario
Rehabilitation Sciences Programs Application Service (“ORPAS”). ORPAS is not a policy or
document enacted by the University of Toronto. Rather, it is an Ontario wide service which
Universities and applicants utilize in order to govern the application process. The ORPAS
document describing the application process provides:
Admission Irregularities
The discovery that any information is false or misleading or that any material
information has been concealed or withheld will invalidate your application and
will result in its immediate rejection, or in the revocation and cancellation of an
offer of admission and/or registration if you have been admitted.
The University has adopted the position that by submitting her application for admission
through ORPAS, the Student agreed to be bound by the terms and conditions of ORPAS. ORPAS
does not provide for any appeal route for decisions taken by Universities using its application
process. ORPAS also does not provide for any procedural protections prior to a University
determining that a student is in violation of the terms of ORPAS. In this case, the written notice
provided to the Student in July of 2006, informing her of the allegations against her and requiring

-4-

Case 135

her attendance at a meeting with the Dean, were procedural steps associated with laying a charge
under the Code, not with a breach of the terms of ORPAS.
The Student submits that ORPAS is “vague” and “totally void of direction” as to how
Universities should deal with potential concerns after a candidate has been admitted.
Once the University decides that the terms of ORPAS were breached by concealing or
withholding material information in a student’s admission application, what recourse is available
to the student subject to this decision? What if the student believes the information at issue in a
decision to revoke admission was not in fact “material,” or was not “concealed” or “withheld,”
within the meaning of ORPAS or where the student believes there is an explanation or justification
which may mitigate the appropriate consequences? If GAAB and your committee lack jurisdiction
over such a dispute, where can an aggrieved student turn?
At a minimum, as a public decision-making body, the actions of the University may be
challenged through judicial review to the Superior Court. In Mulligan v. Laurentian University
2008 ONCA 523, the Court of Appeal for Ontario confirmed the jurisdiction of the Court to
review admissions decisions by Universities, and confirmed that the Courts “should be reluctant to
interfere with the core academic functions of Universities.” (at para. 20) Further, if a student
believed that a revocation of admission (or simply the denial of admission in the first place) lacked
impartiality or was decided in a procedurally unfair fashion, or was decided in bad faith, or for
ulterior motives or improper purposes, the student could challenge the University’s decision by
way of judicial review. A Court has jurisdiction to quash the University’s decision and remit the
matter back to the University for a fresh decision, and also has the power to compel the University
to take appropriate action. In other words, while no appeal route has been established from
admissions decisions through internal mechanisms, the University in no way can shelter or
insulate its decisions from legal accountability. As a practical matter, however, pursuing remedies
through a judicial review may be costlier and more complex than appeals through internal
mechanisms.
In her submissions, the Student raised a scenario in which the University was confronted
by suspected dishonesty on the part of a graduate student who has been a successful student in a
program for several years and is nearing graduation. In the scenario, the student’s alleged
dishonesty included but was not limited to falsifying the transcripts that formed the basis of
admission. Rather than investigate the dishonesty through laying a charge under the Code, could
the University simply revoke that student’s admission, thus expelling the student from the
program, erasing his or her progress to that point, and do so with no further proceeding or due
process provided to the student?
The effect of the decision that GAAB and your Committee lack the jurisdiction to hear
appeals from admissions decisions would appear to mean that there are no internal impediments to
the University exercising discretion either to proceed under the Code or to revoke admissions in
such a scenario. It is not open to GAAB to assume jurisdiction over an admissions decision, in
other words, merely because the conduct underlying the revocation of admission could have been
treated as an academic matter or as an academic offence.

-5-

Case 135

Notwithstanding the decision to uphold GAAB’s conclusion on the jurisdiction issue, your
Committee appreciates the sense of unfairness perceived by the Student, who feels that she has
been unable to have the merits of her challenge to the University’s decision heard. While your
Committee has no authority to direct that the University provide the Student with an opportunity
to explain the basis for her challenge to the July 2006 Revocation Decision, your Committee notes
that there is no bar to the University making available an opportunity for a reconsideration of that
decision. Your Committee is mindful of the fact that the Student already has had one opportunity
to provide information to Dean Pfeiffer during their meeting in July of 2006. An opportunity to
provide additional information (in writing or orally) which the Student believes would be relevant
to a reconsideration of the July 2006 Revocation Decision could be informal. A reconsideration
process clearly could not lead to any remedies which would bind the University. The purpose of
such a discretionary procedure, rather, would be to ensure the July 2006 Revocation Decision was
appropriate in the circumstances, and to provide a safeguard against the possibility of error in that
decision.
Your Committee also believes these circumstances distinguish this case from other
admission decisions. Revocations of admission occur rarely, and revocations of admission after a
student has already registered and completed courses in a Program are rarer still. While the
University may consider developing a policy to address such settings, there may also be
advantages in approaching such revocations of admission on a case by case basis.
Delay might be a relevant consideration in the exercise of this discretion. Given the fact
that the revocation of admission occurred in July of 2006, over ten months after the Student was
permitted to register in the Program, and over a year from the time of her admission, and the fact
that the University possessed the same information about the student at the time of admission as it
raised subsequently as grounds for the revocation of her admission, your Committee believes there
could be grounds to justify such a procedure in these circumstances.
Finally, your Committee recommends that if the July 2006 Revocation Decision is not
modified, the University should return any fees paid by the Student for the Fall semester of 2005,
and expunge any record of the Student’s academic performance in the Fall of 2005.
Conclusion
In summary, your Committee upholds GAAB’s conclusion regarding its jurisdiction.
GAAB is therefore precluded from hearing an appeal of the July 2006 Revocation Decision. Your
Committee also upholds GAAB’s conclusion that, in light of its lack of jurisdiction over the July
2006 Revocation Decision, the appeal over the February 2006 Termination Decision is moot. Your
Committee notes, however, that if the University does allow for a reconsideration of its July 2006
Revocation Decision, this could also have the effect of reviving the appeal of the February 2006
Termination Decision.
The appeal is dismissed.

-6-

