Report 334

DATE:

   May 7, 2009

PARTIES:

   Ms. T. D.Â  (the Student) v. the School of Graduate Studies

Hearing Date(s):

   April 22, 2009

Committee Members:

   Professor L. Sossin (Chair)
   Mr. Grant Gonzales (Student)
   Professor Ellen Hodnett Mr. John Stewart
   Professor Cindy Woodland

Secretary:

   Ms Nancy Smart

Appearances:

For the Student Appellant:

   Ms. T.D. (the Student)
   Mr. Michael Hamilton (Downtown Legal Services)

For the School of Graduate Studies:

   Mr. Robert Centa

   Appeal of a decision to revoke and cancel the Studentâs offer of
   admission and/or registration in the Masters of Health Science Program.
   The Student had withheld material information from her admission
   application. The Student had been admitted, registered, and completed a
   full semester. The Faculty requested a charge be laid against the
   Student under the Code but no charge was laid. The decision to revoke
   the Studentâs âadmission and/or registrationâ was not imposed as a
   sanction under the Code and therefore, the Student could not appeal the
   decision under the Code. The Student sought the appeal on the grounds
   that the Graduate Academic Appeals Board did have jurisdiction to hear
   the appeal from the revocation decision, and that, irrespective of how
   the jurisdiction issue was decided, the Graduate Academic Appeals Board
   should have considered her prior pending appeal against her termination
   from the Program due to poor academic performance. The Committee found
   that the Graduate Academic Appeals Board did not err in its finding
   that the decision of the Faculty ârevoking and cancellingâ the
   Studentâs âoffer of admission and/or registrationâ was an admissions
   decision. The Committee considered whether the Graduate Academic
   Appeals Board and the Committee had a role in the accountability of the
   University for admission decisions. The Committee considered the
   Graduate Academic Appeals Boardâs Terms of Reference, the Facultyâs
   Calendar and the Governing Councilâs policy regarding appeals within
   academic divisions and found that the University had not conferred on
   the Graduate Academic Appeals Board or the Committee the jurisdiction
   to review an admissions decision.Â  The Student claimed that by relying
   on the revocation of admission after she had completed a full semester,
   the University was seeking to terminate the Student in a fashion which
   deprived her of the procedural protections she would have been afforded
   had the University relied on its termination of the Student for her
   poor academic performance, or had the University pursued the
   allegations against the Student for violation of the Code. The basis
   for the Universityâs revocation of the Studentâs admission was the
   admission irregularities provision of the Ontario Rehabilitation
   Sciences Programs Application Service regarding, the terms and
   conditions of which the University claimed the Student had agreed to be
   bound by when she submitted her application through the service. ORPAS
   did not provide any appeal route for decisions taken by Universities
   using its application process. The Committee considered the
   availability of recourse for an aggrieved student and found that while
   no appeal route had been established from admissions decisions through
   internal mechanisms, the Superior Court has jurisdiction to quash a
   decision of the University, and remit the matter back to the University
   for a fresh decision or compel the University to take appropriate
   action, as confirmed in Mulligan v. Laurentian University. The
   Committee observed that pursuing remedies through a judicial review may
   be costlier and more complex than appeals through internal mechanisms.
   The Committee found that there was no internal impediments to the
   University exercising discretion either to proceed under the Code or to
   revoke admissions where the conduct underlying the revocation of
   admission could have been treated as an academic matter or as an
   academic offence. The Committee observed that there was no bar to the
   University making available an opportunity for a reconsideration of the
   revocation decision although such a reconsideration process would not
   lead to any remedies which would bind the University. The Committee
   observed that if the University did allow for a reconsideration of its
   revocation decision, it could also have the effect of reviving the
   appeal of the termination decision. The Committee observed that there
   may be advantages in approaching such revocations of admission on a
   case by case basis and that delay might be a relevant consideration in
   the exercise of such discretion. The Committee found that, given the
   delay in the revocation of admission and the fact that the University
   possessed the same information about the Student at the time of
   admission as it raised subsequently as grounds for the revocation of
   her admission, such a procedure could be justified. Appeal dismissed.
   The Committee recommended that if the revocation decision was not
   modified, the University should return any fees paid by the Student for
   the semester she completed and expunge any record of the Studentâs
   academic performance in the semester.
   [1]View Report

References

   1. file:///media/12584
