Case #368

   DATE: information not available
   PARTIES: University of Toronto v. Student
   Hearing Date(s): May 10
   Panel Members:
   information not available
   Appearances:
   information not available
   Trial Division - s. B.i.3(a) of Code â forged academic record -
   attempted implication of academic advisor in act â hearing not attended
   â reasonable notice of hearingâ see s. 6 (1) of Statutory Powers
   Procedures Act and s. C.ii.(a)4 of Code â finding of guilt â third
   party implicated made offence egregious and provided indication of
   character â probability of behaviour being repeated in absence of
   contrary evidence â not possible to gauge whether excuses were accurate
   in absence of evidence â prior academic offence - previous suspension
   meant nothing to Student - recommendation that the Student be expelled
   as per s. C.ii.(b)(i) of Code; permanent notation on transcript; and
   report to Provost
   Student charged with one offence under s. B.i.3(a), and alternatively,
   with two offences under s. B.i.3(b) of the Code. The charges related to
   allegations that the Student deliberately falsified his/her academic
   record and attempted to implicate an academic advisor in the act. The
   Student did not attend the hearing. The Panel found that there was
   clear and convincing evidence, including an e-mail to which the Student
   had responded, that reasonable notice of the hearing was given in
   accordance with s. 6 (1) of the Statutory Powers Procedures Act and
   appropriate notice provided pursuant to s. C.II.(a)4 of the University
   of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters. The Panel found the
   Student guilty of the charge under s. B.i.3(a) of the Code. The Panel
   found that the Universityâs submission on sanction was appropriate
   because the Student deliberately falsified his/her academic record;
   lied about petitioning to have his/her papers remarked; evaded service
   of the notice of hearing; and attempted to implicate an academic
   advisor at UTSC in his/her scheme. The Panel found that the implication
   of the innocent person made the offence particularly egregious and was
   an indication of the Studentâs character because the act could have
   destroyed the academic advisorâs career. The Panel found no evidence of
   mitigating factors. The Panel found that although there was no evidence
   of possible repetition, in the absence of evidence from the Student, it
   could be likely that the Student would repeat his/her behaviour. The
   Panel did not hear of extenuating circumstances and found that,Â  in
   the absence of evidence from the Student, it had no way of gauging
   whether the excuses provided to the University were accurate. The Panel
   found that it would be detrimental to the University to impose anything
   other than a very serious punishment for forging a transcript and that
   it was important that the University community be shown how seriously
   the offence was viewed. The Panel found that suspension was not a
   sufficient sanction as the Student had already been suspended for a
   year and it meant nothing to him/her. The Panel imposed a
   recommendation to the President, further to s. C.ii.(b)(i) of the Code,
   that the Student be expelled from the University; a permanent notation
   on the Studentâs academic record and transcript; and that a report be
   issued to the Provost.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12728
