THE UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO

IN THE MATTER OF charges of academic dishonesty made on July 5, 2011;
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code c?f Behm1iour on Academic
i\-1atters, 1995;
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Act, 197 l, S.O. 1971, c. 56 as amended
s.o. 1978, c. 88

BETWEEN:

THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO

- and -

Date of Hearing: Dcccmbet' 19, 2011
Mcmbe1·s of the Panel:
Ms Lisa Brownstone, Barrister and Solicitor, Chair
Dr. Chris Koenig-Woodyard, Faculty Panel Member
Ms Susan Mazzatto, Student Panel Member

Appearances:
Mr. Robe1t A. Centa, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Barristers
Professor John Carter, Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
Professor Timothy Bender, Instructor CHE2 l 3H l S: Organic Chemistry, Department of
Chemkal Engineering and Applied Chemistry
Professor Yuri Lawryshyn, Instructor CHE22H l S: Applied Differential Equations, Depru1ment
of Chemical Engineering and Applied Chemistry

In Attendance:
Ms Natalie Ramtahal, Coordinator, Appeals, Discipline & Facility Grievances
Not in Attendance:

~ - ·' the Student

- I-

Preliminary

[I]

The Trial Division of the University Tribunal was convened on December 19, 2011 to
consider charges under the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic
1\1atters, 1995 (the "Code") laid against the student by letter dated July 5, 2011 from
Professor Edith Hillan, Vice-Provost, Faculty & Academic Life.

[2]

Neither the student nor a representative of the student attended the hearing at the
scheduled time and place. The Tribunal waited 15 minutes after the scheduled
commencement of the hearing to allow for the student to appear. The student did not
advise the University whether he would be attending; in fact, communication from the
student had ceased in the recent past.

[3]

The University proposed to proceed in the student's absence, and therefore, had the onus
of satisfying the Tribunal that "reasonable notice" of the hearing had been provided to the
student under the provisions of the Code and the Statutory Powers Procedure Act
("SP PA"). Reasonable notice of the hearing must also include a warning to the student
that if he does not attend at the hearing, the Tribunal may proceed in his absence and the
student will not be entitled to any further notice in the proceeding (s. 6(3)(b) of the
SPPA).

[4]

The University filed the Notice of Hearing in this matter dated November 11, 2011 as
Exhibit 1, and the Charges dated July 5, 2011 were filed and marked as Exhibit 2. The
University also tendered an email and letter to the student dated July 6, 2011, which
advised the student that the hearing would occur, and strongly urged the student to
consider speaking with a legal representative if he had not already done so. The letter
further advised the student that he had the right to be represented before the University
Tribunal, and indicated that some students retain Downtown Legal Services to represent
them at that hearing. Information about Downtown Legal Services, including a contact
telephone number, was enclosed. Information about obtaining a lawyer through the Law
Society of Upper Canada's Lawyer Referral Service was also included with the July 6
material.

[5]

Counsel for the Provost, Mr. Centa, also filed several emails between him and the student
from the period between July, 2011 and October 21, 2011. Those portions of the emails
which contained privileged settlement information were redacted. In the emails, the
student repeatedly responded to Mr. Centa from the student's University of Toronto
email address. The student was told that Mr. Centa would be requesting a hearing date
(initially thought to be in September). The student responded to Mr. Centa by email on
October 8, 2011, after emails from Mr. Centa advising the student "If I do not hear back
from you, I will ask the Governing Council to set this matter down for hearing in October
or November" and again "As I have not heard back from you, the Provost will set this
matter down for hearing. You will be informed of the date of the hearing by email."

-2-

[6]

The Panel was advised that attempts had also been made to leave messages with the
student, but that these attempts had been unsuccessful.

[7]

It was Mr. Centa's submission that this email correspondence, followed by an email
setting out the exact date, time and information about the Charges and the hearing,
constituted reasonable notice and was given to the student in plenty of time. The emails
were sent to the student to his University of Toronto account, which he had been using to
correspond with Mr. Centa and others from the University. Counsel also drew to the
Panel's attention the Policy on Official Correspondence With Students, a policy of the
University that has been in effect since September, 2006. The policy contains important
information. It indicates that students are expected to monitor and retrieve their mail,
including electronic messaging accounts issued to them by the University, on a frequent
and consistent basis. Further, students have the responsibility to recognize that certain
communications may be time-critical. Additionally, students have the right to forward
their account to another email service but remain responsible for ensuring that all
University electronic message communication sent to the official University issued
account is received and read.

[8]

In counsel's submissions, the evidence was clear that there had been emails back and
forth from July 2011, that these emails had been received and read by the student at his
University of Toronto account 1 that he engaged in correspondence by email at his
University of Toronto email address until October 8, 2011, and that proceeding to use this
account to provide notice of the hearing is reasonable notice within the meaning of the
SPPA. The notice of today's hearing date was given on November 11, 2011. Therefore,
the University asked the Tribunal to proceed in the student's absence. Counsel pointed
out that the Notice of Hearing, filed, warns the student that the hearing may take place
without him.

[9]

The Panel considered the evidence before it and the submissions of counsel. It asked for
counsel to advise the Panel of the contents of the October 8, 2011 email, the last email
received from the student, which had been redacted. The Panel was advised that in the
email, the student told Mr. Centa that he had been without telephone or internet for a
period of time, and he referred to the completion of a form which related to a potential
settlement. The student advised that once he got a scanner, he would attempt to sign and
return the form to Mr. Centa.

[IO]

Considering all of the evidence before it, including the student's obligations clearly set
out in the Policy referred to above, and the fact that the student was engaging in
correspondence from his University email address about this hearing, the Panel
concluded that the notice requirements in the SPPA were met and that the student had
been given reasonable notice of the hearing. Therefore, the Panel agreed to proceed to
hear the case on its merits. Students cannot avoid this Panel's processes by suddenly
"going silent" on their University issued email accounts.

-3-

Hearing on the Merit

[ 11]

[12]

The charges facing the student were the following:
(1)

In early March 20 I I, you knowingly possessed an unauthorized aid, or obtained
unauthorized assistance in a term test in CHE 222, contrary to section B.l.l(b) of the Code.

(2)

In the alternative, in early March 20 I I, you knowingly engaged in a form of cheating,
academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or misrepresentation not otherwise described in
the Code in order to obtain academic credit or other academic advantage of any kind in a
term test in CHE 222, contrary to section B.l.3(b) of the Code.

(3)

On or about April 28, 201 I, you knowingly possessed an unauthorized aid, or obtained
unauthorized assistance in an examination in CHE 213, contrary to section B.I.l(b) of the
Code.

(4)

In the alternative to charge #3, on or about April 28, 2011, you knowingly engaged in a
form of cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or misrepresentation not
otherwise described in the Code in order to obtain academic credit or other academic
advantage of any kind in an academic examination in CHE 213, contrary to section B.IJ(b)
of the Code.

Particulars of the charges were as follows:
(1)

At all material times, you were a registered student in the Department of Chemical
Engineering and Applied Chemistry in the Faculty of Applied Science and Engineering at
the University of Toronto. In the Winter term of 20 t t, you enrolled in CHE 222 and CHE
213.

(2)

Students in CHE 222 were required to write a term test, which was worth 30% of the final
grade in CHE 222 ("Tenn Test"). In early March, you wrote the Term Test. No aids were
permitted, and students were permitted only to have pens, pencils and an approved
calculator on their desks.

(3) You had three sheets of paper on your desk during the test. They contained information
relevant to the material covered in CHE 222. You were not permitted to have these sheets of
paper with you during the Term Test.
(4)

You knowingly possessed an unauthorized aid, namely, the sheets of paper, or received
unauthorized assistance from the sheets of paper during the Term Test.

(5)

Students in CHE 213 were required to write a final examination ("Examination"). On or
about April 28, 201 t, you wrote the Examination. The Examination was closed book, and

no aids were permitted except for those provided. Only non-programmable calculators were
permitted.
(6)

You had several sheets of paper on your desk during the Examiuation. These sheets of
paper were relevant to the material covered in CHE 213. You were not permitted to have
these sheets of paper with you during the Examination.

(7)

You knowingly possessed an unauthorized aid, namely, the sheets of paper, or received
unauthorized assistance from the sheets of paper during the Examination.

[13]

The University called as its first witness, Professor Y.A. Lawryshyn, an Assistant
Professor in Chemical Engineering and Applied Chemistry. Professor Lawryshyn
identified his course outline, which was marked as Exhibit 4 and which showed that a
mid-term examination would be given on March 8, and would be worth 30% of the final
mark in the course. Professor Lawryshyn also identified the mid-term examination itself,
which was marked as Exhibit 5. Professor Lawryshyn testified that he first advised the
students that faculty approved calculators were the only aid permitted on the mid-term
on their first day of class when he went through the course outline with them. He advised
the students that an aid sheet would be permitted on the final exam, but not on any
quizzes, nor on the mid-term examination.

[14]

Professor Lawryshyn also identified an announcement made on "blackboard", an
electronic system used to post problem sets, solutions, announcements, and mid-term
solutions. He testified that students have to check blackboard regularly in order to get
their problem sets, solutions, etc. On Sunday, March 6, 2011, details about the mid-term
examination were posted on blackboard. A copy of the postings about the mid-term dated
March 6 and March 7 were identified by Professor Lawryshyn and filed as Exhibit 6. The
March 6 announcement specifically stated "aid sheets are not allowed" for the mid-term.
On Monday, March 7, 2011, the day before the mid-term, Professor Lawryshyn repeated
this announcement in class. On March 8, 2011 the examination took place. Professor
Lawryshyn testified that his usual practice is to hand out examinations face down before
the students come in the room and he believes he followed his usual practice on this
occasion. Students leave their backpacks at the front or back of the room, turn all cell
phones off, and leave their cell phones with their backpacks. He tries to keep the students
quiet, gets everyone seated and starts the examination at fifteen minutes after the hour.
He testified that he announced again that the students would be allowed a calculator,
pens, pencils, a UofT card and "that's it".

[15]

At the end of the examination, Professor Lawryshyn testified that the Teaching Assistant
said that he had caught the student with three pages of notes. The Professor approached
the student and asked what he was doing with the notes and the student advised that he
thought they were allowed. Professor Lawryshyn told them they were not and that he had
told the students they were not. The student said that he didn't go to class, and that he

-5-

normally doesn't go. The Professor said that he would have to take it up with the
department to address it and the student asked him not to go to Profossor Norval.
Professor Lawryshyn advised that he had to do lhat and that he also had to meet with the
student. The student requested that the meeting between the two of them take place right
then. The student did not deny that the notes were his and said that they wouldn't have
helped him anyway. Professor Lawryshyn sent an email outlining what had occurred to
Professor Norval; this was marked as Exhibit 7.

[ 16]

In response to a question from a member of the Panel, Professor Lawryshyn testified that
the notes would in facl have been beneficial for the mid-term examination.

[17)

The next witness called by the University was Professor Timothy Bender, an Assistant
Professor in Chemical Engineering and Applied Chemistry. He identified his course
Syllabus for course number CHE 213, which was marked as Exhibit 8. The syllabus
indicated that the final examination would be worth 50% of the final course mark. The
final examination itself was identified and marked as Exhibit 9; it stated on page 1 thal no
aids were allowed.

[18]

Professor Bender testified that he did not know the student personally. The Associate
Chair of the Department had told Professor Bender that the student wrote the examination
at the University of British Columbia.

[19)

The University then tendered the Affidavit of Jane Park and advised the Panel that the
information in the affidavit had all been provided in disclosure lo the student, and that the
affidavit itself had been sent to the student that day. This was accepted by the Panel and
marked as Exhibit 10. Ms Park's affidavit stated:
(i)

I am the Undergrnduate Counsellor in the Department of Chemical Engineering
and Applied Chemistry at the University of Toronto. I have personal knowledge
of the facts set out in this affidavit. Where my knowledge is based on information
and belief, I will state the source of my information. In all such cases, I believe
that the information provided to me is true and accurate.

(ii)

Because of my position in the Department, I had several dealing w i t h - • ·

(iii)

Mr. SIii successfully petitioned to \vrite his University of Toronto examination in
CHE2 l 3H IS ("Exam") at the University of British Columbia ("UBC") on April
28, 2011. UBC agreed to invigilate the Exam as long as Mr. • paid a $75 fee to
cover the costs of administering and invigilating the Exam. He agreed to do so.

(iv)

I coordinated the arrangement with UBC and sent a copy of the Exam to UBC.
Sheila Williamson at UBC advised me that UBC would invigilate the Exam in a
manner consistent with the instructions on the front of the Exam paper.

-6-

(v)

On April 28, 2011, Ms. Williamson called me and told me that Mr. s■ had been
caught with unauthorized aids during the Exam.

(vi)

Later that day, I received two e-mail messages from Mr. • · In these messages,
Mr. SIii admitted that he had taken his notes and lecture slides into the room
where he wrote the Exam.

(vii)

On May 5, 2011, Ms. Williamson sent me an e-mail message. Ms. Williamson
attached a series of .PDF files to her message. She advised me that the .PDF files
contained images of Mr. s■s exam and the notes that the UBC invigilator found
in Mr. S■'s possession as he was writing the Exam.

(viii)

Sometime bel\.veen May 11 and May 24, 20 11 , I received by courier the original
Exam and the original notes that ,:vere found in Mr.
possession ... A true
copy of the original Exam is found in the Provost's Book of Documents at Tab
12. A true copy of the notes found in Mr. S■'s possession during the Exam is
found the Provost's Book of Documents at Tab 13.

SIii's

[20]

Emails providing details of how UBC fmmd the notes and dealt with the situation were
attached to Ms Park's affidavit.

[21]

The University next called Professor Carter, the Dean's Designate, who testified that he
met with the student via Skype on May 31, 2011, about the accusations of academic
offences in the two courses at issue in this hearing. Professor Carter testified that he had
documents with him at the time, one from Professor Lawryshyn and one from UBC. He
could not necessarily identify the notes as the ones he had seen, but was certain that there
were notes, and that he had them with him at the time he talked to the student. He
discussed the allegation and with respect to CHE 222, the student admitted that he had
notes. He said that he felt that he was permitted to have them, and thought that the
instructor had said on the first day that notes were permitted. He stated that he did not go
to lectures or check the website, that his learning style was independent, that he did not
go to classes or read announcements. He said he didn't recall an announcement at the
beginning of the mid-term exam itself. With respect to CHE 213, he admitted that he had
notes. He said that he did not know that it was an examination because the room did not
look like an exam room. He came late and therefore in order not to disturb other students,
was given his own room. The booklet itself said "exam" and also specified that no aids
were allowed, but he thought this did not apply to him. Professor Caiier testified that he
found the student's explanation bizarre and not satisfactory.

[22]

That was all of the evidence called by the University, who then proceeded to make
submissions.

-7-

[23]

In his submissions, counsel for the Provost emphasized the broad definition of
"knowingly" in the Code of Behaviour, and acknowledged that the burden was on the
Provost to prove the offences on the balance of probabilities, in that it must prove that it
is more likely than not that the offences occurred. In counsel's submissions, the evidence
was overwhelming that the student knew or ought to have known that he was in
possession of an unauthorized aid. He submitted that the course materials in CHE 222
were clear that an aid sheet would be permitted on the final examination only, and not on
the mid-term or quizzes. Clear warning had been given to the student and then repeated
on the blackboard on March 6 1'\ and at the outset of the examination on March 8th •
Whether or not the student was present at classes where this was stated, it is the student's
responsibility to be informed of and compliant with course expectations.

[24]

With respect to the second set of charges related to CHE 213, the test itself indicated that
no aids were permitted and the evidence shows that the student does not deny that the
notes were his.

[25]

In the Provost's counsel's submissions, it is clear that the student ought to have known
that he was committing an offence. The University counsel also made submissions about
the sequencing of the events, namely that the offence in CHE 213 occurred almost two
months after the student had had the conversation with Professor Lawryshyn about
unauthorized aids, and the student should have been taking care about \.Vhat he brought in,
given the situation in which he found himself with respect to CHE 222.

[26]

In the University's submissions, the evidence was sufficient for the Panel to reach and
make findings on charges (1) and (3).

Decision of the Tribunal
[27]

The Panel deliberated and concluded that the University had discharged its onus and met
the burden of proof of proving the offences on a balance of probabilities in respect of
both charges (1) and (3).

[28]

The Panel agrees that the student must take responsibility for becoming aware of and
ensuring compliance with course requirements. Students cannot simply absent themselves
from the tools used to communicate course and University expectations to them, and then
claim ignorance as a defence when they fail to comply with the rules. The student clearly
ought reasonably to have known that aids were unauthorized in both cases and he clearly
violated this restriction in both cases. Although it may have been preferable, out of an
abundance of caution, to have included this limitation directly on the course outline in
CHE 222, there were numerous other warnings provided to the student. If he was in the
class to receive the course outline, he would have received the information provided
orally about what aids are and are not permitted. These warnings were given on

-8-

numerous occasions, posted on blackboard, and repeated at the outset of the midterm. In
the case of CHE 213, the prohibition on the use of aids was also included in the
information on the first page of the examination.
[29)

Therefore, the Panel made find ings on charges (1) and (3) and the Provost withdrew
charges (2) and (4).

Pcual(y Phase

(30]

In respect of the penalty phase, no additional evidence was called. The Provost sought an
order that Mr. ~ receive a final grade of zero in both courses, that he be suspended
from the University from the date of the Order until December 18, 2014 (a period of three
years), that his academic record and transcript bear a notation of the sanction until
December 18, 2015, and that the case be reported to the Provost for publication of a
notice of the decision of the Tribunal and sanction imposed, ,vith the student's name
withheld.

[31]

In his sentencing submissions, counsel pointed out that when the student does not
participate, it is difficult to have any information or evidence of any mitigating factors,
extenuating circumstances, or external pressures that might support a reduced penalty.
Similarly, there is no opportunity to see whether there is any demonstration of insight or
remorse. In the Provost counsel's submission, these absences make it difficult to calibrate
the likelihood of repetition of the offence because we do not know much about the
student. In his submission, what we do know is that on March 8 and April 28 two very
similar types of offences occurred.

[32)

Counsel referred the Panel to a number of cases on which it relied in support of the
penalty the Provost was seeking. The Panel specifically reviewed the previous University
discipline cases of LlYJ (Case 607; Febrnary 17, 2011 ), SK (Case 595; September 24,
2010) and HB (Case 599; June 2010). Counsel noted that in the instant case, although the
student is not a true repeat offender because the first offence had not been through the
system at the time the second offence occurred, there had been an intervention with a
Professor about the first offence before the second offence occurred. Thus, in the instant
case, there were two separate offences involving unauthorized aids, and nothing that
would support a decreased penalty.

[33]

The Tribunal considered the facts of the case and the precedents referred to by University
counsel and agreed that the proposed penalty was appropriate. There was adequate
warning to the student in both courses that aids were not permitted in the two evaluations
at issue, the student had on two occasions brought in unauthorized aids, and the student
knew or ought to have known that the aids were unauthorized. The student cannot simply
say that he does not pay attention to course requirements, or to information provided

-9-

about what is and is not permitted, and then rely on that ignorance in defence of bringing
aids into an examination .
[34]

The Panel notes that it is important for the core values of the University to be respected,
and for a message to be sent to this student and to all students that conduct of this nature
will not be tolerated and will have profound effects upon the student. Students must be
actively engaged with the University and ils rules and expectations in order for !he
institution to fimc tion effectively. Just as students must take responsibility for monitoring
communications to their University email accounts, so too must they lake responsibility
to make themselves aware of and compliant with course expectations and requirements.

[35]

Therefore, the Panel signed the Order on December 19, 2011 ordering:

1·-.
l· -

l) that
is guilty of two charges of the academic offence knO\:vingly
possessed an unauthorized aid, or obtained unauthorized assistance contrary to
section B.l. l(d) of the Code of BehaPiour on Academic 1\1atters;
2) that

~ receive a final grade of zero in the course CHE 222;

3) that ~ - . receive a final grade of zero in the course CHE 213;

9

4) that ~ be suspended from the University for three years, to
commence on December 19, 20 l 1, and to end December 18, 2014;
5) that the sanction shall be recorded on his academic record and transcript from the date
of the Order until December 18, 2015; and
6) that this case shall be reported to the Provost for publication of a notice of the
decision of the Tribunal and the sanctions imposed, with the name of the student
withheld.

r,JJ,
Dated this ~

day of February, 2012

- l O-

