Case 635

DATE:

   February 8, 2012

PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v.Â T.S.

Hearing Date(s):

   December 19, 2011

Panel Members:

   Ms. Lisa Brownstone, Chair
   Prof. Chris Koenig-Woodyard, Faculty Member
   Ms. Susan Mazzatto, Student Member

Appearances:

   Mr. Robert Centa, Assistant Discipline Counsel for the University
   Prof. John Carter
   Prof. Timothy Bender
   Prof. Yury Lawryshyn

In Attendance:

   Ms. Natalie Ramtahal, Coordinator, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty
   Grievances

   Student charged under s. B.i.1(b) of the Code . The charges related to
   allegations that the Student knowingly possessed unauthorized notes
   during a midterm test in one course and during a final exam in another
   course. In both instances, the Student claimed that he did not know
   that he was not allowed to have the notes. The Student did not attend
   the hearing. The Panel proceeded to consider whether reasonable notice
   had been provided. The Panel stated that the reasonable notice must
   include a warning to the Student that if he does not attend the
   hearing, the Tribunal may proceed in his absence and the Student will
   not be entitled to any further notice in the proceeding. In this case,
   the Student had been in correspondence with the University for a period
   of three months until two months before the hearing. The Student had
   responded to the Provost by email after the Provost sent emails
   advising the Student âIf I do not hear back from you, I will ask the
   Governing Council to set this matter down for hearing in October or
   Novemberâ and again âAs I have not heard back from you, the Provost
   will set this matter down for hearing.â As such, the Panel held that
   reasonable notice had been provided, considering the Universityâs
   clearly set policy of expecting students to regularly monitor and
   retrieve mail as well as the fact the Student was engaging in
   correspondence from his University email address about the hearing. The
   Panel next proceeded to consider whether the University had met the
   burden of proof in proving the charges. The Studentâs course instructor
   testified that he made online and in-class announcements as well as an
   announcement on the day of the exam regarding unauthorized aids.
   However, the Student claimed that he felt that that he was permitted to
   have his notes and thought that the instructor had said on the first
   day that the notes were permitted. He also stated that he did not go to
   classes or read online announcements. In response to the Studentâs
   claim, the Panel stated that the Student must take responsibility for
   becoming aware of and ensuring compliance with course requirements and
   that the Student cannot claim ignorance as a defence when failed to
   comply with the rules. The Panel found that in both instances, the
   Student ought reasonably to have known that the aids were not allowed
   as there were numerous warnings throughout. The Panel found the Student
   guilty under s. B.i.1(b) . The Panel considered the facts of the case
   and the precedents referred to by the University and found the proposed
   penalty to be appropriate. The Panel noted the importance of general
   deterrence. The Panel imposed a grade assignment of zero in both
   courses; a three-year suspension; a four-year notation on the Studentâs
   transcript; and a report be issued to the Provost.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12783
