GOVERNING COUNCIL JUDICIAL BOARD
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
IN THE MATTER of charges of academic misconduct made on March 18, 2021
AND IN THE MATTER OF The University of Toronto Act, 1947, S.O. 1947, c. 112 and The
University of Toronto Act, 1971, S.O. 1971, c. 56 as amended S.O. 1978, c. 88
B E T W E E N:

UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
- and X

C

REASONS FOR DECISION

Hearing Date: December 19, 2022, via Zoom
Members of the Judicial Board:
Patricia D. S. Jackson, Chair
Douglas McDougall, Faculty Board Member
Susan Froom, Student Board Member
Appearances:
Lily Harmer, Counsel for the University of Toronto
Daniel Goldbloom, Counsel for X
C
(the “Graduate”)
Hearing Secretary:
Carmelle Salomon-Labbé, Associate Director, Office of Appeals, Discipline and Faculty
Grievances

-2Introduction
1.

This Judicial Board was established by the Executive Committee of the Governing Council,

exercising power delegated by the Governing Council, for the purpose of hearing and deciding
upon all matters relating to charges against the Graduate. In the same resolution, the Executive
Committee gave this Board full authority to hear the case and render final judgment, including
with respect to penalty, and to report its decision to the Governing Council for information.
2.

In so doing, the Governing Council was delegating (pursuant to section 2(14)(e) of The

University of Toronto Act, 1971) the authority it has pursuant to section 48 (c) of The University
of Toronto Act, 1947 which provides that the powers and duties of the then Senate (now Governing
Council), including the ability to:
(c) provide for the cancellation, recall or suspension of and cancel, recall or suspend
the degree, whether heretofore or hereafter granted or conferred, of any graduate of the
University heretofore or hereafter … guilty of any infamous or disgraceful conduct or
of conduct unbecoming a graduate of the University, and for erasing the name of such
graduate from the roll or register of graduates and for requiring the surrender for
cancellation of the diploma, certificate or other instrument evidencing the right of such
graduate to the degree for which he shall have been deprived, and for providing the
mode of inquiring into and determining as to the guilt of such graduate, and the
procedure generally in respect of any such matter, and for the purpose of making such
inquiry, the Senate and the committees thereof shall have all the powers which by The
Public Inquiries Act may be conferred upon commissioners appointed under the
provisions of that Act.
The Charges:
3.

The charges which this Judicial Board has been authorized to hear and dispose of are

charges against the Graduate as follows:
1. On or about March 2, 2020, you were guilty of infamous conduct in that you
forged or in any other way altered or falsified an academic record, and/or uttered,

-3circulated or made use of any such forged, altered or falsified record, and/or
attempted to utter, circulate or make use of such forged, altered or falsified record,
namely a document purporting to be a transcript of your academic history at the
University of Toronto;
2. On or about March 2, 2020, you were guilty of disgraceful conduct in that you
forged or in any other way altered or falsified an academic record, and/or uttered,
circulated or made use of any such forged, altered or falsified record, and/or
attempted to utter, circulate or make use of such forged, altered or falsified record,
namely a document purporting to be a transcript of your academic history at the
University of Toronto;
3. On or about March 2, 2020, you were guilty of conduct unbecoming a graduate
of the University in that you forged or in any other way altered or falsified an
academic record, and/or uttered, circulated or made use of any such forged, altered
or falsified record, and/or attempted to utter, circulate or make use of such forged,
altered or falsified record, namely a document purporting to be a transcript of your
academic history at the University of Toronto.
Agreement and Joint Submissions
4.

Shortly before the date of the hearing of these matters, the Graduate and the University

arrived at an Agreed Statement of Facts and a Joint Submission on Penalty. We set forth both
below.
5.

As we stated at the hearing, we have accepted the Agreed Statement of Facts and found the

Graduate guilty of the third charge above.
6.

However, we have concluded that this is one of those rare cases where we should depart

from the penalty proposed in the Joint Submission. We have decided that in the unusual
circumstances of this case the interests of justice and reasonableness call for a lesser penalty.
7.

The facts to which the parties have agreed contain, in relevant part, the following:

-44. The Graduate … pleads guilty to Charge 3.
…
6. The Graduate attended the University of Toronto Scarborough (“UTSC”) as a
student from 2007 Fall to 2011 Summer. The Graduate’s Bachelor of Business
Administration degree was conferred by the University in November 2011.
7. On March 2, 2020, the Graduate attended at the UTSC’s Registrar’s Office and
spoke with Joe Butkevich. She presented a printed copy of her official University
of Toronto transcript, issued January 21, 2020 (the “ROSI Transcript”)
[Importantly, the ROSI Transcript copy she presented is a correct copy of the
Graduate’s official ROSI Transcript.] …
8. At the same time, the Graduate also presented a three-page printout called “View
Academic History, Academic History”, and said that it was her online academic
history. The print-out presented by the Graduate was undated with no student name
or student number, for a University of Toronto Scarborough student with a
registration history from 2007 Fall to 2011 Summer upon whom a Bachelor of
Business Administration was conferred in November 2011 (“Academic History”).
She explained that she had printed out the Academic History Transcript at some
point after she graduated in 2011. [ As set out in the document itself, and in the
affidavit of Tracey Rockbrune, which the Graduate agrees is accurate, the
Academic History reflected grades that in 21 out of 40 courses were higher than in
the ROSI Transcript and grade point averages that in 24 out of 26 cases were higher
than those in the ROSI Transcript.] …
9. The Graduate informed Mr. Butkevich that there were significant discrepancies
between the ROSI Transcript and the Academic History. She asked Mr. Butkevich
to change the ROSI Transcript to reflect these discrepancies. She explained that she
needed these changes to be made because she was applying to graduate school. She
told Mr. Butkevich several times that she was thankful that she had taken a

-5“screenshot” of her online academic history in the form of the Academic History
before she graduated.
10. Mr. Butkevich took the Official Transcript and Purported Transcript to Tracey
Rockbrune in the Records Department and explained the Graduate’s concerns.
11. The Graduate admits the facts as set out in the affidavit of Tracey Rockbrune
[which sets out the discrepancies noted above]
…
14. The Graduate admits that, in order to improve the chances of success for her
applications for admission to graduate school, she knew or ought to have known
that she:
(a) misrepresented her academic status in the Academic History by altering
and falsifying a copy of her official academic record to inflate many of the
grades and thus grade point averages earned, in order to significantly
enhance the record of her academic achievements;
(b) submitted the altered and falsified Academic History to the Registrar’s
office;
(c) attempted to convince the Registrar that the Academic History
represented her official academic record, and that the ROSI Transcript was
incorrect and needed to be corrected to reflect the false information in the
Academic History;
(d) engaged in conduct that is unbecoming a graduate of the University.
15. The Graduate acknowledges that she is signing this ASF freely and voluntarily,
knowing of the potential consequences she faces, and does so having had the
opportunity to seek the advice of counsel.

-616. The Graduate confirms that the Provost has made no assurances to her about
what penalty the Judicial Board may impose.
8.

As noted, on the basis of these agreed facts, the Board has accepted the Graduate’s plea and

have found her guilty of the third charge set out above.
9.

The penalty which the parties have submitted is appropriate in these circumstances is set

forth in the Joint Submission. It reads as follows:
3. The Graduate understands that the University Tribunal [which we take to mean
in this case, this Judicial Board] may depart from the recommendations contained
in this joint submission on penalty and may impose sanctions against her as set out
in the Acts. …
4. The Provost and the Graduate submit that, in all the circumstances of the case,
the Judicial Board should impose the following sanctions on the Graduate:
(a) The Bachelor of Business Administration degree conferred by the
University of Toronto on the Graduate in November 2011 shall be
suspended for five years from the date of this order; and
(b) The fact that the University of Toronto has suspended for five years the
Bachelor of Business Administration degree it conferred on the Graduate
be recorded permanently on her academic record and transcript.
5. The parties agree that this case may be reported to the Provost for publication of
a notice of the Board’s decision and the sanction imposed, with the Graduate’s
name withheld.…
6. The Graduate acknowledges that:

(a) the Provost advised the Graduate of her right to obtain legal counsel and
that she has obtained that advice; and

-7(b) the Graduate is signing this JSP freely and voluntarily, knowing of the
potential consequences she faces and knowing that the Tribunal is not
bound by this JSP and has the discretion to impose a different penalty,
including one that is more severe than the JSP recommends.
10.

In addition to the Joint Submission, the Board was also provided with a copy of a letter the

Graduate sent to the Vice-Provost shortly before the hearing. The University agreed that the letter
be placed into evidence, with the proviso that, because no cross-examination of the Graduate was
anticipated, the University should not be taken to have accepted the truth of the letter’s contents.
11.

The letter is a lengthy one and describes an extended period of a traumatic disruption in the

Graduate's life beginning while she was at University and extending for some period afterwards.
She says it transformed what had been the happy family life that she experienced with her parents
after they came to Canada when she was 11. Soon after she began her undergraduate studies, her
mother became very sick with ovarian cancer. This led to extensive medical treatment, significant
financial difficulty, the need for the Graduate to take on part-time work, trips to China to endeavour
seeking surgical solutions to what Canadian doctors had described as her mother's inevitable
demise, accumulating financial bills, the disappearance of her father together with much of the
family's money, countless surgeries, and ultimately the death of her mother in 2018.
12.

The Graduate acknowledges her conduct in the following terms:
I am writing to apologize and take responsibility for my actions on March 2, 2020.
I went to the Registrar’s office that day to talk about my grades from my 2011
Bachelors of Business Administration degree. As you know, I provided a copy of
my grades that were different from my official transcript and asked that the
discrepancies be rectified. The copy I brought with me that day was not accurate. I
now realize that I ought to have known that this was an inaccurate copy, and that I
should not have tried to use it to get the grades changed on my official transcript. I
let myself down, and I let my alma mater down. I accept that my actions were
unbecoming a graduate of the University of Toronto and take full responsibility.

-8While I do not remember creating this document, there is no way that anyone else
could have made it. The file properties on the Word Document say that I created
the document on December 14, 2011, at 3:14 p.m. and that the document was last
modified that same day at 4:34 p.m. I have forgotten or tried to forget much of what
happened in my life at that time. …
When I finally wound up my mom’s estate … I thought about going back to school
instead and trying to apply for graduate programs. I imagined this as being the
“normal” life that I could of have if my mom was never sick. …
When I was looking to apply to graduate school, I found the Word document that I
brought to the Registrar’s office on March 2, 2020. It was on an old computer of
mine. I don’t remember creating this document, but I must have done so back in
2011. I don’t remember ever using this document for anything other than bringing
it to the Registrar’s office. The only reason I can think of for creating it is that it
was a private fantasy of a “normal life,” of what my academic career might have
looked like if my mom stayed healthy and my dad stayed with us. I never would
have been an “A” student, but maybe I could’ve been a “B” student. I can’t say for
sure if that’s why I created this document. It’s just my best guess.
When I received copies of my official transcript, I did not remember what my
undergraduate grades were (from 2007-2011), or that they were so low. When I
discovered the Word document on my computer with better grades, I should have
known that it was too good to be true. I was desperate for a fresh start, and to finally
get some kind of normalcy in my life. For the first time in my adult life, I wanted
to do something for me.
I deeply regret my rushed decision to go to the Registrar’s office and ask them to
fix the discrepancies between these two documents. I never should have made the
transcript with the incorrect grades, whatever my reasoning might have been. I
should not have asked the Registrar’s office to investigate or correct any
discrepancies without looking into the document first and realizing the obvious –

-9that these grades were not my own. This is not the kind of behaviour that I expect
from myself, or from any other graduate of U of T.
It has been very difficult to relive these years to go back and explain all of this. I
am a very private person. My mom was, too. I am focused on moving forward with
my life. But I understand that before I do that, I will have to accept the University’s
decision in dealing with what I did in the Registrar’s office.
The Appropriate Penalty in this Case
13.

The Graduate’s acknowledgment at the end of the Joint Submission is a correct reflection

of the legal principles that govern whether we are obliged to accept a penalty on which the parties
have agreed. We are not. We may conclude that the penalty should be greater, or less, than what
the parties have agreed.
14.

But equally important are the principles that constrain whether we should depart from an

agreed penalty. And those principles dictate that such departures should be rare.
15.

The Supreme Court of Canada addressed the standards that should apply when a court

proposes to depart from an agreed penalty in the context of criminal law in R. v. Anthony-Cook,
2016 SCC 43, [2016] 2 SCR 204. The principles set out there have been adopted in professional
discipline cases, for example in Bradley v. Ontario College of Teachers, 2021 ONSC 2303, and
in cases before the University Tribunal’s trial division and the Discipline Appeals Board, for
example, University of Toronto v. S.F. (Case No. 690, August 6, 2013, para 18.) and University of
Toronto v. M. A., (Case No. 837, December 22, 2016).
16.

The Supreme Court of Canada identified multiple reasons why courts and tribunals should

be hesitant to depart from a jointly agreed-upon penalty and should do so only in circumstances
where the administration of justice effectively demands it. As the Court pointed out, those who are
charged with offences will not give up their right to a hearing on the merits, with all of the
procedural safeguards involved, unless they have some reasonable assurance that the agreement
they enter into will, in most instances, be adopted by the court or tribunal, even where it is not the
sentence that the court or tribunal would itself have imposed. The court should take comfort from

- 10 the fact that the agreement comes from the parties, who know their case best. And the result saves
the justice system precious time, resources, and expense which can be more productively
channeled into other matters.
17.

At the same time, the Court recognized and adopted the view of the Court of Appeal of

Ontario that "certainty of outcome is not ‘the ultimate goal of the sentencing process. Certainty
must yield where the harm caused by accepting the joint submission is beyond the value gained
by promoting certainty of result’".
18.

The Supreme Court concluded, however, that a joint submission should only be disregarded

in those rare circumstances where to do otherwise would bring the administration of justice into
disrepute, or would otherwise be contrary to the public interest. This would occur where the
proposed sentence "is so unhinged from the circumstances of the offence, and the offender that its
acceptance would lead reasonable and informed persons aware of all the circumstances, including
the importance of promoting certainty in resolution discussions, to believe that the proper
functioning of the justice system had broken down."
19. These principles and the resulting standard have been regularly employed in the consideration
of jointly submitted penalties before the University Tribunal’s trial division and the Discipline
Appeals Board. In our view, they apply equally to a hearing before a Judicial Board.
20.

However, after much consideration, we have concluded that this is one of those exceptional

cases where such a departure is warranted.
21.

As noted, the Joint Submission asks us to impose a penalty of a five-year suspension of the

Graduate’s degree, and a permanent notation on her academic record and transcript.
22. The University provided us with a chart of cases dealing with students or graduates found to
have engaged in forging transcripts or other academic records.
23.

In virtually all the cases, where the conduct was engaged in by a graduate, the graduate’s

degree was recalled, or where the conduct was by an existing student, the student was expelled.

- 11 24.

However, in virtually all of the cases referred to by the University, and in all of the cases in

which a degree was revoked or a student expelled, the forged transcript/record was provided to
one or more third parties in the expectation that they would rely upon it. The University confirmed
that it was not aware of any case similar to this one, namely, one in which a student or graduate
simultaneously provided an accurate copy of the official record of their transcript results (i.e., the
ROSI Transcript), let alone a case in which records were provided not to a third party for their
reliance, but to the custodian of the official University record for the purposes of record correction.
25.

The University confirmed that, but for the Graduate’s agreement to the facts and the

appropriate penalty, the University would have sought a recall of the Graduate’s degree in this
case.
26.

However, in light of the Graduate’s cooperation in resolving the case, the University was

prepared to agree that the lesser penalty contained in the Joint Submission was appropriate.
27.

Forgery, as reflected in the cases cited by the University, is indeed a serious offence. The

reasons were recently summarized in the University of Toronto v. Y.Y. (Case No. 1259, July 14,
2022, para 41) quoting earlier caselaw:
The reasons why forgery is deserving of the most serious of sanctions are succinctly
outlined in S.W. … forgery, or falsification of academic records, is among the most
serious academic offences. … Such misconduct undermines the integrity of the
University’s academic mission. It misrepresents a student’s accomplishments. If
undetected, it may result in a student obtaining a benefit which he or she does not
deserve, deprive another more deserving student of that benefit, and tarnish the
reputation of the University, and by extension, that of other students, alumni and
faculty… Second, forgery may be difficult to detect… Third by its nature, forgery
is only rarely an offence that can occur through a student's inadvertence, or even
mere negligence. It is usually the product of planning and knowing participation,
not a moment of weakness or poor judgment.
28.

The Graduate's counsel observed that this is one of those rare cases where the factors referred

to in support of the seriousness of the forgery offence are not in play. We agree.

- 12 29.

Consistent with our acceptance of the Graduate’s guilty plea, we consider that she should

have known that the second academic record she took to the Registrar’s office was false and that
she should not have taken it or suggested that it was or might be accurate. But we cannot reasonably
conclude that a student who gave any serious consideration or planning to her actions and who
went to the custodian of the University's official records with a correct copy of her official
transcript and a falsified additional document could be said to have reasonably expected that the
University would ignore its own records or the ROSI transcript she provided, or that the University,
let alone any third-party, would thereby be deceived. Nor can we conclude that the falsification of
the academic history that accompanied the official transcript (which the custodian also possessed)
would be difficult to detect.
30.

The Graduate’s conduct seems to us to have been an ill-considered and irrational act which

was destined to be unsuccessful. While it was misconduct that should be sanctioned, we think it
is unreasonable and unjust to impose a penalty that should reflect those imposed for serious
offences involving the planned provision of knowingly falsified records to third parties for their
reliance. We think an independent informed observer would come to the same conclusion.
31.

We questioned counsel as to whether there might be other caselaw that more closely

paralleled the circumstances of this case and it appears there is none.
32.

Although we were advised that the Graduate is a very private person who did not wish to

be part of a contested hearing, we do not otherwise know the reasons that led to the agreement to
propose the penalty that is before us. In response to questions about those reasons, her counsel
quite properly advised us that the answer was subject to confidential settlement privilege.
33.

However, there is one fact that is known to us that we consider must have weighed heavily

in the decision by the Graduate to agree to the Joint Submission. That is the University's expressed
intention that, if the hearing were contested and the Graduate found guilty of the charge it would
seek the revocation of the Graduate's degree.
34.

Thus, the University made it clear that the price of failure might be the loss of the Graduate’s

degree. It is hard to imagine a more disastrous outcome for the Graduate. We are concerned that
that fact may have weighed very heavily on the decision to agree to the Joint Submission, and may

- 13 well have led to an agreement to a proposed penalty that the Graduate and her counsel otherwise
thought unfair. If it did, that would be entirely understandable.
35.

We certainly do not suggest that the University or its Counsel, who, as always, discharged

her responsibilities in an excellent and entirely professional fashion, would seek a penalty that was
considered inappropriate for the purposes of extracting a settlement.
36.

But it will be apparent from these reasons that we consider the revocation of the Graduate's

degree an excessive penalty for the conduct with which she was charged, and this causes us to
accord less weight than we otherwise might to the Graduate's agreement to the Joint Submission.
37.

This leaves the question of what we consider would be an appropriate penalty for the

Graduate’s conduct.
38.

There does not appear to be any line of authority that would apply to the determination of

the appropriate penalty in the unusual circumstances of this case. So we turn to the well-established
sentencing factors set out in the 1976 Chelin case.
a.

The character of the Graduate: We know of nothing other than the offence in
question to suggest that her character is other than blameless, and her expressed
acknowledgement and remorse reinforce that impression.

b.

The likelihood of repetition of the offence: There is nothing to suggest that there is
any likelihood of repetition of this or any comparable offence and what evidence
there is suggests the opposite.

c.

The nature of the offence: While we think it is a result of failure to exercise
reasonable judgement rather than an intention to harm or mislead, the creation and
presentation of a false academic record is nonetheless a significant offence
deserving of sanction.

d.

The detriment to the University: Given that the University was the only recipient of
the falsified record, and that the corrected record was both presented at the same

- 14 time and also in the University’s possession, we think that any detriment would
have seemed to be unlikely and was in fact non-existent.

e.

The need to deter others from committing a similar offence: While it is important
that the University be seen to penalize the falsification of academic records, we do
not think the unique circumstances of this case are likely to be repeated by others.

39.

In the result, we conclude that a significant penalty, but not one at the high end of the scale,

is called for. We therefore impose:
a.

a suspension of the Graduate’s degree for a period of 3 years;

b.

a notation to that effect on the Graduate’s transcript for a period of 3 years;

c.

a report to the Provost for publication of a notice of this Board’s decision, including
the facts on which it was based and the sanction imposed, with the Graduate’s name
withheld.

40.

We close by recording our gratitude to both counsel for their invaluable assistance in the

circumstances of this unusual case.

All of which is hereby ordered this 3rd of March 2023

_______________________________________
Patricia D.S. Jackson
On behalf of the Judicial Board Panel

