UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
GOVERNING COUNCIL

Report #326 of the Academic Appeals Committee
July 2, 2008

To:

The Academic Board,
University of Toronto

Your Committee reports that it held a hearing on Thursday June 19, 2008, at which the following
were present:
Assistant Dean Kate Hilton, Chair
Professor Joel Kirsh
Professor Michael Marrus
Mr. Alexandru Rascanu
Professor Anthony Sinclair
In Attendance:
Ms. A. S. (the “Student”)
Professor Susan Howson, Vice-Dean, Undergraduate, Faculty of Arts and Science (the
“Faculty”)
Ms. Elaine Ishibashi, Associate Faculty Registrar, Faculty of Arts and Science
Ms. Sari Springer, Counsel for the Faculty of Arts and Science
Ms. Nancy Smart, Judicial Affairs Officer
Ms. Mette Mai, Office of the Governing Council
The Appeal
The Student is appealing the June 18, 2007 decision of the Academic Appeals Board of the
Faculty denying her request for an extension of time to submit term work in HIS343Y,
POL214Y and POL354Y.
Facts
The Student enrolled at Victoria College in an Honours Bachelor of Arts program (History and
Political Science) in September 2003.
In the academic year 2005-2006, the Student’s third year of study, she was enrolled in a full
course load which included HIS343Y, POL214Y and POL354Y. The course requirements in
each of HIS343Y, POL214Y and POL354Y included a mid-term assignment, worth 25 percent
of the final grade. These assignments were due on March 15, 2006, February 28, 2006 and
February 13, 2006, respectively. The course descriptions for each course made it clear that late
work would be subject to a penalty.
According to the Student, at some point between February 7 and February 10, 2006, the
Student’s brother became ill with an infection. The Student stated that she was very involved

46988

1

with her brother’s care, and that she was required to stay up at night with him in order to
administer medicine and to prevent sleep-walking. Because of her brother’s illness, the Student
requested and received an extension of time to submit the mid-term essay in POL354Y; the due
date was extended from February 13 until February 17. The Student stated that she then became
ill for a period of several weeks, and consequently failed to submit the mid-term essays in
HIS343Y, POL214Y and POL354Y.
The Faculty’s calendar clearly states: “The University of Toronto Student Medical Certificate
must be submitted in support of a request for an exemption from Faculty regulations, if illness is
being used as the reason for the request.” However, the Student was unable to provide the
medical documentation required by the Faculty in such cases. She received a failing grade in all
three courses.
Preliminary Motion
At the beginning of the hearing, the Student brought a motion to exclude evidence of several
petitions, mentioned briefly in the Faculty’s submissions, on the basis that these petitions were
not at issue in the present case. She also brought a motion to introduce evidence of academic
performance (an updated statement of grades from ROSI) and character (a reference letter in
support of her participation in a UNDP internship program). It was decided that all evidence
would be considered by the panel, and that the Chair would instruct the panel with respect to the
relevance of the evidence and the weight to be given to it.
Previous Decisions
On May 4, 2006, the Student petitioned the Faculty’s Committee on Standing for an extension of
time to submit term work in HIS343Y, POL214Y and POL354Y. In support of her petition, the
Student provided two pieces of medical documentation. The first, an official University of
Toronto Medical Certificate, was dated February 15, 2006. This certificate stated that the
Student’s younger brother had become ill on February 12, that he “was sick at home with fever
and a cough” and that the Student “was helping to look after him.” The second piece of medical
documentation was a note written on a prescription pad, dated February 20, stating only: “This is
to confirm that [the Student] was in my office on Feb 17/2006.”
The Committee on Standing issued three separate decisions (one for each course) dated June 30,
August 9 and August 17, 2006. All three petitions were denied on the basis of insufficient
medical documentation.
On September 19, the Student appealed a second time to the Committee on Standing, providing
further details about her illness during the months of February and March, 2006. The Student
stated that she became ill with the flu while caring for her brother, and went to see her doctor on
February 17, 2006. This illness continued for several weeks, but she did not return to see her
doctor until March 16, 2006, at which time she was suffering from a sore throat and fatigue. In
support of her appeal, the Student provided one new piece of medical documentation: a note
written on a prescription pad, dated August 22, 2006. The note read: “This is to confirm that [the
Student] came to my office on March 16/2006 with a medical illness.”

46988

2

On December 15, 2006, the Committee on Standing denied the Student’s appeal. The decision
stated:
You have not followed the required procedures for seeking extensions of time
during the session and have not provided an acceptable medical certificate that
clearly establishes that you were seriously ill prior to the deadlines or
afterwards….The medical documentation should be written by a physician
who can confirm that you were treated at the time of your illness, and can
provide reliable information about the onset of an illness, its course and its
effect on your ability to complete your course work.
On March 2, 2007, the Student appealed to the Faculty’s Academic Appeals Board. In her
submissions, the Student stated that she “was very ill for about 4 weeks” in February and March
of 2006. She stated that she sought medical help twice during her illness, on February 17 and
March 16, but did not think to ask for a medical certificate at the time. She stated that it was
against her physician’s policy to provide a medical certificate after the fact, and that he could
only confirm that she had visited his office.
On June 18, 2007, the Academic Appeals Board denied the appeal, indicating that the Student
had not offered “any new or compelling information” that would have allowed the panel to
overturn the decision of the Committee on Standing.
Decision
The Faculty’s policies relating to the provision of medical documentation are clearly stated in the
calendar and set expectations for students that are appropriate in light of the Faculty’s
responsibility to uphold high academic standards. The question before this Committee is
whether or not an exception should be exercised in this case because of compelling and unusual
circumstances.
In the present case, the Student argues that she was so ill from mid-February until mid-March
that she was unable to submit three separate essays, due February 17 (extended due date),
February 28 and March 15. However, there is no independent medical evidence to confirm the
Student’s account. As stated earlier, there is a University of Toronto Medical Certificate, was
dated February 15, 2006, that confirms her younger brother’s illness between February 12 and
15. In addition, there is a note, dated April 30, 2008, that states: “This is to confirm that [the
Student] was up at nights helping to look after her sick younger brother, who had an infection in
mid-February 2006, and therefore she was unable to hand in 2 assignments on time at that time.”
With respect to the Student’s own illness, we have a note confirming the Student’s presence in
the doctor’s office on February 17, and a note confirming that the Student visited the doctor’s
office on March 16 “with a medical illness”. There is no independent confirmation of the
Student’s illness between February 17 and March 16, and no indication in the existing medical
notes that the Student required accommodation to complete her assignments.
The majority of the Committee is of the view that there are no exceptional circumstances in this
case that would justify the setting aside of University policy. Consequently, the majority of the

46988

3

Committee believes that the decision of the Faculty’s Academic Appeals Board is reasonable,
and should be upheld.
One member of the Committee is of the view that an exception to University policy should be
made, based on the oral evidence provided by the Student.
The appeal is dismissed.

46988

4

