Report #326

   DATE: July 2, 2008
   PARTIES: Ms. A. S. (the Student) v. Faculty of Arts and Science
   Hearing Date(s): June 19, 2008
   Committee Members:
   Assistant Dean Kate Hilton, Chair
   Professor Joel Kirsh
   Professor Michael Marrus
   Mr. Alexandru Rascanu
   Professor Anthony Sinclair
   In Attendance:
   Ms. A. S. (the ‚Student‚)
   Professor Susan Howson, Vice-Dean, Undergraduate, Faculty of Arts and
   Science
   Ms. Elaine Ishibashi, Associate Faculty Registrar, Faculty of Arts and
   Science
   Ms. Sari Springer, Counsel for the Faculty of Arts and Science
   Ms. Nancy Smart, Judicial Affairs Officer
   Ms. Mette Mai, Office of the Governing Council
   Faculty of Arts and Science ‚ request for extension of time to submit
   term work ‚ illness prevented the submission of three essays ‚ no
   independent confirmation of Student‚s illness ‚ no indication in
   medical notes that the Student required accommodation ‚ minority
   opinion that exception should be made based on oral evidence provided ‚
   appeal dismissed
   Request for an extension of time to submit term work in three courses.
   The Student submitted that she was so ill during the relevant period of
   time that she was unable to submit three separate essays. The Committee
   found that there was no independent confirmation of the Student‚s
   illness during the relevant period of time, and no indication in
   medical notes that the Student required accommodation to complete her
   assignments. The majority of the Committee found that there was no
   exceptional circumstances in this case that would justify the setting
   aside of the Faculty‚s policies relating to the provision of medical
   documentation and set expectations for students. The majority of the
   Committee found that the decision of the Divisional Appeals Board was
   reasonable, and should be upheld. A minority of the Committee found
   that an exception to University policy should be made based on oral
   evidence provided by the Student. Appeal dismissed.
   [1]View Report

References

   1. file:///media/12577
