Case #614

   DATE: January 26, 2011
   PARTIES: University of Toronto v. T.K.
   Hearing Date(s): January 14, 2011
   Panel Members:
   Rodica David Q.C., Chair
   Professor Ato Quayson, Faculty Member
   Shakir Rahim, Student Member
   Appearances:
   Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel for the University
   Betty-Ann Campbell, Law Clerk, Paliare Roland Barristers
   Professor Shafique Virani, Islamic Literature, Associate
   Lucy Gaspini, Academic Affairs Officer
   Trial Division â s. B.I.1(d); s. B.I.3(b) of Code â plagiarism â
   plagiarism of final project â hearing not attended â reasonable notice
   of hearing provided â deception to avoid scheduling of hearing â
   abeyance of file â finding on evidence of guilt â no conflict for Panel
   members â prior academic offences â prior plagiarism offences â prior
   deception to avoid hearing â history of academic offences â no evidence
   of remorse â no mitigating factors âUniversity submission on penalty
   accepted -Â  grade assignment of zero for courses; five-year suspension
   to begin after the end of the Studentâs current suspension;
   recommendation to the President that the Student be expelled; and
   report to Provost

   Student charged with two offences under s. B.I.1(d) and. B.I.3(b) of
   the Code. The hearing proceeded without the Student in attendance. The
   Panel reviewed the evidence regarding whether the Student had notice of
   the hearing. The Panel heard that the Student had claimed he was
   serving in the Taiwan air force; as a result, the University put the
   file in abeyance. Discipline Counsel submitted evidence that the
   Student had been in Toronto during the time he claimed to be serving in
   the Taiwan air force. The Panel heard the University had to go through
   numerous efforts over an unnecessarily length period of one and half
   years to schedule the hearing. The Panel accepted the Student had
   proper notice and proceeded with the hearing. The charges against the
   Student related to the allegations that the Student plagiarized an
   entire project. The Panel heard that the Student had been repeatedly
   warned about what plagiarism was and how it was a serious offence in
   the Course. The Panel concluded that, based on the evidence, the
   Student knowingly plagiarized. The University withdrew the second
   charge under s. B.I.3(b) of the Code.Â  The Student had been subject to
   previous disciplinary proceedings at the University, having been found
   to have plagiarized on three occasions. The Panel noted the seriousness
   of the offence. The Panel further noted aggravating factors including
   the Studentâs history of academic offences, the Studentâs absence at
   the hearing, the pattern of deception the Student engaged in to avoid
   the hearing, and the Studentâs lack of remorse. No extenuating
   circumstances were found by the Panel. The Panel accepted the
   Universityâs submission on penalty and imposed a final grade of zero in
   the course, a five-year suspension to start a year and four months
   after the end of the Studentâs current suspension, a recommendation to
   the President that the Student be expelled, and that a report to the
   Provost be issued.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/13016
