Ul\1VERSITY Oli' TORONTO
UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
TfUAL DIVIS.ION
IN THE MATTER charges of academic dishonesty made on June 22 1 2009;
ANH IN THE MATTltR of the University of Toronto Code of Behaviolll' on Academic

Ma/lers~ 1995;
AND IN THE MATTJr~R of the University of Toronto Act, 1971, S.O. 1971, c. 561 as
amended S.O. 1978, c. 88;
BETWEEN:
THE UNIVERSITY OJi' TORONTO

-AND-

-·-·

Hearing Dntc: Jnnunt')' 14, 2011
Members of the Panel:

Ms. Rodica David, Q,C., Barrister and Solicitor, Chair
Professor Alo Quayson, Dil'cctor, Centre for Diaspora & Transnational Studies; Gradualc
Faculty; Undergraduate Instructor, Faculty Panel Member
Mr, Shakir Rahim, Student Panel Member
Appearances:

Ms. Lily Hrumert Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Banisters
Ms. Betty-Ann Campbell, Law Clerk, Paliare Roland Barristers
Professor Shafique Virani, Instructor for RLG451 YSY: fslamic Literature, Associate
Professor, Department and Centl'e for the Study of Religion 1 Historical Studies
Ms. Lucy Gaspini, Academic Affairs Officer, University of Toronto Mississauga
In Attendance:
Ms. Natalie Ramtahal, Coordinator, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Gl'ievanccs, Office
of the Governing Council
Not in Attendance:

Mr. 'rllll■ - KIi, the Student

NOTICR Oli' HEARING AND STIJl}gNT'S INFORMAL REQUEST FOR
All,JOtJRNMltNT

f 1] The evidence of Bct1y~Atm Campbell, Law Clerk at Paliarc Roland leads lo the
nccessmy inference that the sludent had notice of lhis hem'ing. Exhibit l

contains a series of documents relating to the numerous attempts since .lune
2009~ to contact the student and to give him notice of the hearing.
[2] Tab 4 is ai1 email exchange with the student at his email addt·ess as it appears on
his ROSI record, as well as another email address which Ms. Campbell had
obtained from communications with the student on other matters and from

which the student had directed emails lo Ms. Campbell. The stuclent claimed
that he was not avctilable until 2012 as he was serving h1 the Taiwan air force.
Ms. Campbell proposed a hearing by SKYPE. The student claimed in an email
that appears at Tab 9 that this was not feasible. As a 1·esull the University put

the file in abeyance.

p]

ln cal'ly December 20 IO the University 1·cvicwcd the file and locotcd o Fnccbook

page (Tob I0), which indicated that the student was nctuully in Toronto. At Tab
J l appears a Resume posted on Linked In which indicated that he was employed

in Toronto during the period that he claimed he was serving in the Taiwnn air
force. ivls. Campbell confirmed with Mr.

Kll's employers that he was indeed

employed in Toronto. She then called his place of employment and spoke to a
person who acknowledged thnt he was indeed ~·fr. KIii and that he knew of the
email communications referred to above.

Ms. Campbell also conducted a

dl'iver's licence MTO Search which indicated his Toronto address on Doris
Avenue and that the student had violalions during the period that he claimed he
was serving in the Taiwan Ah· Force. Ms. Cmnpbell sent tvlr. KIii an email
indicating that she wished to take steps lo schedule the hearing. to which the
student !'esponded by email. On December 9, 2010, the student sent an email
that he was contacting Downtown Legal Services. Tabs 13 and 14 are the

Notices of I-lcal'ing which were sen! to the student by both email and comicr.

2

(4)

ivJs. Campbell and Ms. Harmer contacted the student at his place of employment
on Wednesday January 12, 2011 at which time he gave a spurious reason for an
mtjournmen1, to which lvls. llarmer advised lhat the University intended to
proceed rmd urged him to contact Downtown Legal Services immediately (niter

tvll'. KIii claimed that he had tried but they wern closed, and then acknnwledged
he had not contacted them). There was no contact from the student since thnl
time nor did he appeur at this hearing.
[51 After Ms Campbell gave evidence, Professor Ato Quayson indicated thnt he was
the Director of the Centre of Diaspora and Transnational Studies in which the
slu~ent was apparently cmolled according lo his ROSI record in 2006-2007. hul
this was not !he Department in which the offence occurred, as per section
C.II.(a)(20) of the Code of Behal'lour on Academic Malle,~\·, 1995. Professor
Quayson had no contact whatsoever with the student. In the circumsta11ccs this
Tribunal as constituted finds that lhere is no actual or potential conflict.
[6] It is cleat' that the University has been required, in large part because or the
student's deceptions, to go through numerous cflb1ts over an unnecessarily
lengthy period of I ½ years, to schedule this hearing. The Notices of Hearing nt
Tabs 19 and 20 were served in accordance with the requirements of Section 6 of
the Statutory Powers and Procedutcs Act.

The student requested an

adjournment in an informal way in his conversation initiated by Ms. Hanner, but
his only explanation was that he had a presentation at work.
evidence that he actually had such a p1·csentation.

There is no

He claimed that he was

m1nble 10 reoch Downtown Legal Services as they were closed, but this was
patently false.

He did not make nny formal request lo this Tribunal fol' an

adjournment. Thmughout the last 1 ½ years, the student has engaged in a web
of deception to delay this hearing.

[7J ln the circumstnnces, lhe Tribunal accepts that the student had proper notice, and
this heal'ing will pmcced. 11 :25 am.

3

CH-1,RGES
[8] The charges against the student, which appear at Exhibit 2 Tab 2, are as follows:
I.

On or about Febrnary 23, 2009, you knowingly represented as yom

own an idea, or an expression of an idea) or the work of another, in
connection with a "Polished Rough Draft ~ Entire Creative Project"
(Project), which you submitted for academic credit in RLG451 YSY:

Islamic Literatme (''Course"), contrary to section B.I.1 {d) of the Code.
2.

In the alternative, on or about February 23, 2009, you knowingly
engaged in a form of ch.eating1 academic dishonesty or misconduct,
fraud or misrepresentation not otherwise described in the Code in
orde1· to obtain academic credit or other academic adva11tage of any
kind in connection with the Project, which you submitted for academic
credit in the Course, contmry to section B.I.3(b) of the Code.

[9] The University called Professor Shafique Virani to give evidence. Presently he
is Associate Professor and Chair of the Dept of Historical Studies at Mississauga
Campus, and Professor at the Graduate Departments of Religion and History at
St. George Campus. He taught comses RLG204 which the student took in fall
2007 and RLG4SI in ,vhich the. student was enrolled in the winter of 2009.

[ 10] The RLG204 course encompassed class time devoted to a detailed explanation
of plagiarism, its !lature and consequences, and included various exercises to
illustrate what constitutes plagimism. The student attended this class. If he did
not have an understanding of what constitutes plagiarism before he took this
class, he must have known the elements of plagiarism after he had completed
this course.
[llJ On the sylJabus for course RLG451, it is stated that the Univel'Sity uses the
websitt\ turnitin.com to dl!tect plagiarism.

An assignm.ent is submitted

electronically to this website which then identifies similarities to other sources.
The class, including the student, was offered the opportunity to request that a

4

different means or website be used. The student never gave any indication that
he wished a different means or website to be used.
[ 12) In Course RLG451, the student submitted an assignment which Professol' Virani
suspected might be plagiarized. When he met with the student to discuss this
assignme11t 1 the student did not appear to know anything about the content of the
assignment he had submitted. However, Professor Virani had no concrete proof
that the particular assignment had been plagiarized.
[ 13] Another pait of course RLG451, related to a particular novel that gave rise to a
discussion of various ethical issues. In this context Professor Virani discussed
the ethical aspects of plagiarism.

By this point there can be no question

whatsoever that the student knew folly what constituted plagiarism.
[14] As part of course RLG451, the student was required to complete a project in
various stages as indicated at Tab 3, second page, with deadHnes as indicated.
[15] Professor Virani testified that, in the classroom context, the student appeared not
to have done his assigned readings, nor did he appear to have any knowledge of
assignments that he had submitted. In contrast, the student's written assignment
that he submitted in the preliminary stages of the required project was quite well
done. Howeve1\ the asllignmcnt that was submitted at the third stage of t!1e
project appeared to be a regression from the assignments submitted previously
in respect of this project.
[16] Tabs 8 and 9 are two documents which the student submitted electronically as
the Polished Rough Draft at the 41h stage of the project 1 which was worth 15% of
the final mark.

It was qtiite curious that two documents were submitted.

Protessor Virani thought that perhaps Tab 9 was submitted in error as the

internal content appears the same as Tab 8, except that Tab 9 contains
advertisements. It the1·efore appeat·ed to Professor Virani that pot1ions of the
student's submitted works were copied from various websites.

5

[ 17] Professor Virnni then compared in detail the documents submitted by the student
to other websites. When he completed this nnalysis for about 1/, of the paper, he
found that every single sentence in the submission was identical to various
websites. This detailed comparison appears at Tab I 0, After that Prol'essor
Virani me\ with the student and urged him at the meeting as well as in an email
exchm1ge to complete the comsc requirement with the Final Creative Project.
[ 18] The student was advised that his assigiunent would be submitlcd by the
University to turnitin.com. The result by turnitin.com showed a 92% similarity
with other websites - see Tab 11.
[ 19] There is little question that the entire project submitted by the student was
plagiarized. The evidence is elem' that the student bud ample opportunity to
know and understand plagiarism. He had been enrolled at the University since
2003. I-le was taught in detail the nature of plagiarism in the courses he took.
Given the extensive classroom time devoted to ensure that lhe stuckm
understood the elements of plagiarism, the Tribunal concludes thal IK
knowingly plngimized.
[20] The student is therefore guilty as charged on the lirsl charge. The University
therefore chooses not to proceed on the second charge.

[2l] Mr.

KIii has been the subject of previous disciplinary proceedings at this

University since he first enrolled al the University in 2003.
[22] In the summer of 2004, he admitted to plagiarizing a paper worlh 15% of the
mmks in his philosophy course and acccplcd a sanction of a nrnrk of zero for the
paper in question.
[23] In November 2006 the student was charged with plagiarizing in his History
course. In December 2006, th,; student wus fmthcr charged with plagiarism in
his Religion course. Tw,:, h<:arings took place in May and November 2008. I-le

6

was found guilty on both charges with a sanction of zero in the two courses, plus
a suspension of 3 years.

[24] In this case the University seeks the following sanctions under Section C.II.(b) I:
1.

a mark of zero (0) in the course RLG45 l;

2,

that the sh1dent be suspended from attending at the University for 5
years starting May l , 2012 - for the pmpose of affording 1he
University sufficient time for the expulsion process to be completed;
and,

J.

that a recommendation of expulsion to the President for his
recommendation to the Governing Council.

[25] The Univer~ity further requests under Section C.II.(b)3: that this case he
reported to the Provost for publication with the name of the student \•Vithheld.
[26] This is a very serious offence. fn addition there are a number of aggravating
factors in this case:
l. The student has a history of academic offences.

2. The present offence was committed during the time that he had been given, at
his request, before the suspension on the charges of which he had been
previously found guilty as appears from paragl'aph 22 of the Reasons for
Decision dated March 11, 2009 at exhibit 3, Tab 2.
3. The student did not appear at this hearing.
4. The student engaged in a web of deception in this case. As appears in the

Reasons for Decision dated March 11, 2009 at exhibit 3, Tab 2, the student.
similarly engaged in a pattern of deception in the previous offences of which
he was found guilty after a lengthy hearing.

5. There is no evidence ofremorse in this case, again similar to the previous
case.

7

[27) There are no extenuating circumstances. In light of the student's disciplinary
history indicating repeated plagiarisms, there is every likelihood that the student
will repeat the oifonce. This type of conduct is highly detrimental to (he
reputation of the University. It must be made clear to the public that the
University will take all reasonable steps to protect its reputation and the
integrity of its academic process. The students of the University must be
discouraged from attempting such conduct and be made aware that the
University will impose severe sanctions.
[28] Ms. Harmer presented mnplc case authority to support the sanctions that she
requests on behalf of the University. The Tl'ibm1al has no hesitation in
unanimously accepli11g in foll the University's proposed sanctions.

Dated at Toronto, thh,..;?6~ of January, 2011

/)
d1
_d-/~-~c~

Rodi~Q.C. 1 Co-Chair

8

