IN THE MATTER OF THE UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
OF THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO (APPEAL DIVISION)
IN THE MATTER OF charges of academic dishonesty filed on June 27, 2013,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic
Matters, 1995 (the "Code");
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Act, 1971, S.O. 1971, c. 56 as amended
S.O. 1978, C. 88
BETWEEN:
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
Appellant
and

Respondent
REASONS FOR DECISION

Appeal hearing date: November 11, 2015
Members of the Discipline Appeal Board:
Ms. Patricia D.S. Jackson, Chair
Ms. Jenna Jacobson, Student Panel Member
Ms. Beth Martin, Student Panel Member
Professor Elizabeth Peter, Faculty Panel Member
Appearances:

Rob Centa, for the Appellant, the University of Toronto

-2-

The Appeal
L

M s . ~ ' (the "Student") was charged, and convicted of the following academic

offences (the "unauthorized assistance offences"):
(1) On or about March 4, 2013, you knowingly obtained unauthorized

assistance in connection with a partial essay draft that you submitted for
academic credit in the Course, contrary to section B(i) 1(b) of the Code; and
(2) On or about March 19, 2013, you knowingly obtained unauthorized
assistance in connection with an essay that you submitted for academic credit
in the Course, contrary to section B(i)l(b) of the Code; and
2.

The Student was also convicted of other academic offences, and a sentence imposed for

all of the convictions. No appeal is taken from the other charges for which there were
convictions, or in respect of sentencing.
3.

The Student was also charged and acquitted of the following academic offences (the

"plagiarism offences"):
(1) On or about March 4, 2013, you knowingly represented as your own an
idea or expression of an idea and/or the work of another in a partial essay draft
that you submitted for academic credit in the Course, contrary to section
B(i)l(d) of the Code; and

(2) On or about March 19, 2013, you knowingly represented as your own an
idea or expression of an idea and/or the work of another in an essay that you
submitted for academic credit in the Course, contrary to section B(i)l(d) of
the Code.
4.

The University appeals the decision of the Trial Division of the University of Toronto

Tribunal to acquit the Student in respect of the plagiarism offences.
5.

The University submits that the Tribunal erred in concluding that plagiarism under

Section B(i)l(d) of the Code requires an "element of theft". The University further argues that

-3-

the "rule against multiple convictions" (often called the Kienapple principle) does not apply so as
to prevent a conviction of plagiarism in respect of the same acts giving rise to a conviction for
unauthorized assistance.

The Student did not respond or attend
6.

As discussed in the Reasons for Decision of the Tribunal, the Student did not attend or

participate in the Tribunal proceedings. Relying on the provisions of the Statutory Powers
Procedure Act, and the Tribunal's Rules of Practice and Procedure, including the provisions that

set forth the proper method of service, the Tribunal concluded that the Student had been properly
served, and that it was appropriate to proceed in her absence.
7.

Similarly, on this appeal, the University led evidence that the Tribunal's Reasons for

Decision, the Provost's Notice of Appeal, emails detailing the arrangements for the scheduling of
this appeal and the Provost's materials on the appeal were all sent to the Student's email address
as contained in ROSI (the Repository of Student Information). This is an authorized method of
service under the Rules of Practice and Procedure. As it did in the case below, the University
also couriered a letter confirming the time for the appeal, and a copy of the Provost's materials
for the appeal to the Student's mailing address as listed in ROSI. However, the ROSI notation
indicated the termination date for that address was the end of August 2013, and, indeed, the
courier was unable to deliver anything to the Student at that address. The University advised that
the Student has not responded to any of the communications sent to her, or otherwise participated
in these proceedings, since her meeting with the Office of Student Academic Integrity in May of
2013.
8.

Given the service of all relevant documents on the Student as required under the Rules of

Practice and Procedure, the clear notification of the University's Policy on Official

-4-

Correspondence with Students, including the obligations thereby imposed, and the provisions of
the Statutory Powers Procedure Act, we consider that the Student has been provided with
reasonable notice and that it was appropriate to proceed in her absence. Reasonable notice was
given and no response was received.
The Decision Below
9.

The issues on appeal relate to the Student's submission of a partial essay draft, and the

subsequent final essay in her East Asian Studies 209H course.
10.

Concerning those two documents, the Tribunal found that the evidence was clear that:
•

the Student obtained the assistance of another person - namely Doug Manson;

•

the writing styles manifested in both the partial draft essay and the final essay differed
markedly from the writing style in the Student's in-class test;

•

the "document properties" of both the partial draft essay and the final essay revealed
the author to be "Doug Manson";

•

when interviewed by the Dean's Designate, the Student did not know the meaning of
some of the words used in in her essay and could not provide any details as to the
process she followed in writing the essay; and

•

there was compelling evidence that the Student admitted that Mr. Manson had helped
her with the partial essay and that he had written at least half of the final essay.

11.

The University does not dispute, and indeed it relies upon, these factual findings on the

appeal.
12.

On the basis of these findings, the Tribunal found the Student guilty of the unauthorized

assistance offences. The offence of unauthorized assistance, as set out in Section B(i) 1(b) of the
Code is as follows:

It shall be an offence for a student knowingly ... to use or possess
an unauthorized aid or aids or obtain unauthorized assistance in

-5-

any academic examination or term test or in connection with any
other form of academic work.
13.

The University also sought a conviction for plagiarism in respect of the partial essay and

final essay under Section B.I. l(d) of the Code which provides:
It shall be an offence for a student knowingly ...

(d) to represent as one's own any idea or expression of an idea or
work of another in any academic examination or term test or in
connection with any other form of academic work, i.e. to commit
plagiarism (for a more detailed account of plagiarism, see
Appendix "A").
Appendix "A" of the Code referred to in the offence section as providing "a more
detailed account of plagiarism" reads as follows:
In this Code, unless the context otherwise requires:
(p) "plagiarism" The present sense of plagiarism is contained in
the original ( 1621) meaning in English: "the wrongful
appropriation and purloining, and publication as one's own, of the
ideas, or the expression of the ideas ... of another." This most
common, and frequently most elusive of academic infractions is
normally associated with student essays. Plagiarism can, however,
also threaten the integrity of studio and seminar room, laboratory
and lecture hall. Plagiarism is at once a perversion of originality
and a denial of the interdependence and mutuality which are the
heart of scholarship itself, and hence of the academic experience.
Instructors should make clear what constitutes plagiarism within a
particular discipline;"
14.

The Tribunal declined to convict the Student of the plagiarism offences. In coming to

this conclusion, the Tribunal noted that University counsel was not aware of any other cases in
which a student had been convicted both of obtaining unauthorized assistance and of plagiarism
in circumstances where a student submitted the work of another person.
15.

More importantly, the Tribunal noted, that Appendix "A" refers to the "purloining" of

work as one's own, and hence, in the view of the Tribunal, necessarily includes the theft or
misappropriation of the work of another. In other words, the Tribunal held, to convict a student

-6-

of plagiarism it was necessary to show that the Student had taken another's ideas or words
without that person's permission. As there was no suggestion that the Student lacked permission
from Doug Manson to use his ideas, indeed on the contrary the evidence suggested he had
granted his permission, there was no basis upon which the Student be could convicted of the
offence of plagiarism.
16.

On the basis of the convictions for the unauthorized assistance offences, and the

convictions on other offences which are not the subject of this appeal, the Tribunal accepted the
University's recommendation as to the appropriate penalty, namely a O in the course, a
suspension for five years, a notation of the penalty on the Student's transcript until graduation,
and a report for publication of the decision of the Tribunal. The University did not submit
below, and did not submit on this appeal, that the sentence should be increased in the event of a
conviction for the plagiarism offences.
17.

Having found that the evidence did not permit a conviction for plagiarism, it was not

necessary and the Tribunal did not consider the question of whether if the facts established a
basis for conviction of plagiarism, the rule against multiple convictions would preclude a
conviction for both unauthorized assistance and plagiarism.
Issues on Appeal
18.

The issues therefore raised by the appeal are:
a. whether the Tribunal erred in concluding that plagiarism under Section B(i)l(d)
of the Code requires an element of theft; and

-7-

b. whether the rule against multiple convictions applies so as to prevent a conviction
of plagiarism in respect of the same acts giving rise to a conviction for
unauthorized assistance.

a. Whether Plagiarism under Section B(i)l(d) of the Code requires an element of theft
The offence of plagiarism is defined in s. B .1.1(d) of the Code noted above at paragraph

19.

12. In the plain and ordinary meaning of the language used and incorporating the Code's
definition of "knowingly" the offence is established if the Student knew or ought reasonably to
have known that she was representing as her own, an idea or expression of an idea or work of
another person.
20.

In this case, the Student submitted the ideas, expression of ideas and work of another

person without attribution or any other indication that they were his. She represented those as
her own. In the circumstances, the Student knew or ought reasonably to have known that she
was doing so.
21.

We conclude that the University has established the offence of plagiarism.

22.

We disagree that the University is required to establish, in addition, that the Student was

using the ideas or words of another without that person's permission, or in other words that there
was an element of theft. We come to this conclusion for several reasons:
•

There is no element of theft contained in the section of the Code that defines the offence
of plagiarism, section B.l. l(d). The Tribunal's decision to import or read in an element
of theft is inconsistent with the clear and unambiguous language of s.B.l. l(d). The word
"purloining", on which the Tribunal's interpretation turned, does not define the
plagiarism offence. It is found in Appendix A which contains "a more detailed account

-8-

of plagiarism" and there is nothing to suggest that this is intended to derogate or
otherwise modify the offence defined in s. B .I.1 (d) of the Code. Indeed, when read in
context1, we interpret "purloining" as referring to the taking of another's ideas or words
without proper attribution, as the balance of the sentence indeed makes clear.
•

We also agree with the University that it is appropriate to read the word "purloining" in
the context of the Code as a whole. As the Code indicates in multiple places, including in
the preamble, it is concerned with "the integrity of the teaching and learning relationship,
openness, honesty and courtesy before any private interests" and "to ensure that academic
achievement is not obscured or undermined by cheating or misrepresentation, that the
evaluation process meets the highest standards of fairness and honesty and that
malevolent or even mischievous disruption is not allowed to threaten the educational
process". Viewed in the light of the Code's expressed objectives, the plagiarism offence
is not designed to protect the private interests of third parties, including authors, from the
unauthorized copying of their works, but rather to ensure that a student is prohibited from
obtaining academic credit for someone else's work.

•

The Tribunal's interpretation of the plagiarism offence is completely unworkable (and
undesirable) in the academic setting. If the element of theft (or a lack of consent by the
author) is required to make out the offence of plagiarism, then the University would be
required in every case to prove that the author did not consent to the student's use of his
or her idea, expression or work. The University cannot be expected to call the author of
any article, textbook, internet page or otherwise that the student has copied without

1 Appendix A reads: "The present sense of plagiarism is contained in the original (1621) meaning in English: "the
wrongful appropriation and purloining, and publication as one's own. of the ideas, or the expressions of the ideas ...
of another."

-9-

appropriate attribution to testify to the lack of consent. Nor is it appropriate that a student
could successfully defend a charge of plagiarism by leading evidence that the author of
an unattributed work expressly or impliedly consented to her use of the work. The
consent, for example of a paid author, would not be an appropriate answer to a charge of
plagiarism. It is precisely because of this fact that many of the examples of plagiarism
convictions under the Code occur when students have paid consenting third parties to
create the work on their behalf.
In the result, we conclude that it is not an element of the offence of plagiarism that the
misrepresentation of work of another person as the student's own be shown to be done without
the consent of that other person. On the facts of that case, the offence of plagiarism was made
out.

b. Whether the Rule against Multiple Convictions prevents a conviction of Plagiarism in
respect of the same acts giving rise to a conviction for Unauthorized Assistance
23.

This then leads to an issue which the Tribunal, given its findings, did not address, and

that is whether the rule against multiple convictions prevents a conviction for plagiarism in
respect of the same acts giving rise to a conviction for unauthorized assistance. For the reasons
that follow, we conclude that it does.
24.

It does not appear that this issue has been previously addressed in decisions of the

University Tribunal at either level.
25.

The Tribunal appears to have misinterpreted the University's statement as to whether

there have been previous cases of conviction for both unauthorized assistance and plagiarism for
the same acts. The University referred to three cases in which a student was convicted of
plagiarism and unauthorized assistance: University of Toronto v.

511-•~ (Case 601),

- 10 -

University of Toronto v. J9~ ~ (Case 602), and University ofv. . - ~ (Case
539). 2 However, each of these cases was decided on the basis of an agreed statement of fact, an

agreement as to which charges would proceed and which would be withdrawn, and a guilty plea.
Before the Tribunal and before the University conceded that there was no argument or
consideration of whether it was appropriate to enter convictions for both prevented plagiarism
and unauthorized assistance on the facts of those cases.
26.

The University also noted the case of the University of Toronto v. , , . LJ3( Case 410 ), in

which the Tribunal dismissed multiple charges in respect of the same act, and entered a
conviction in respect of one count only relating to each event of misconduct on the basis that the
other charges were duplicative. 4 In effect, the Tribunal appears to have invoked the principle
underlining the rule against multiple convictions without expressly considering the rule.
27.

The rule against multiple convictions has developed in the criminal context, and been

well established as a matter of Canadian law since at least the decision in Kienapple v. The

Queen, [1975] 1 S.C.R. 729. The essence of the rule is that "Canadian courts have long been
concerned to see that multiple convictions are not without good reason heaped on an accused in
respect of a single criminal delict." 5 The principle is equally applicable in the case of noncriminal convictions, such as those in issue here.
28.

The rule against multiple convictions is applicable where there is a relationship of

sufficient proximity between (1) the facts and (2) the offences which form the basis of the two or
more charges.

2

Decided on March 8, 2011, May 6, 2011 and August 11, 2009, respectively.

3 August 20, 2007

4 ■, supra, at para. 27
5 R.

v. Prince, [1986] 2 S.C.R. 480

- 11 -

29.

The requirement for a factual nexus essentially asks whether the charges are both

grounded in the same transaction or act. Here, the charges of plagiarism and unauthorized
assistance clearly arise from the same act. The first charge of plagiarism and unauthorized
assistance relates to the submission of a partial essay draft on March 4, 2013, and the second
charge of plagiarism and unauthorized assistance relates to the submission of a final essay on
March 19, 2013.
30.

The requirement for a sufficient proximity between the offences which form the basis of

the charge is that if there are no "additional or distinguishing elements going to guilt in the
second offence for which conviction is sought which are not present in the first offence".
31.

In this case, the offence for which the Student has already been convicted occurred when

the Student used or possessed an unauthorized aid or aids or obtains unauthorized assistance in
the writing of the partial essay and the final essay. The offence of plagiarism occurred when the
Student represented as her own any idea or expression of an idea or work of another in the partial
essay and the final essay.
32.

Rather than creating any additional or distinguishing elements to the offence of

unauthorized assistance, the offence of plagiarism on the facts of this case is in effect a particular
method of obtaining unauthorized assistance. The assistance which forms the foundation for the
Student's guilt under the offence of unauthorized assistance is the use of the work of another -- a
partial essay in one case and a final essay in the second. The reason that the assistance is
unauthorized under the Code is that work was represented as the work of the Student. In effect
the plagiarism for which the University seeks the conviction of the Student is no more than a
specification of the means by which the Student employed unauthorized assistance. It does not
add any distinguishing or additional element to the offence of unauthorized assistance.

- 12 33.

While not determinative, we note that the University's decision here and below not to

seek any additional penalty in respect of the plagiarism offences reinforces the conclusion that
they do not add anything additional to the elements of the unauthorized assistance offences.
34.

In the circumstances, we are of the view that on the facts of this case, there is sufficient

nexus between the offences and the facts on which they are based to engage the rule against
multiple convictions.
35.

In the result, we conclude that the Tribunal erred in concluding that the evidence did not

establish an offence of plagiarism, but that the rule against multiple convictions prevents a
conviction for both the unauthorized assistance offences and the plagiarism offences.
36.

We accordingly dismiss the appeal.

,r

February

j , 2016.
Jenna Jacobson, Student Panel Member

Beth Martin, Student Panel Member

Professor Elizabeth Peter, Faculty Panel Member

- 12 33.

While not determinative, we note that the University's decision here and below not to

seek any additional penalty in respect of the plagiarism offences reinforces the conclusion that
they do not add anything additional to the elements of the unauthorized assistance offences.
34.

In the circumstances, we are of the view that on the facts of this case, there is sufficient

nexus between the offences and the facts on which they are based to engage the rule against
multiple convictions.
35.

In the result, we conclude that the Tribunal erred in concluding that the evidence did not

establish an offence of plagiarism, but that the rule against multiple convictions prevents a
conviction for both the unauthorized assistance offences and the plagiarism offences.
36.

We accordingly dismiss the appeal.

February 3

, 2016.
Patricia D.S. Jackson, Chair

r
Jenna Jacobson, Student Panel Member

Beth Martin, Student Panel Member

Professor Elizabeth Peter, Faculty Panel Member

- 12 33.

While not determinative, we note that the University' s decision here and below not to

seek any additional penalty in respect of the plagiarism offences reinforces the conclusion that
they do not add anything additional to the elements of the unauthorized assistance offences.
34.

In the circumstances, we are of the view that on the facts of this case, there is sufficient

nexus between the offences and the facts on which they are based to engage the rule against
multiple convictions.
35.

In the result, we conclude that the Tribunal erred in concluding that the evidence did not

establish an offence of plagiarism, but that the rule against multiple convictions prevents a
conviction for both the unauthorized assistance offences and the plagiarism offences.
36.

We accordingly dismiss the appeal.

February

, 2016.
Patricia D.S. Jackson, Chair

Jenna Jacobson, Student Panel Member

Beth Martin, Student Panel Member

Professor Elizabeth Peter, Faculty Panel Member

- 12 33.

While not determinative, we note that the University's decision here and below not to

seek any additional penalty in respect of the plagiarism offences reinforces the conclusion that
they do not add anything additional to the elements of the unauthorized assistance offences.
34.

In the circumstances, we are of the view that on the facts of this case, there is sufficient

nexus between the offences and the facts on which they are based to engage the rule against
multiple convictions.
3 5.

In the result, we conclude that the Tribunal erred in concluding that the evidence did not

establish an offence of plagiarism, but that the rule against multiple convictions prevents a
conviction for both the unauthorized assistance offences and the plagiarism offences.
36.

We accordingly dismiss the appeal.

February

, 2016.
Patricia D.S. Jackson, Chair

Jenna Jacobson, Student Panel Member

Beth Martin, Student Panel Member

Professor Elizabeth Peter, Faculty Panel Member

