Case No.: 1179

THE UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
IN THE MATTER OF charges of academic dishonesty made on February 8, 2021
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic
Matters, 1995,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Act, 1971, S.O. 1971, c. 56 as
amended S.O. 1978, c. 88

BETWEEN:
UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO

- and -

H

W

REASONS FOR DECISION

Hearing Date: December 16, 2021, via Zoom
Members of the Panel:
Ms. Harriet Lewis, Chair
Dr. Pascal van Lieshout, Faculty Panel Member
Ms. Amal Shah, Student Panel Member
Appearances:
Ms. Tina Lie, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg Rothstein LLP
Hearing Secretary:
Ms. Carmelle Salomon-Labbé, Associate Director, Office of Appeals, Discipline and
Faculty Grievances
Not in Attendance:
Mr. H
W

2

1.

This panel of the University Tribunal held a hearing on December 16, 2021, to

consider the charges brought by the University of Toronto (the “University”) against Mr.
H

(the “Student”) under the Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters, 1995

W

(the “Code”).
A.

Preliminary Issue: Proceeding in the Absence of the Student

2.

The hearing was scheduled to begin at 9:45 a.m. on Thursday, December 16,

2021, by videoconference. At that time, Assistant Discipline Counsel advised that neither
the Student nor a representative of the Student had responded to the Notice of Electronic
Hearing.
3.

The onus of proof is on the University to demonstrate that it provided a student

with reasonable notice of the hearing.
4.

The Tribunal had before it affidavit materials prepared by Assistant Discipline

Counsel setting out the following attempts, which had been made to provide notice of the
charges and hearing to the Student:
i.

On February 8, 2021, the Office of the Vice-Provost, Faculty and
Academic Life served the charges on the Student by email to the
utoronto email address that the Student had provided in the
University of Toronto Repository of Student Information (“ROSI”).

ii.

On February 9, 2021, the Office of Appeals, Discipline and Faculty
Grievances, University of Toronto served the Student with a letter
regarding the charges filed against him, together with copies of the
charges, the Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters, the Rules of
Practice and Procedure (the “Rules"), and a pamphlet for Downtown
Legal Services. These were sent by email to his utoronto email
account. The Office did not receive a “bounce back” message from

3

the Student’s email account indicating that the email could not be
delivered.

iii.

On December 16, 2021, the Office of Appeals, Discipline and Faculty
Grievances, University of Toronto, sent additional correspondence
by email (including another copy of the charges, the other noted
material and a Notice of videoconference via the Zoom platform) and
advised the Student that if he wished to proceed in person he could
still request an oral hearing under the Rules by notifying the Office of
Appeals Discipline and Faculty Grievances at least one week before
the hearing date.

iv.

Assistant Discipline Counsel and others in her office also made
efforts to contact the Student by email through his ROSI account on
October 12 and 20, and on December 7, 2021. Attached to the email
sent on December 7, 2021, were copies of the affidavit materials on
which the University intended to rely at the hearing.

v.

In addition, a legal assistant to Assistant Discipline Counsel made 2
attempts to contact the Student by telephone. The first of those
attempts, made on December 9, 2021, was to a number which had
been provided to the University by the Student but which, when
called, was found to be “not assigned”. The second attempt, made
on December 14, 2021 to an “international phone number” provided
by the Student but believed to have expired, reached a voicemail box
containing information which identified it as belonging to the Student.
The legal assistant left a detailed message advising of the date and
time of the upcoming hearing, and asking for the Student to “check
his U of T email account for some important emails” and to make a
return call to Assistant Discipline Counsel at a number provided,
before the hearing date.

4

5.

As of the date of the December hearing date, the Student had not responded to

any of the above-noted correspondence or telephoned the Assistant Discipline Counsel
at the provided number.
6.

Pursuant to section 17 of the Rules, where “notice of an oral hearing, electronic

hearing or written hearing has been given to a person in accordance with this rule, and
the person does not attend at or does not participate in the hearing, the panel may
proceed in the absence of the person or without the person’s participation and the person
is not entitled to any further notice in the proceeding.”
7.

The University requested that the Tribunal proceed with this hearing in the absence

of the Student.
8.

Pursuant to rule 9, a notice of hearing may be served on a student by various

means, including by sending a copy of the document by courier to the student’s mailing
address in ROSI or by emailing a copy of the document to the student’s email address in
ROSI.
9.

The University’s Policy on Official Correspondence with Students expressly states

that students are responsible for maintaining a current and valid postal address and email
account on ROSI. Students are expected to monitor and retrieve all mail, including emails,
on a frequent and consistent basis.
10.

Based on totality of the attempts made to provide notice to the Student, the

Tribunal concluded that the Student was given reasonable notice of the hearing in
compliance with the notice requirements of the Act and the Rules.
11.

The Tribunal therefore determined it would proceed to hear the case on its merits

in the absence of the Student, and the hearing proceeded on the basis that the Student
was deemed to deny the Charge made against him.

5

B.

The Charges and Particulars

12.

The Charges and Particulars were detailed in a letter to the Student dated

February 8, 2021, and are set out verbatim below:
i.

On approximately March 26, 2020, you knowingly used or possessed an
unauthorized aid or aids, or obtained unauthorized assistance in Test Four in
PHL245H1: Modern Symbolic Logic (the “Course”), contrary to section B.I.1(b) of
the Code.

ii.

On approximately March 26, 2020, you knowingly engaged in a form of cheating,
academic honesty or misconduct, fraud or misrepresentation not otherwise
described in the Code in order to obtain academic credit or other academic
advantage of any kind, contrary to section B.I.3(b) of the Code, in connection with
your Test Four in the Course.
Particulars
(a) At all material times you were a registered student at the University of
Toronto in the Faculty of Arts & Science.
(b) In the Winter 2020 academic term you were enrolled in the Course.
(c) Students in the course were required to write a test that was worth 20% of
the final mark in the Course (“Test Four”).
(d) You wrote Test Four remotely, using Canvas software, due to restrictions
imposed by the COVID-19 pandemic.
(e) You were required to write Test Four independently without the use of any
aids or assistance.
(f) You did not write Test Four independently. Instead, you knowingly obtained
unauthorized assistance, and/or used an unauthorized aid, in the course of
providing your answers to Test Four.

6

(g) In particular, you did not answer the questions asked of you at questions 6,
7, and 9 of Test Four. Instead, you provided answers to questions asked in
an alternate version of Test Four, which you did not write.
(h) You knowingly obtained and/or provided unauthorized assistance in
connection with Test Four in the Course.
(i) You knowingly committed a form of cheating, academic dishonestly, or
misconduct for the purposes of obtaining academic credit and/or other
academic advantage.

C.

The Evidence

13.

Evidence on behalf of the University was given by Elizabeth Cowper, Professor

Emeritus in the Department of Linguistics at the University who appeared as the Dean’s
Designate for Academic Integrity with Student Academic Integrity (“SAI”), Faculty of Arts
and Science at the University. In addition to her December 7, 2021 affidavit attesting to
her contact with the Student and other facts, Professor Cowper referred to an affidavit of
Professor Alex Koo, dated December 6, 2021, and filed as Exhibit 3 in this proceeding,
and to her further affidavit of December 7, 2021 addressing sanction.
14.

Professor Cowper confirmed that in May 2020, SAI received allegations from

Professor Koo that a number of students, including the Student, had committed academic
misconduct on the fourth test (“Test 4”) in his course PHL245H1S, Modern Symbolic
Logic, (the “Course”). Test 4 was held online through Quercus, an online testing platform,
on March 26, 2020.
15.

SAI notified the Student of the allegations against him in August 2020. Following

that notification, the Student indicated to SAI that he would like to meet with SAI to discuss
the allegations. He met with Professor Cowper for that purpose on December 9, 2020 by
Zoom videoconference. Also present on that occasion was Uji Umenyi, an Academic
Integrity Specialist with SAI who took notes.

7

16.

As noted in the Charges, the basis for the allegation against the Student arose

from his answers to Questions 6, 7 and 9 of Test 4 in the Course. As explained in his
affidavit, Professor Koo had created two versions of each numbered question on Test 4.
Students had not been informed that there were two versions of Test 4. They were
required to complete Test 4 independently and were advised in writing that they were not
permitted to collaborate with one another on tests. The students were given 60 minutes
to complete Test 4 within a 90-minute window. The Student completed Test 4 in 29
minutes.
17.

When marking the Student’s test, Professor Koo discovered that the Student’s

answers to questions 6, 7 and 9 did not correspond with the version of the questions he
had been given. Rather, his answers to those three questions responded to questions 6,
7 and 9 on the alternate version of Test 4.
18.

Attached to Professor Koo’s affidavit was the answer key to both versions of Test

4 and a copy of the Student’s test. Question 1 of the test was an affirmation by the
Student that in submitting the test, he did not act in such a way that “would constitute
cheating, misrepresentation, or unfairness, including but not limited to, using
unauthorized aids and assistance ...” Professor Koo’s affidavit noted that the syllabus for
the course contained a section on academic integrity which advised students of potential
academic offences including “on tests and exams: Using or possessing any unauthorized
aid, including a cell phone. Looking at someone else’s answers.”
19.

The Student’s answers to the three noted questions showed the following:
i.

Question 6 on the Student’s test used the characters “A” and “F”.
However, the Student used a “C” where there should have been an
“A”, and an “A” where there should have been an “F”. The characters
he used were those appropriate for question 6 on the alternate
version of the question.

8

ii.

Question 7 on the Student’s test used characters “D” and “J”, but the
Student’s answer used a “C” where there should have been a “D”
and a “K” where there should have been a “J”. Again, the Student
used the letters that were assigned on the alternate version of Test
4, not those appropriate to his version.

iii.

Question 9 on the Student’s version of Test 4 used the words
“Dennis” and “leg”. The alternate version of Test 4 used “wrist” and
“Dario”, which were the terms the Student included in his answer to
the question.

20.

In her December 2020 meeting with the Student, Professor Cowper referred him

to the specific differences between the two sets of questions, described the differences
and referred to his answers. Professor Cowper testified that the Student attempted to
offer explanations for each of these answers including that he had misread question 7
and that he had based his answer to question 9 on a practice exam. She did not find his
explanations convincing or satisfactory in light of the evidence provided in Professor
Koo’s affidavit. Neither do we.
D.

Decision of the Tribunal

21.

The onus is on the University to establish on the balance of probabilities, using

clear and convincing evidence, that the academic offences charged have been committed
by the Student.
22.

Assistant Discipline Counsel advised the Tribunal that were we to find the Student

guilty of Charge 1, they would withdraw Charge 2.
23.

Charge 1 refers to an offence under section B.I.1(b) of the Code, which reads:
“It shall be an offence for a student knowingly:

9

(b) to use or possess an unauthorized aid or aids or obtain unauthorized assistance in any
academic examination or term test or in connection with any other form of academic work”

After retiring to consider the evidence before us, the Tribunal determined that the
University had established that it was more likely than not that the Student received
unauthorized assistance during Test 4 from an individual or individuals who were writing
the alternate version of Test 4. While the method of obtaining the assistance remains
unknown, it is probable that he was in contact with one or more students by telephone or
by computer during the exam window. His explanations as noted above were not credible.
24.

The Tribunal therefore found that the Student is guilty of using an unauthorized aid

or aids during the test and/or obtaining unauthorized assistance to complete the test,
contrary to section B.I.1(b) of the Code.
E.

Penalty / Sanction

25.

After advising Assistant Discipline Counsel of our finding on the merits, the matter

continued with a hearing on the appropriate sanction.
26.

The University requested that the Tribunal order that the Student be awarded a

grade of zero in the course, that he be suspended for three years, and that there be a
notation on his transcript for four years. The University also requested that this case be
reported to the Provost for publication of a notice of the decision of the Tribunal and the
sanction imposed, with the Student’s name withheld.
27.

The Student’s academic record in the form of a transcript provided to the Panel by

Assistant Discipline Counsel indicated that at the time of the hearing of this matter, the
Student was under a one-year academic suspension, beginning in December 2021.
28.

Attached to a second affidavit of Professor Cowper dated December 7, 2021, was

a Discipline Case Report for the Student noting that in April 2019 he had admitted to an

10

offence of using unauthorized assistance on “clicker quizzes” in course AST201H1, worth
8% of the marks in the course. In that instance the department chair imposed a sanction
on the Student of a grade of zero on the clicker quizzes.
29.

Assistant Discipline Counsel for the University referred the Tribunal to a Summary

of Cases in the Book of Authorities, included in her materials on sanction. This summary
showed a listing of penalties imposed by the University Tribunal in other cases where
students were found to have used unauthorized aids in an exam and where they had
previous offences.
30.

We were asked to consider the factors for determining an appropriate sanction as

set out in what is considered the leading case: University of Toronto v. Mr. C. (Case
#1976/77-3, November 1976). These are: the character of the person charged, the
likelihood of a repetition of an offence, the nature of the offence, any extenuating
circumstances surrounding the commission of the offence, the detriment to the University
occasioned by the offence and the need to deter others from committing a similar offence.
31.

We noted that the Student had previously pleaded guilty to the same offence,

indicating he had not learned from that experience. He chose not to plead guilty in this
case, and provided unbelievable explanations for his behaviour which we found to be
dishonest. He did not appear at his hearing despite evidence that he was notified of it
taking place and had been notified of his right to seek assistance in putting forward any
case on the merits, or arguments on penalty to address any extenuating circumstances
which might affect our decision. In his absence and on the facts as we know them, we
had no basis on which to consider a lesser penalty than that requested by the University
and previously imposed in similar circumstances.
32.

The Mr. C case and those which follow it each note the importance of the

University as an educational institution and a degree-granting body, and emphasize that
members of the public must be able to rely on the academic integrity of the University’s
evaluation processes. Using unauthorized aids is cheating and allowing cheating to go

11

unsanctioned is unfair to the other students who abide by and follow the rules and
regulations. If not sanctioned, cheating undermines the value of all of the University’s
degrees.
33.

The Tribunal deliberated and concluded that, under the circumstances, we concur

with and accept the University’s recommendation on sanctions.
F.

Conclusion

34.

The Tribunal has found that the Student is guilty of the academic offence of using

an unauthorized aid or aids or obtaining unauthorized assistance in Test 4 in PHL245H1
contrary to section B.I.1(b) of the Code;
35.

The Tribunal ordered that the following sanctions be imposed on the Student:
i.

The Student be given a grade of zero in Course PHL245H1 in Winter 2020;
and

ii.

The Student be suspended from the University of Toronto for a period of 3
years from the date of the Tribunal’s order; and
A notation of the penalty be placed on the Student’s transcript for a period

iii.

of 4 years from the date of the Tribunal’s order.
36.

The Tribunal also ordered that this case be reported to the Provost for publication

of a notice of this decision and the sanctions imposed, with the name of the Student
withheld.
Dated at Toronto this 7th day of March 2022

12

Original signed by:

