Case 1179

   DATE:

   March 7, 2022

   PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v. H.W. ("the Student")

   HEARING DATE:

   December 16, 2021, via Zoom

   PANEL MEMBERS:

   Ms. Harriet Lewis, Chair
   Dr. Pascal van Lieshout, Faculty Panel Member
   Ms. Amal Shah, Student Panel Member

   APPEARANCES:

   Ms. Tina Lie, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg
   Rothstein LLP

   NOT IN ATTENDANCE:

   The Student

   HEARING SECRETARY:

   Ms. Carmelle Salomon-Labbe, Associate Director, Office of Appeals,
   Discipline and Faculty Grievances

   The‚ØStudent‚Øwas charged under ss. B.i.1(b) and B.i.3(b)‚Øof the‚ØCode
   of Behaviour on Academic Matters, 1995‚Ø(the ‚Code‚) on the basis that
   he knowingly used or possessed an unauthorized aid or aids, or obtained
   unauthorized assistance in a test and, he knowingly engaged in a form
   of cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or
   misrepresentation in order to‚Øobtain academic credit or other academic
   advantage‚Øin connection with a test.

   Assistant Discipline Counsel (‚Counsel‚) advised the Panel that the
   Student, nor a legal representative for the Student had responded to
   the Notice of Electronic Hearing. Counsel requested that the Panel
   proceed with the hearing in the absence of the Student. The Panel noted
   that the charges were served via email to the Student at his University
   of Toronto email address as outlined in the University of Toronto
   Repository of Student Information (‚ROSI‚). Counsel provided evidence
   that the Notice of Electronic Hearing was served at the Student‚s email
   address as outlined in ROSI and that her assistant attempted to contact
   the Student via the telephone numbers the Student provided on two
   occasions. On the first occasion, the operator outlined that the number
   was ‚not assigned.‚ On the second occasion, the assistant attempted to
   call a second phone number provided by the Student at which time she
   received a voicemail box which contained information which identified
   the Student; the assistant left a detailed message advising of the
   upcoming hearing date and asked the Student to check his University of
   Toronto email address. Both the notice and the calls went unanswered.
   The Student nor a legal representative for the Student appeared at the
   hearing. The Panel noted that pursuant to rule 17 of the University‚s
   Tribunal‚s Rules of Practice and Procedure, if a notice of hearing has
   been given in accordance with the Rules, and that party does not attend
   or participate in the hearing, the Tribunal may proceed in the absence
   of that party. Furthermore, pursuant to rule 9, a notice of hearing may
   be served on a student by various means, including sending a copy of
   the document via email to the Student‚s email address in ROSI. The
   University‚s‚ØPolicy on Official Correspondence with Students‚Øprovides
   that students are responsible for maintaining a current and valid
   postal address and email account in ROSI. Students are expected to
   monitor and retrieve all mail, including emails, on a frequent and
   consistent basis. Based on the totality of the evidence on notice, the
   Panel concluded that the Student was given reasonable notice of the
   hearing in accordance with the notice requirements. The Panel proceeded
   to hear the case on its merits in the absence of the Student, and the
   hearing proceeded on the basis that the Student denied the charges made
   against him.

   Regarding the charges under ss. B.i.1(b) and B.i.3(b) of the Code, the
   Panel received affidavit evidence of the Dean‚s Designate for Academic
   Integrity in the Faculty of Arts and Science. In additional to her
   affidavit, the Dean‚s Designate referred to an affidavit of the
   Professor who taught the course for which the test in question was
   submitted. The Panel noted that the Professor‚s affidavit outlined that
   there were two versions of the test and the Student‚s answers to three
   questions corresponded with the answers of the alternate version of the
   test and not the version he received. The Dean‚s Designate testified
   that at her meeting the Student, he attempted to offer explanations for
   each of the answers. The Dean‚s Designate did not find the explanations
   convincing or satisfactory in light of the evidence provided by the
   Professor. Upon review of the evidence, the Panel determined that the
   University had established that it was more likely than not that the
   Student received unauthorized assistance during the test from an
   individual or individuals who were writing the alternate version of the
   test. Therefore, the Panel found the Student guilty of using an
   unauthorized aid or aids during the test and/or obtaining unauthorized
   assistance to complete the test, contrary to s. B.i.1(b) of the Code.
   The University withdrew the second charge under s. B.i.3(b) of the
   Code.

   In determining sanction,‚Øthe‚ØPanel considered the factors for
   determining an appropriate sanction as outlined in the University of
   Toronto v. Mr. C (Case No. 1976/77-3, November 5, 1976). In considering
   the current offence, the Panel noted that the Student‚s previous
   admission of guilt to the same offence was an indication that he had
   not learned from the previous offence. The Panel further noted that the
   Student chose not to plead guilty in this case, and provided
   unbelievable explanations for his behaviour which the Panel found to be
   dishonest. Furthermore, the Student did not appear at the hearing
   despite being notified of the hearing date. The Panel noted that in the
   Student‚s absence and on the facts before it, there was no basis on
   which to consider a lesser penalty than that requested by Counsel and
   previously imposed in similar circumstances. The Panel outlined that
   using unauthorized aids is cheating and allowing cheating to go
   unsanctioned is unfair to students who abide by and follow the rules
   and regulations. Furthermore, if not sanctioned, cheating undermines
   the value of the University of Toronto‚s degrees. The Panel imposed the
   following sanctions: final grade of zero in the course; three-year
   suspension; four-year notation on transcript; and a report to the
   Provost for publication.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/30323
