Case No.: 1025
THE UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
IN THE MATTER OF charges of academic dishonesty filed on July 5, 2019
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters, 1995,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Act, 1971, S.O. 1971, c. 56 as am. S.O. 1978, c. 88

B E T W E E N:
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
- and E

C

(the “Student”)

Reasons for Decision
Hearing Dates, via Zoom:
August 19, 2020, October 19, 2020, October 26, 2020, and November 9, 2020
Members of the Panel:
Ms. Cheryl Woodin, Chair
Professor Ernest Lam, Faculty Panel Member
Mr. Sean McGowan, Student Panel Member
Appearances:
Ms. Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg Rothstein LLP
Mr. Eunwoo Lee, Downtown Legal Services, for the Student
In Attendance:
The Student
Hearing Secretary:
Mr. Christopher Lang, Director, Office of Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances
Ms. Krista Kennedy, Administrative Clerk & Hearing Secretary, Office of Appeals,
Discipline and Faculty Grievances

2
Introduction
1.

The Trial Division of the University Tribunal was convened beginning on
August 19, 2020, to consider charges brought by the University of Toronto
Scarborough (the “University") against the Student under the University of Toronto
Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters, 1995 (the “Code").

2.

The Student attended and was represented by Mr. Eunwoo Lee of Downtown
Legal Services.

3.

The Panel heard evidence and argument relating to the issue of liability in respect
of the charges only by Zoom format over four days concluding on
November 9, 2020. No exclusion order was sought as witnesses were admitted
to the hearing only as they were called to give evidence. The Student was present
throughout the hearing.

4.

The Panel reserved its decision on liability. For the reasons that follow, the Panel
was unable to conclude that any academic offence had been committed by the
Student.

The Charges and Particulars
5.

The Charges and Particulars alleged against the Student, as described by the
University, are as follows:

Charges
6.

On or about November 22, 2018, the Student knowingly used or possessed an
unauthorized aid or obtained unauthorized assistance in connection with a midterm test in POLB50Y3 contrary to section B.I.1(b) of the Code.

7.

In addition or in the alternative, on or about November 22, 2018, the Student
knowingly engaged in a form of cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct,
fraud or misrepresentation not otherwise described in the Code in order to obtain
academic credit or other academic advantage of any kind, contrary to section
B.I.3(b) of the Code, in connection with a mid-term test in POLB50Y3.

3
Particulars:
8.

At all material times, the Student was a registered student at the University of
Toronto Scarborough.

9.

In Fall 2018 the Student enrolled in POLB50Y3. As part of the requirements of
POLB50Y3, the Student was required to and did write a mid-term test on
November 22, 2018, which was worth 12.5% of the final grade.

10.

Students in POLB50Y3 were expected to write the mid-term test on
November 22, 2018 independently, without aids and without assistance from
other students.

11.

During the mid-term test the Student attempted to look at the paper of another
student in the course, Mr. K*, and the Student copied or attempted to copy
answers from Mr. K's test paper onto the Student's own, without authorization.

12.

In doing so the Student used or possessed an unauthorized aid or obtained
unauthorized assistance, or attempted to do so.

The Evidence Related to the Charges
13.

The University called a number of witnesses including:
a. Professor Christopher Cochrane, who taught the Canadian government and
politics class in which the incident occurred;
b. Mr. Chris Greenaway, who invigilated the mid-term test;
c. Mr. K, who was friends with the Student and from whom it is alleged that the
Student obtained assistance without authorization; and
d. Professor Trevor Campbell, a statistics professor who was retained to provide
independent expert evidence regarding the test results.

14.

The Student testified on his own behalf.
*The full name of this Student can be found in the Charges, however, within these reasons, he is referred to as Mr. K.

4
The Students:
15.

The Student was enrolled in POLB50Y3 at the time of the incident giving rise to
these charges. He was a high performing student. Professor Cochrane was
familiar with both the Student and Mr. K. He described both of them as excellent
students. He judged this by their questions and level of engagement. The
Student received 96% on the test preceding this one. He went on to continue to
perform well in the remaining four tests.

16.

The Student and Mr. K were acquaintances who were in a number of classes
together and who had studied at least to some degree together before this test.
They had a habit of sitting beside each other in this class.

The Test:
17.

The Student and Mr. K wrote an in-class mid-term test on November 22, 2018 in
a large theater-style room which was their usual classroom. It had fixed seating
in long somewhat curved rows. The test was worth 12.5% of their grade in the
course and was comprised of 50 multiple-choice questions. The students had
two hours to complete the test though, according to Professor Cochrane, most of
them completed it within an hour. Professor Cochrane was present throughout
the test along with one invigilator. A second was scheduled to attend but did not.
Both Professor Cochrane and the Invigilator Mr. Greenaway were responsible for
monitoring the class for cheating.

18.

The test could be written either on ExamSoft (electronically) or on paper using a
scantron card. If the test was written using a scantron card, then the student
would also have a test booklet. Both the Student and Mr. K wrote the test with a
test booklet and using a scantron card (though Mr. K had intended to write the
test electronically he had forgotten to download the software). Approximately 70
out of 180 students chose to write a paper test instead of an electronic one.

19.

The Student and Mr. K sat beside each other in what Professor Cochrane thought
was their "usual" seating area. It is unclear exactly how far apart they were from
each other. The Student testified that there was a meter or five feet between

5
them. There may have been a chair between them. Mr. K says there was not
and that they were a half meter apart, but the Student, the Invigilator and the
Professor say there was a chair between them.
20.

Professor Cochrane was present throughout the test.

At approximately 30

minutes into the test, the Invigilator raised a concern with Professor Cochrane
about the Student and Mr. K. Professor Cochrane then turned his attention to
watching the Student and Mr. K more carefully but did not separate them. He did
not see any suspicious or unusual behaviour. Professor Cochrane recalled that
approximately forty minutes into the test the Invigilator reported to him that he was
now convinced that the Student was "blatantly" looking.
21.

Professor Cochrane reported that he would have separated the students at that
point but that the Student was then passing in his test and left the room. Professor
Cochrane observed Mr. K continuing to review his test for another 15 minutes or
so.

22.

Professor Cochrane did not observe any of this behaviour directly. As a result of
the Invigilator's reports, Professor Cochrane separated the test results of the
Student and Mr. K.

23.

Professor Cochrane subsequently reviewed their tests and determined that their
test answers were identical for 49/50 questions. In respect of the only different
answer, the Student chose C while Mr. K chose D, but had originally written C on
his test script. D was the correct answer. Only 4 out of 178 students answered
C as the Student did and Mr. K had originally. In addition, the Student and Mr. K.
answered the same incorrect answers to six questions. Most of these, according
to Professor Cochrane, were not commonly chosen in the class as a whole, they
were in fact chosen by each of 27%, 10%, 14%, 14%, 9%, and 49% by the rest
of the class. Lastly, Professor Cochrane noted that Mr. K's test script showed that
he changed his answers to two questions and that the Student's scantron sheet
showed that he also changed his answers in the same way. Professor Cochrane
plotted the results of the test to illustrate the degree of similarity between all

6
possible students taking the test as a function of the average test grade between
those pairs, and concluded that the Student and Mr. K were outliers to the rest of
the class. He combined this observation with his knowledge that the Student and
Mr. K had been sitting together and the Invigilator's observations to conclude an
academic offence might have occurred.
The Observations of the Test Invigilator:
24.

The only evidence about whether the Student looked at Mr. K's test materials
comes from the Invigilator.

25.

The Invigilator gave evidence that he first became suspicious when he was
standing at the back of the room and saw both the Student and Mr. K making
active, animated and mutual head movements back and forth towards each other.
The animation of the students would increase when other students raised their
hands to have questions answered and Professor Cochrane was walking over to
help those students.

26.

The Invigilator's suspicion was increased further when he saw large block letters
on Mr. K's test booklet (which Mr. K explained as a method he used to make it
easier to review his answers before finalizing them). He first reported his concern
to Professor Cochrane at this point and was told to continue to observe the pair.
As he was doing so, he describes noticing that their eyes continued to be "very
active" and that he then saw the Student look at Mr. K's paper (which he
determined from the fact that the Student's eyes were towards the direction of
where the two students shared space), at which point he believes that the Student
noticed him observing his behaviour and then put up his hand to ask a
"nonsensical" or "commonsensical" question. He could not remember what the
question was.

27.

The Invigilator acknowledges that there was a chair between the two students and
that their own chairs were fixed to the floor so that they could not angle them
towards each other. He does not know where Mr. K's scantron paper was relative
to his table.

7
28.

When specifically pressed on what he observed in regards to the Student's
behaviour in relation to Mr. K, the Invigilator stated that it was "clear that his eyes
were moving in that direction" but he could not directly conclude that the Student
was cheating.

29.

Although the Invigilator described active head movements emanating from both
students, Mr. K denies ever looking at the Student's papers and denies ever
having seen the Student look at his papers.

Analysis of the Test Responses:
30.

Analysis of the test results as performed by Professor Cochrane has been
described above.

31.

The University also called expert evidence from Professor Trevor Campbell, an
assistant professor of statistics at the University of British Columbia. He was
retained to provide an independent expert opinion and was specifically tasked
with analyzing the multiple-choice responses of the students in the class to
identify any patterns or anomalies in the answers that were given.

32.

Professor Campbell concluded that there were two pairs of students within the
class of 179 who produced anomalous results. One of these pairs was the
Student and Mr. K. When Professor Campbell was not aware that these students
were sitting beside each other during the test, he determined that there was a
30% probability that similarities in their test results were not attributable to
misconduct. When Professor Campbell was then told that the students were in
fact sitting beside each other, he testified that he determined there was a more
than 90% probability that the results were due to misconduct. Dr. Campbell
candidly and correctly acknowledged that his analysis could not determine which
student within this pair might have been looking at whose test paper.

33.

Incidentally, Professor Campbell's model identified another pair of students
whose results were more anomalous than the Student and Mr. K's. There was no

8
report by the Invigilator regarding behaviour of this pair during the test itself. No
charges were laid in respect of this pair.
34.

The Student challenged the evidence of both Professor Cochrane and
Professor Campbell on the basis that: (1) neither accounted for the fact of the
students' prior academic abilities and that failure to do so overemphasizes the
significance of the similarity of their results; and (2) both fail to appropriately
acknowledge that the likelihood of an incorrect answer will always be low because
of how a multiple choice test works.

35.

The Student also challenged the University's reliance on the fact that the Student
changed two of his answers to conform to answers recorded by Mr. K. The
Student points out that there was also evidence of each of the students changing
answers that the other did not. Specifically, answers to questions 5, 19 and 31
were changed by the Student but not by Mr. K. Mr. K changed answers to
questions 14 and 25 but the Student did not. The Student submits that this is
evidence that they made changes independently of one another.

36.

The Student advanced other criticisms of the evidence regarding the likelihood of
similarities between the Student and Mr. K's test results, which included whether
it was appropriate to include Mr. K's results in the aggregate analysis against
which the results of the Student and Mr. K were measured, failure to consider the
impact of similar study habits, and the effect of incorrect but linked answers on
the assessment of statistical likelihood. Ultimately, however, the Panel did not
make findings on these points because neither Professor Cochrane nor Professor
Campbell could provide any evidence as to whether the similarity of test results
occurred because the Student was looking at Mr. K's test paper, and the only
other evidence on that point was not sufficient to allow us to reach that conclusion.

The Student's Interactions with the University and Others After the Test:
37.

There was significant attention devoted to evidence of social media
communications between the Student and Mr. K once they learned that the results
of their tests were being scrutinized by the University, with the objective of

9
establishing that the Student "admitted" he was guilty or at least that his
communications were consistent with that conclusion.
38.

In the Panel's view, none of the evidence could be used to establish that the
Student intended to copy Mr. K's answers.

Firstly, much of it was entirely

equivocal. Mr. K produced an extract from a "snapchat" communication in which
the Student is alleged to have stated "Like yea we glanced at each others papers,
but I probably would've scored 1 point higherrr [sic] if I didn't look at ur paper lol
Plus if I have to retake a test I can still get a 90+ easy". When Mr. K then states
that he did not look at the Student's test, the Student responds "that's what I mean
tho…like, we didn't cheat".
39.

Second, the communications between the Student and Mr. K occurred at least in
part because Mr. K was attempting to prove that it was the Student and not Mr. K
who had "cheated". Mr. K had been led by Professor Cochrane and the University
to believe that if he did not establish the Student's guilt he might be accused
instead. The circumstances of this dynamic, combined with the equivocal nature
of the communications they produced, render this evidence entirely unhelpful.

40.

We note that the Student gave evidence that the "snapchat" communication was
fabricated. The Tribunal makes no findings regarding whether the communication
occurred or not because, even if it did, it does not assist in establishing on a
balance of probabilities that the Student copied answers from Mr. K's test
materials.

Decision of the Tribunal on the Charges
41.

The University must establish on a balance of probabilities through clear and
convincing evidence that an academic offence has been committed by the
Student.

42.

The University fairly acknowledged that without evidence from the Invigilator
establishing that the Student was looking at Mr. K's test paper for the purpose of

10
copying or attempting to copy answers, the charges against the Student could not
be made out.
43.

The Invigilator did not see the Student looking directly at Mr. K's test materials.

44.

The University also fairly acknowledged that the Invigilator's evidence as to what
he observed about Mr. K's behaviour was not consistent with Mr. K's own
evidence.

45.

The Student emphasizes that the Invigilator first observed the Student and Mr. K
from behind and could not see their faces or eyes. The Invigilator described a
"mutual" back and forth between the two students when he first observed them.
Mr. K denies that he himself engaged in any suspicious head movements, though
he states he may have looked at a clock on either side of the room.

46.

The Student also emphasizes that the second observation as described by the
Invigilator is limited by the fact that the Invigilator is observing from the Student's
right side while Mr. K is on the student's left side, making it very difficult for the
Invigilator to determine what the Student was doing with his eyes.

47.

There is a conflict in the evidence between the Student and the Invigilator as to
the exchange between them. The Student testified that he raised his hand to ask
a question and looked up at the same time. The Invigilator says that the Student
looked up, made eye contact with the Invigilator, and then raised his hand. There
is also some dispute about the nature of the question asked by the Student at that
time. The Invigilator cannot remember what the question was. The Student gave
evidence that he asked about the difference between "cooperative" and
"collaborative" in the context of a question about federalism. While the Student
acknowledges that it may not have been a fair question to ask, it was not
"commonsensical" but rather consistent with a good faith effort to choose between
two possible answers for a student who had studied from the defined terms
available in the course textbook.

11
48.

On the evidence presented, it was not clear to the Panel that the charges were
made out on clear and convincing evidence. This is not a circumstance like, for
example, the one addressed in University of Toronto and S.R. (Case No. 708,
dated June 6, 2014), in which two students' tests were also exceedingly similar
but where one of the two students also admitted to providing and obtaining
assistance in order to complete the test and another student gave direct evidence
that she was asked by the student to provide assistance.

49.

The evidence available to this Panel is also distinguishable from what was
available to the Panel in University of Toronto and R.A. (Case No.: 738, dated
January 15, 2015), in which there was simply no other credible explanation for the
conduct of the student, all of which was observed directly by the Professor.

50.

Lastly, the evidence available to this Panel is distinguishable from the evidence
on which the student was found guilty of obtaining assistance from another
student in University of Toronto and Y.Y. (Case No.: 851 – Finding, dated October
19, 2016), in which there was uncontroverted evidence from two invigilators who
observed the student looking directly at another student's test paper.

51.

In the absence of clear and convincing evidence that the Student had attempted
to look at Mr. K's paper, evidence regarding the similarity of the Student and
Mr. K's test results, even if it is overwhelming, is insufficient to establish an
academic offence committed by the Student.

Dated at Toronto this 17th day of February, 2021

________________________________
Ms. Cheryl Woodin, Chair

