Case 1025

   DATE: February 17, 2021

   PARTIES: University of Toronto v. E.C. (the "Student")

   Hearing date : August 19, 2020,Â October 19, 2020, October 26, 2020 and
   November 9, 2020, via Zoom

   Panel Members:
   Ms. Cheryl Woodin, Chair
   Professor Ernest Lam, Faculty Panel Member
   Mr. Sean McGowan, Student Panel Member

   Appearances:
   Ms. Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg
   Rothstein LLP
   Mr. Eunwoo Lee, Downtown Legal Services, Representative for the Student
   The Student

   In Attendance:
   Mr. Christopher Lang, Director, Office of Appeals, Discipline and
   Faculty Grievances
   Ms. Krista Kennedy, Administrative Clerk & Hearing Secretary, Office of
   Appeal, Discipline and Faculty Grievances

   TheÂ StudentÂ was charged under s. B.i.1(b) of theâ¯Code of Behaviour
   on Academic Matters, 1995â¯(the âCodeâ) on the basis that he knowingly
   used or possessed an unauthorized aid, or aids, or obtained
   unauthorized assistance on a mid-termÂ test.Â In the alternative,
   theÂ StudentÂ was charged underÂ s.Â B.i.3(b)Â of theÂ CodeÂ on the
   basis that theÂ StudentÂ knowingly engaged in a form of cheating,
   academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or misrepresentationÂ in order
   toÂ obtain academic credit or other academic advantageÂ in connection
   withÂ a midterm test.Â The charges stem from allegations that
   theÂ StudentÂ copied, or attempted to copy, answers from another
   studentâs test paperÂ during a midterm test.

   Regarding the charge laid under s.Â B.i.1(b)Â of theÂ Code,
   theÂ PanelÂ heardÂ evidence ofÂ theÂ Invigilator,Â an expertÂ on
   statisticsÂ and analysis, the ProfessorÂ who taughtÂ the course for
   which theÂ midterm testÂ in question wasÂ completed, the other
   studentÂ whom it is alleged theÂ StudentÂ obtained assistance from
   without authorization, and theÂ Student, himself.

   The InvigilatorÂ testified thatÂ he became suspicious of the two
   students when he noticed that theyÂ were making animated and mutual
   head movements back and forth towards one another. He became further
   suspicious when he noticed that the other studentÂ had large block
   letters on his test booklet.Â However, the Invigilator confirmed that
   he could not directly conclude that theÂ StudentÂ was cheating.Â The
   Professor who taught the course for which the midterm test in question
   was completedÂ testified thatÂ he wasÂ present throughout the test and
   approximately thirty minutes into the test, the InvigilatorÂ raised a
   concern with the Professor about the two students.Â The Professor
   further testified that he did not observe any of
   theÂ StudentâsÂ behaviour directly, however, due to the concerns of the
   Invigilator the Professor subsequently reviewed their testsÂ and
   determined their test answers were identical.Â Based on the findings of
   the Professorâs review, the knowledge that the two students were
   sitting together during the test, and the observations of the
   Invigilator, the Professor concluded that an academic offence might
   have occurred.Â The UniversityÂ relied on an expert witness to
   provideÂ anÂ independent expert opinionÂ on his analysis of
   theÂ multiple-choiceÂ responses of the students in the class to
   identify any patterns or anomalies in the answers.Â TheÂ expert witness
   is a Professor at the University of British ColumbiaÂ (âExpertâ).
   TheÂ ExpertÂ provided evidence that there were two pairs of students
   within theÂ class that produced anomalous results. It was his evidence
   that based on the analysis of the answersÂ of the two students in
   question, there was a 30% probability that theÂ similaritiesÂ in their
   test results were not attributable to misconduct. However,
   onceÂ learning that the twoÂ studentsÂ were sitting beside one another,
   theÂ ExpertÂ testified thatÂ he determined there was a more than 90%
   probability that the results were due to
   misconduct.Â TheÂ ExpertÂ acknowledged that his analysis could not
   determine which student within the pair might have been looking at
   whose test paper.

   The Panel observed some conflict in the evidence between the Student
   and the Invigilator as to the exchange between them during the test.
   TheÂ StudentÂ testifiedÂ that he raised his hand to ask a question and
   looked up at the same time whereas the InvigilatorÂ states that
   theÂ StudentÂ looked up, made eye contact with the Invigilator and then
   raised his hand.Â TheÂ StudentÂ was also able to provide clear
   information pertaining to what question he asked the Invigilator and
   what relevance it had in determining the answer for the question.

   On the evidence presented, it was not clear to the Panel that the
   charges were made out on clear and convincing evidence.Â Therefore, in
   the absence of clear and convincing evidence that theÂ StudentÂ had
   attempted to look at the other studentâsÂ test paper,Â evidence
   regarding the similarity of the two studentsâ test resultsÂ is
   insufficient to establish that an academic offence was committed by
   theÂ Student.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/29663
