Report 384

DATE:

   June 23, 2016

PARTIES:

   Mr. A.P. (the Student) v. the Faculty of Arts and Science

Hearing Date(s):

   May 27, 2016

Committee Members:

   Professor Malcolm Thorburn, Chair
   Professor Avrum Gottlieb
   Mr. Faizan Akbani

Secretaries:

   Mr. Christopher Lang, Director,Â Appeals, Discipline and Faculty
   Grievances
   Ms. Krista Osbourne, Administrative Assistant, Appeals, Discipline and
   Faculty Grievances

Appearances:

For the Student Appellant:

   Mr. Alex Redinger, Downtown Legal Services
   Ms. Ejona Xega, Observer, Downtown Legal Services
   Ms. Melanie Warren, Social Work Student, Downtown Legal Services

For the Faculty of Arts and Science:

   Mr. Robert A. Centa, Counsel
   Professor Adrienne Hood, Associate Professor, Department of History and
   Acting Associate Dean, Undergraduate, Faculty of Arts and Science
   Ms. Shelley Cornack, Registrar, University College
   Mr. Michael Nicholson, Coordinator, Student Academic Progress, Office
   of the Assistant Vice President

   Appeal from the Academic Appeals Boardâs decision rejecting the
   Studentâs request for a second consideration of his earlier petition
   for an extension of time for filing an appeal of the decision of the
   Facultyâs Committee on Standing (CS), which had rejected the Studentâs
   petition requesting a re-write of his final examination in one course
   and late withdrawal without academic penalty from six other courses.

   The Student did not withdraw from the six courses at issue before the
   drop date, and he subsequently missed the deadline for withdrawal
   through the LWD process (the last day of classes). The CS denied the
   Studentâs petition for late withdrawal on its merits, stating that he
   did not present appropriate documentation nor compelling reasons why he
   could not withdraw in a timely manner. The CS also denied the Studentâs
   petition for a re-write of an examination in another course, noting
   that this was not an available remedy for the course. The Student
   indicated his intent to appeal this decision, but he did not do so
   within the 90-day deadline. Nine months after the CS decision, the
   Student filed a petition requesting additional time to file an appeal.
   This petition was denied because of the delay.

   The Student then filed a petition to the AAB for another consideration
   of his request for an extension to appeal the CSâs decision. The AAB
   denied the petition, stating that though the Student had provided
   evidence for a chronic health issue, the AAB did not find compelling
   evidence to support the Studentâs assertion that was unable to check
   his email around the time that the CS released the decision and that he
   was therefore only aware of the decision after the 90-day window had
   passed.

   The Student then appealed to the Academic Appeals Committee. At issue
   in the appeal was the Studentâs delays in filing his petitions. The
   Student did not deny that he was late; rather, he argued that his
   delays at each stage were reasonable given his particular health
   problems. The Committee took into account the fact that the Student
   withdrew from another course in determining that it was not reasonable
   for the Student not to withdraw from the six courses in a timely
   manner. Further, the Committee took into account the Studentâs
   correspondence with University administrators in determining that
   though his anxiety would make it more difficult for him to draft an
   appeal, it was still reasonable to expect him to send an email asking
   for an extension of time to file an appeal. The Committee concluded
   that the AAB was reasonable in its determination that the Studentâs
   anxiety and associated problems did not preclude him from checking his
   email or from filing an appeal in a timely manner, especially given the
   fact that the Student was aware of the fact that an important decision
   was to be released, that he had prior experience with these academic
   processes, and that students have an obligation to check their emails
   regularly. Appeal dismissed.
   [1]View Report

References

   1. file:///media/12630
