Case No.: 1406
THE UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
IN THE MATTER OF charges of academic dishonesty filed on August 30,2022,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters, 2019,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Act, 1971, S.O. 1971, c. 56 as am. S.O. 1978, c. 88

B E T W E E N:

THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
- and J

Z

REASONS FOR DECISION

Hearing Date: April 4, 2023, via Zoom

Members of the Panel:
Sana Halwani, Chair
Professor Joseph Clark, Faculty Panel Member
Jennifer Chen, Student Panel Member
Appearances:
Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg Rothstein LLP
Ryan Shah, Co-Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg Rothstein LLP
Hearing Secretary:
Nusaiba Khan, Quasi-Judicial Administrative Assistant, Office of Appeals, Discipline and Faculty
Grievances
Not in Attendance:
J
Z

I.

Charges and Procedural History
1. The Trial Division of the Tribunal held a hearing on April 4, 2023, to address the following
charges brought by the University of Toronto (the “University”) against J

Z

(the

“Student”) under the Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters, 2019 (the “Code”):
a. On or about March 22, 2021, you knowingly used or possessed an unauthorized
aid or aids or obtained unauthorized assistance in Quiz 3 in FSL105H5: Functional
French — Novice (the “French Course”), contrary to section B.I.1(b) of the Code.
b. On or about April 8, 2021, you knowingly submitted academic work containing a
purported statement of fact or reference to a source which has been concocted in
a term paper titled “Social Media Use and Social Isolation, Mental Problems, and
Self-esteem Among Young adults” (“Term Paper”) which you submitted in
CCT110: Rhetoric and Media (“CCT Course”), contrary to section B.I.1.(f) of the
Code.
c. In addition, and in the alternative to charges 1 and 2, you knowingly engaged in a
form of cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or misrepresentation
not otherwise described in the Code in order to obtain academic credit or other
academic advantage of any kind, contrary to section B.I.3(b) of the Code, in
connection with:
i. Quiz 3 in the French Course; and
ii. The Term Paper in the CCT Course.

II.

Notice
2. The Student was not in attendance at the hearing and, as a result, Assistant Discipline
Counsel addressed the issue of notice.
3. On review of the evidence, and on considering the Statutory Powers and Procedures Act,
R.S.O. 1990, c. S.22, rules 9(b), 13, 14 and 17 of the University Tribunal’s Rules of
Practice and Procedure, and the University’s Policy on Official Correspondence with
Students, the Panel was satisfied that notice had been adequately provided to the Student
and decided to proceed with the hearing despite her absence.

2

4. The evidence of notice included three affidavits as follows:
a. Affidavit of Lisa Devereaux, Director, Academic Success & Integrity at the
University of Toronto Mississauga (“UTM”), describing the attempts made to
schedule a Dean’s designate meeting (between July 2021 and August 2021), and
attaching the Student’s academic record, contact information, and Student Web
Services Activity Log;
b. Affidavit of Andrew Wagg, Manager, Incident Response at Information Security,
Information Technology Services at the University, providing evidence of the last
time someone accessed the email account

@mail.utoronto.ca (the

email address identified as the email address of the Student in their Repository of
Student Information (“ROSI”) record). The last time someone logged into this email
address was on March 2, 2022, after the emails sent by Ms. Devereaux; and
c. Affidavit of Natalia Botelho, a legal assistant at Paliare Roland Rosenberg
Rothstein LLP, providing evidence of all the efforts to contact the Student about
the charges and the hearing, prior to the hearing date including by email to the
Student’s utoronto account, by phone to the Student’s telephone number listed in
ROSI, and by courier to the Student’s address listed in ROSI.
5. As set out in rule 13 of the Rules of Practice and Procedure: “Charges, notices of hearing,
disclosure material for use on motions or hearings, orders, and reasons for decision may
be served on a student or sent to a student: […] by e-mailing a copy of the document to
the student’s e-mail address contained in ROSI, or to the students’ representative, if such
representative has confirmed its authority to accept service, and service shall be effective
on the day the document is sent by e-mail.” Repeated attempts were made to contact the
Student at her e-mail address contained in ROSI, including sending the Notice of
Electronic Hearing.
6. As set out in rule 21: “Where notice of a virtual hearing, an in-person hearing, a hybrid
hearing, or a written hearing has been given to a party in accordance with this Part, and
the party does not attend at or does not participate in the hearing, the panel may proceed
in the absence of the party or without the party’s participation and the party is not entitled
to any further notice in the proceeding.” This language was repeated in the Notice of
Electronic Hearing emailed to the Student.

3

7. Although the evidence provided did not go so far as to confirm that the Student had
received Notice of Hearing (because she never responded or acknowledged receipt), it is
clear from the evidence that the Student was given reasonable notice under the Rules of
Practice and Procedure. The University served the Student by email to her official ROSI
email, and by courier, as well as seeking to reach the Student by phone. The University
took many steps beyond what is strictly required by the University’s Policy on Official
Correspondence with Students.
8. The evidence indicates that the Student had not provided her actual mailing or permanent
address, or her telephone number to the University (in ROSI). Both addresses were listed
as

, which is a commercial not a

residential address. When businesses at that address were called, the one that was
reachable did not have any records or information relating to the Student. In addition, the
telephone number provided by the Student in ROSI was not in service.
9. Further, there was evidence provided to the Panel that the Student was aware of the
allegations that led to the charges as she had had met with instructors in the relevant
courses to discuss their concerns in April 2021. This case is similar to that in The
University of Toronto v. Y. L. (Case No. 1239, March 17, 2022) (“Y.L.”). Given the
Student’s interactions with the instructors concerning the allegations of academic
misconduct, the Tribunal was satisfied that it was more likely than not that the Student had
made a deliberate choice to avoid any official communications from the University. As the
Panel in Y.L. stated: “That choice has consequences.”
10. On this basis, the Panel was of the view that reasonable notice had been provided under
the Rules and was content to proceed with the hearing in the Student’s absence.

III.

Summary of Evidence
11. The evidence of the University on the charges was presented by way of affidavit from:
a. Catherine Phillips, a Sessional Lecturer in the Department of Language Studies at
the University, who was the instructor for the French Course;
b. Rosa Hong, Associate Professor, Teaching Stream, in the Department of

Language Studies at UTM, who is also the Chair’s Designate for Academic
Integrity, on behalf of the Chair of the Department. As Chair’s Designate, she
4

is responsible for meeting with students who are alleged to have committed
academic offences in courses within the Department of Language Studies on
behalf of the Chair of the Department; and
c. Elizabeth Peden, Sessional Lecturer of the Institute of Communication, Culture,
Information and Technology at UTM, who was one of the instructors for the CCT
Course.
12. The Student was a student in the French Course and the CCT Course in the Winter of
2021.
13. As the Student did not attend and was not represented at the hearing, the affiants were
not cross-examined but were made available to the Panel for any questions. The Panel
did have some questions for Professor Phillips, who was able to clarify her evidence
relating to Quiz 3 in the French Course.
A.

The French Course Quiz

14. The evidence regarding the French Course was provided by Professor Phillips.
15. The French Course is a beginner French course. Students are expected to have little to
no knowledge of the French language when they enroll in the course. Quiz 3 was
conducted using the University of Toronto’s Quercus website. On Quiz 3, students were
required to answer basic questions about French grammar and write basic compositions
in French.
16. The syllabus for the French Course contained a section titled “Academic Honesty and
Plagiarism.” This section alerted students to the existence of the Code and advised
students that it is an offence to submit “work that was done in conjunction with or by
another student and passing it off as your own.”
17. Another section of the syllabus, titled “Plagiarism will not be tolerated”, advised students
that they were expected to adhere to the Code regardless of the course delivery method.
This section advised students of potential academic offences in the online learning
context, including:
a. “Access unauthorized resources (search engines, chat rooms, Reddit, etc.) for
assessments”;
5

b. “Using technological aids (e.g. software) beyond what is listed as permitted in an
assessment”;
c. “Post test, essay, or exam questions to message boards or social media”;
d. “Creating, accessing, and sharing assessment questions and answers in virtual
“course groups”; and
e. “Working collaboratively, in person or online, with others on assessments that are
expected to be completed individually”.
18. As the French Course was an online course, students were also provided with a document
called “Academic Integrity in an Online Learning Class.” This document listed several aids
that were prohibited during tests, including “collaboration with anyone else in real-time or
over a device.”
19. Quiz 3, itself, included an academic integrity declaration, which asked students to confirm
that they would not collaborate with others or use any translation tools during the quiz. In
response to this academic integrity declaration, the Student answered “True.”
20. While grading Quiz 3, Professor Phillips noticed several irregularities, summarized below.
21. Part B Question 1 (verb conjugations): The Student’s answers to Questions 1.3.-1.7
were near identical to the answers submitted by two other students in the course: Y.Z. and
S.Z. (the “Alleged Collaborators”). The similarities between the Student’s answers and the
Alleged Collaborators’ answers were suspicious because these answers were all incorrect
in an identical or near identical manner, and many of the errors were very unusual. For
example, all three students incorrectly used an advanced verb tense that had not been
taught in the course. The three students also failed to complete questions 1.5-1.8, which
asked students to complete sentences and not simply conjugate the verbs.
22. Part B Question 4 (composition): The Student had to write a 50-word composition from
the perspective of a travel agent and her composition also raised suspicions for a number
of reasons. First, the level of the language in the composition was advanced. Yet, the
French Course is a beginner French course. Further, the Student’s performance on other
assessments in the French Course suggests that she has an extremely limited
understanding of the French language. Excluding Quiz 3, the Student had obtained a
grade of 31% on her other assessments. Second, although the Student’s composition was
6

written in advanced language and did not contain any mistakes, the composition did not
fully address the requirements of Part B, Question 4.

Third, the Student only used

masculine adjectives in her composition to describe the speaker. This feature implies that
the speaker in the Student’s composition identifies as a man, despite the Student
identifying as a woman.
23. When Professor Phillips met with the Alleged Collaborators to discuss her concerns, they
denied the allegations and stated that they had completed Quiz 3 independently.
Professor Phillips maintained her concerns and referred the matter up to the Department
level.
B.

Investigation Involving Other Students

24. Professor Hong provided evidence that she met with both S.Z. and Y.Z. (the Alleged
Collaborators) as the Chair’s Designate for Academic Integrity. She met on April 23, 2021,
with both S.Z. and Y.Z to discuss allegations that they obtained unauthorized assistance
in connection with Quiz 3 of the French Course in Winter 2021.
25. During the meeting, S.Z. made the following admissions:
a. He created a group chat with two other students in the French Course for the
purpose of obtaining assistance on Quiz 3 in the French Course;
b. He collaborated with two other students in this group chat to answer questions on
Quiz 3 in the French Course; and
c. He committed an academic offence on Quiz 3 in the French Course.
26. In her meeting, Y.Z. admitted the following:
a. Immediately before the meeting, S.Z. advised her that he admitted to committing
an academic offence on his Quiz 3 in the French Course in his meeting with
Professor Hong;
b. She was a member of a group chat containing two other students in the French
Course that was created for the purpose of obtaining unauthorized assistance on
Quiz 3 in the French Course;

7

c. She collaborated with two other students in this group chat to answer questions on
Quiz 3 in the French Course; and
d. She committed an academic offence on Quiz 3 in the French Course.
27. Neither student specifically implicated the Student in this group chat, but the common
mistakes indicates that the Student was the third student in the chat.
C.

The CCT Course Term Paper

28. The evidence regarding the CCT Course was provided by Professor Peden, who was an
instructor in the course.
29. Students in the CCT Course were required to submit a 10-page academic paper, which
was worth 25% of their final grade. This was the Term Paper at issue.
30. The syllabus for the CCT Course contained a section titled “Academic Integrity”. This
section alerted students to the existence of the Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters
and advised students that it is an academic offence to make up sources or facts in one’s
academic work.
31. In the Term Paper, the Student argued that social media use is responsible for social
isolation, mental health problems and self-esteem issues among young adults. To make
this point, the Student cited a variety of research papers that identify the existence of such
a relationship between social media use and wellness in young adults.
32. Professor Peden’s teaching assistant reviewed the term papers submitted in CCT110 and
advised her that they were concerned about the Student’s use of sources in the Term
Paper.
33. Professor Peden then reviewed the Term Paper and the sources cited in it. She found that
the description of two sources in the Student’s term paper did not accurately reflect the
contents actually contained in these sources: the Dang Source and the Yavich Source.
34. Professor Peden found the Student’s reference to these two sources in the Paper to be
misleading:
a. The Student cited the Dang Source as establishing the relationship between social
media use and anxiety and depression. However, the Dang Source does not
8

discuss social media at all. Instead, the Dang Source is concerned with the
physiological effects of social isolation on mice.
b. The Student cited the Yavich Source as discussing the phenomenon of “social
comparison” and the effects of social media use on “social comparison.” However,
the term “social comparison” is not used in the Yavich Source. The Yavich Source
describes a research study that examines the relationship between reported
Facebook usage patterns and loneliness by students at Ariel University in Israel.
(The Student did appropriately cite the Yavich Source in two other passages of the
Term Paper related to social media use by young adults).
35. In April 2021, Professor Peden met with the Student to discuss her concerns with the Term
Paper.

IV.

Finding on Charges
36. The first charge facing the Student is a charge that the Student cheated on Quiz 3 in the
French Course. As is described below, the Panel found the Student guilty of this first
charge.
37. The second charge facing the Student is a charge that the Student fabricated sources for
the Term Paper in the CCT Course. As is described below, the Panel found the Student
guilty of this second charge.
38. The burden is on the University to prove charges on a balance of probabilities.
39. The Course syllabi in both the CCT Course and the French Course were clear that
fabrication of sources and collaboration during tests were potential academic offences.
40. There is therefore no question that the Student knew or ought to have known that such
actions would be academic offences. The primary question for the Panel therefore was
whether the Student did in fact cheat in Quiz 3 and/or concoct sources in the Term Paper.
41. Following deliberation and based on the affidavit evidence and the documents in the
University’s Book of Documents (re: Finding of Offence), the Panel concluded there was
clear and convincing evidence, on a balance of probabilities, that the Student did commit
the offences with which she was charged.

9

A.

Charge 1: Unauthorized Assistance

42. The primary evidence with respect to the charge of unauthorized assistance is the
evidence of Professor Phillips about the suspicious similarities between the answers of
the Student and the Alleged Collaborators in Part B Question 1, including the same errors
in the same places, the unusual use of an advanced verb tense, and the common failure
to complete certain questions. The Panel agrees with Professor Phillips that it is highly
unlikely that the Student and her Alleged Collaborators answered these questions
independently.
43. In addition, the Panel is persuaded by the admission of the Alleged Collaborators that a
group chat was set up to enable unauthorized collaboration. Although the evidence
provided by Professor Hong is hearsay, the Statutory Powers and Procedures Act deems
hearsay to be admissible (s. 15). While admissible, the Panel must still be convinced of
the reliability of the statements made by the Alleged Collaborators to Professor Hong.
Since the Alleged Collaborators made admissions which resulted in them having worse
academic outcomes, the Panel is persuaded that the evidence is reliable, and that the
group chat described by S.Z. and Y.Z. did indeed exist and included a third student.
44. Although the Student was not specifically identified by the Alleged Collaborators, it is
highly unlikely that there would have been a different third student involved.
45. With respect to Part B Question 4, the advanced level of the composition and other issues
noted by Professor Phillips lead the Panel to conclude that the more likely explanation is
that the Student did not write the composition in that part of Quiz 3.
46. In cases like these, it is not necessary to prove the exact mechanism by which the cheating
occurred. The burden is on the University to prove that it was more likely than not that the
Student received unauthorized assistance. The Panel is of the view that there is sufficient
evidence to conclude that the Student obtained unauthorized assistance during Quiz 3.
B.

Charge 2: Concocted Sources

47. With respect to the second charge of concocted sources, the University must prove on a
balance of probabilities that the Student knew or ought to have known that the source or
sources were being misrepresented. Students who misrepresent sources are seeking to
give their work a “patina of academic rigour” (see The University of Toronto v. M.A. (Case

10

No. 971, November 28, 2018)). The offence captures conduct that is intended to generate
a layer of credibility or academic rigor that is not actually present in the work submitted.
48. The Panel was of the view that the evidence provided on the Dang Source was very
persuasive. The Dang Source describes a research study that examines the relationship
between social isolation in mice and the presence of a protein called HINT1 in their bodies.
In the Term Paper, the Student cited the Dang Source for the proposition that “there is
clear evidence that addiction to social media and overuse of social media for extended
periods of time can lead to anxiety and depression.” Further, the Student stated that in
the study reported in the Dang Source “they discovered that social media exert influence
on individual’s social anxiety indirectly, mediated by social comparison and self-esteem.”
The Dang Source is clearly concocted.
49. The Panel was less persuaded by the evidence relating to the Yavich Source. The Student
appropriately cited the Yavich Source in two passages in the Term Paper, but then
appeared to misrepresent it in a third passage. The Student was not present to explain
their actions, but counsel for the University appropriately conceded that it was possible
that the Student had made a mistake.
50. In any case, to be made out, the charge of concoction does not require more than one
source to be concocted. Without deciding whether the Yavich Source was concocted, the
Panel concluded that the Student had knowingly submitted academic work containing a
purported statement of fact or reference to a source which has been concocted.
51. The first two charges were therefore proven, and the Student was found guilty.
52. On finding the Student guilty of the first two charges, the third alternative charge was
withdrawn.

V.

Finding on Penalty
53. Once the Panel had made a determination on the charges, additional evidence was
provided to the Panel with respect to sanction. The University introduced a second affidavit
of Lisa Devereaux, which provided evidence that the Student has committed one prior
academic offence in ENV100Y5Y (The Environment) (“ENV100’’) in Fall 2020.

11

54. The University requested the following penalty for the offences relating to Quiz 3 and the
Term Paper:
a. a final grade of zero in FSL105 in Winter 2021;
b. a final grade of zero in CCT110 in Winter 2021;
c. a suspension from the University of Toronto from the date of this order for a period
of 3 years; and
d. a notation of the sanction on their academic record and transcript from the date of
this order for a period of 4 years.
55. The University also requested that this case be reported to the Provost for publication of
a notice of the decision of the Tribunal and the sanction imposed, with the Student’s name
withheld.
56. To support this proposed penalty, Assistant Discipline Counsel made submissions on the
following:
a. The Provost’s Guidance on Sanctions
b. The typical penalty for similar cases; and
c. Relevant factors in determining the appropriate sanction.
A.

Provost’s Guidance and Prior Offence

57. The Provost’s Guidance states that the Provost will request that the Tribunal suspend a
student for two years for any offence involving academic dishonesty, where a student has
not committed a prior offence.
58. Other Panels have commented on the appropriateness of that sanction, and on the impact
of a prior offence on that sanction (see The University of Toronto v. M. H. H. (Case No.
521, January 12, 2009)) (“M.H.H.”):
We agree that a two year suspension appears to be the threshold for a first
time offence but in this particular instance, we have concluded that a three
year suspension is warranted having regard to the Student having been
found guilty of a second count of plagiarism.

12

59. As in M. H. H., the Student here had a prior offence. On January 28, 2021, the Student
admitted that she had committed plagiarism on a term test worth 25% of her final grade in
ENV100. For this offence, the Student received a sanction of a grade of zero on her term
test and a 12-month notation on her academic transcript (from January 28, 2021, to
January 27, 2022).
B.

Similar Cases

60. The three-year suspension is also in line with similar cases presented by Assistant
Discipline Counsel. While the Panel is not bound by any of these decisions, they are
helpful in assisting the Tribunal in treating like cases alike.
61. The cases provided to us involved unauthorized aids, plagiarism, and concocted sources.
The cases varied with respect to whether the students involved had prior offences,
whether they participated in the proceeding, and whether there was an Agreed Statement
of Facts and/or a Joint Submission on Penalty. To summarize them briefly:
a. Penalties ranged from two to three years for students with and without priors.
b. Where there were priors, the penalty tended to be on the higher three-year end of
the range.
62. The three-year penalty proposed by the University was therefore in line with past similar
cases.
C.

Relevant Factors under Mr. C.

63. Finally, Assistant Discipline Counsel made submissions on the factors to be considered in
penalty as set out in The University of Toronto v. Mr. C. (Case No.: 1976/77-3, November
15, 1976).
64. The Student in this case had not participated at any stage of the process. The Student
had therefore not shown any remorse, not presented any character evidence, and not
raised any mitigating or extenuating factors to warrant a more lenient sanction. This failure
to participate was therefore a neutral factor.

13

65. With respect to the likelihood of repetition of the offence, the Student has a prior academic
offence, and there is therefore a need for specific deterrence. This prior offence is an
aggravating factor that justifies a greater sanction.
66. With respect to the nature of the offence, the need to deter others, and the detriment to
the University, we echo the words of the Panel in the University of Toronto v. H.W. (Case
No. 1179, March 7, 2022):
The Mr. C case and those which follow it each note the importance of the
University as an educational institution and a degree-granting body, and
emphasize that members of the public must be able to rely on the academic
integrity of the University’s evaluation processes. Using unauthorized aids
is cheating and allowing cheating to go unsanctioned is unfair to the other
students who abide by and follow the rules and regulations. If not
sanctioned, cheating undermines the value of all of the University’s
degrees.
67. Taking all these submissions into consideration, the Panel imposed the requested penalty.

VI.

Decision of the Panel

68. At the conclusion of the hearing on penalty, the Panel conferred and made the following
order:
a. The hearing may proceed in the absence of the Student;
b. The Student is guilty of one count of obtaining unauthorized assistance, contrary
to B.I.1(b) of the Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters, and one count of
concocting references, contrary to B.I.1(f) of the Code of Behaviour on Academic
Matters;
c. The following sanctions shall be imposed on the Student:

i. a final grade of zero in FSL105 in Winter 2021;
ii. a final grade of zero in CCT110 in Winter 2021;
iii. a suspension from the University for a period of 3 years from the date
of the order; and
14

iv. a notation of the sanction on the student’s academic record and
transcript for a period of 4 years from the date of the order;
d. This case shall be reported to the Provost for publication of a notice of the decision
of the Tribunal and the sanctions imposed, with the name of the student withheld.

DATED at Toronto, May 24, 2023

Original signed by:
Sana Halwani, Chair
On behalf of the Panel

15

