Case 1406

FILE:

   Case # 1406 (2022-2023)

DATE:

   May 24, 2023

PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v. J.Z. (‚the Student‚)

HEARING DATE(S):

   April 4, 2023, via Zoom

PANEL MEMBERS:

   Sana Halwani, Chair

   Professor Joseph Clark, Faculty Panel Member

   Jennifer Chen, Student Panel Member

APPEARANCES:

   Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg
   Rothstein LLP

   Ryan Shah, Co-Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg Rothstein LLP

HEARING SECRETARY:

   Nusaiba Khan, Quasi-Judicial Administrative Assistant, Office of
   Appeals, Discipline and Faculty of Grievances

   The Student was charged with knowingly using or possessing an
   unauthorized aid or obtaining unauthorized assistance in a quiz (‚the
   Quiz‚) for FSL105H5 under s. B.i.1(b) of the Code. The Student was
   additionally charged with knowingly submitting academic work containing
   a purported statement of fact or reference to a source which had been
   concocted in a term paper (‚Term Paper‚) in another course, contrary to
   s. B.i.1(f) of the Code. In the alternative to these two charges, the
   Student was charged under s. B.i.3(b) for knowingly engaging in a form
   of cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud, or
   misrepresentation to obtain academic credit or other advantage.

   The Student was enrolled in both courses during the Winter of 2021. The
   Quiz for FSAL105H5 was administered online, and the course syllabus
   indicated that students were prohibited from accessing unauthorized
   aids for assessments. The Student‚s answers to the Quiz were near
   identical to the answers submitted by two other students in the course.
   The course instructor found the similarities suspicious, as the answers
   were incorrect in identical or near identical manners, with very
   unusual errors. The two other students in different meetings admitted
   to using a group chat in the course for assistance on the Quiz. They
   did not name the Student in this case, but the common mistakes indicate
   the Student was the third member in the group chat. With respect to the
   other course, the Student submitted their Term Paper online. The course
   instructor reviewed the Student‚s Term Paper and found that
   descriptions of two sources in the paper did not reflect the actual
   contents of the sources. Upon further investigation, the instructor
   determined that one of the sources used in the Term Paper was clearly
   concocted.

   The Student did not attend the hearing and was not represented by
   counsel. The Panel heard evidence that the University had made serious
   efforts to serve the Student with notice, through email and telephone,
   and through courier delivery. The Panel found that reasonable notice of
   the hearing was provided in accordance with the Statutory Powers and
   Procedures Act and the University Tribunal‚s Rules of Practice and
   Procedure. The Panel was content to proceed without the Student.

   After considering the evidence presented for both charges, the Panel
   found the Student guilty of using unauthorized aid under s. B.i.1(b) of
   the Code and guilty of knowingly submitting academic work containing a
   reference to a source which has been concocted under s. B.i.1(f) of the
   Code. The University withdrew the alternative charge.

   In determining the appropriate sanction, the Panel considered counsel‚s
   submissions regarding the Provost‚s Guidance on Sanctions and penalties
   in similar cases. The Panel considered the Student‚s character,
   mitigating factors, and extenuating circumstances, finding that there
   was no evidence for either due to the Student‚s absence in the
   proceedings. The Panel considered the likelihood of repetition of the
   offence, finding that the Student‚s prior academic offence, held as an
   aggravating factor, necessitated specific deterrence, and justified a
   greater sanction. With respect to the nature of the offence, the need
   to deter others, and the detriment to the University, the Panel agreed
   with a previous case that the offence undermines the value of the
   University‚s degrees and required sanction.

   The Panel accepted counsel‚s submissions and imposed the following
   sanctions: a grade assignment of zero in both courses; a three-year
   suspension; a four-year notation on the Student‚s transcript; and a
   report to the Provost for publication.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/31202
