THE UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
IN THE MATTER OF charges of academic dishonesty made on March 18, 2015
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic
Matters, 1995,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Act, 1971, S.O. 1971, c. 56 as
amended S.O. 1978, c. 88
BETWEEN:
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
-AND-

REASONS FOR DECISION

Date of Hearing: November 23, 2015
Members of the Panel:
Mr. John A. Keefe, Barrister and Solicitor, Chair
Dr. Joel Kirsh, Faculty Panel Member
Mr. Hayden Rodenkirchen, Student Panel Member
Appearances:
Robert A. Centa, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Ban-isters
Ms. Lauren Pearce, Articling Student, Paliare Roland BaiTisters
Mr. Neil Wilson, Counsel for the Student, Stevenson Whelton MacDonald & Swan LLP
Dr. Kristi Gourlay, Manager, Office of Student Academic Integrity, University of Toronto
Mr. Martin Loeffler, Director, Infmmation Security and Enterprise Architecture,
University of Toronto
Associate Professor Karen Reid, Department of Computer Science, University of Toronto
In Attendance:
Christopher Lang, Director, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances
Krista Osbourne, Administrative Assistant Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances

2

INTRODUCTION
1.

The trial division of the University of Tribunal was convened on Monday, November 23,
2015, to consider charges under the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic

Matters, 1995 (the "Code") laid against the student (the "Student") by letter dated March 18,
2015, from Professor Sioban Nelson, Vice-Provost, Faculty & Academic Life. The charges
are set out below:
THE CHARGES

2.

The charges against the Student in the Notice of Hearing are as follows:

Charges related to altering an academic record
1.

On or about October 26, 2014, you knowingly forged or in any
other way altered or falsified an academic record, namely, the
mark recorded for you on Assignment #1 in the Course CSC 369
HlF (the "course"), or you uttered circulated or made use of that
forged, altered or falsified academic record contrary to section
B.I.3(a) of the Code.

2.

On or about October 27, 2014, you knowingly forged or in any
other way altered or falsified an academic record, namely, the
mark recorded for you on Assignment #1 in the Course, or you
uttered circulated or made use of that forged, altered or falsified
academic record contrary to section B.I.3(a) of the Code.

3.

On or about October 29, 2014, you knowingly forged or in any
other way altered or falsified an academic record, namely, the
mark recorded for you on Assignment #1 in the Course, or you
uttered circulated or made use of that forged, altered or falsified
academic record contrary to section B.I.3(a) of the Code.

4.

In the alternative to charges 1, 2, and 3, around November 9, or 10
you engaged in a form of cheating, academic dishonesty or
misconduct, fraud or misrepresentation not otherwise described in
the Code, in order to obtain academic credit or other academic
advantage of any kind, contrary to section B.I(3)(b) of the Code.

Charges related to Assignment #2 in the Course
5.

On or about November 9, 2014, you knowingly used or possessed
an unauthorized aid or aids or obtained unauthorized assistance in
connection with Assignment #2 in the Course by viewing the work
of Spencer Christie, another student in the Court, contrary to
section B.I.1 (b) of the Code.

3

6.

On or about November 10, 2014, you knowingly represented the
ideas of another, or the expressions of the ideas of another, as your
own work in your answer to Assignment #2, which you submitted
in partial completion of the requirements in the Course, contrary to
section B.I. l (d) of the Code.

7.

In the alternative to charges 5 and 6, around November 9 or 10,
you engaged in a form of cheating, academic dishonesty or
misconduct, fraud or misrepresentation not otherwise described in
the Code, in order to obtain academic credit or other academic
advantage of any kind, contrary to section B.I.(3)(b) of the Code.

THE PLEA
3.

The Student did not appear in person at the hearing, but he did appear through his counsel,
Neil Wilson. Counsel for the Student indicated that he would not be entering a plea and
would not be challenging the evidence. In effect, this was equivalent to a no contest plea.
The hearing proceeded on the basis that the Univei·sity would nonetheless prove its case even
though the Student would not be challenging the evidence.

THE FACTS
4.

The Student was registered at the University of Toronto at the St. George Campus in the
Faculty of Arts and Science, majoring in computer science. He was registered in CSC 369
HIF (the "Course").

The Course was being taught by Professor Karen Reid with the

assistance of a teaching assistant Jacqueline Bermudez.
5.

In the fall term of 2014, the Student hacked into the University of Toronto's computer system
and he gained access to Ms. Bermudez's computer account. He then used the account to
change his mark in Assignment #1 from an incomplete grade to 20/40 on October 27, 2014
and 33/40 on October 29, 2014. This conduct occmTed in the period from October 24 to
October 29, 2014.

6.

With respect to Assignment #2, the Student hacked into the account of a fellow student Steven
Christie and copied the work that had been submitted by him on Assignment #2 and submitted
it as his own work. These events occuned between November 9, 2014 and November 10,
2014.

4

7.

During the hearing, we were presented with evidence from Professor Reid describing how
these events were uncovered. We also heard evidence from Maiiin Loeffler, the Director of
Information, Security, and Enterprise Architecture at the University of Toronto who described
the investigation that was conducted which formed the basis for establishing that the Student
had in fact hacked into the University's computer network and with specific details of the
exact time of entry and the exact activity that was the subject matter of the charge. The
evidence was quite overwhelming and it was not challenged by the Student.

DECISION OF THE TRIBUNAL
8.

Based on the evidence presented at the hearing, we had no difficulty concluding that the
offences had been made out by the University. Accordingly, we found the Student guilty on
Counts 1, 2, and 3 relating to the altering of his academic record on Assignment #1. The
University then withdrew Count 4. We also had no difficulty finding the Student guilty on
Counts 5, and 6. The University then withdrew Count 7.

SANCTIONS AND REASONS
9.

Following the finding of guilt on the Counts referred to above, the University and the Student,
through his counsel, provided the Tribunal with an Agreed Statement of Facts and Joint
Submission on Penalty.

10.

In the Agreed Statement of Facts and Joint Submission on Penalty, it was acknowledged that
the Student has been suspended from the University under the Code of Student Conduct since
December 5, 2014. This suspension related to the incident referred to above involving the
Student gaining access to the University's computer system.

11.

In the Agreed Statement of Facts and Joint Submission on Penalty, the Student agreed to
permanently withdraw from the University and not to seek admission or readmission to the
University at any time in the future.

12.

The Joint Submission on Penalty, proposed the following sanctions:
Joint Submission on Penalty:

5

5.

The Provost and Mr. ~ l submit that, in all the
circumstances of the case, the University Tribunal should
impose the following sanctions on M r . ~ :
(a)

a final grade of zero in the Course CSC 369;

(b)
a suspension from University from the date the
Tribunal makes its order until December 5, 2019; and
(c)
a permanent notation of the sanction on his
academic record and transcript
6.

13.

The pmiies submit that this case shall be reported to the
Provost for publication of a notice of the decision of the
Tribunal and the sanction imposed, with the name of the
student withheld.

The Tribunal then heard the submissions of counsel for the University and the Student and we
were referred to a number of decisions dealing with the circumstances in which a Tribunal
should accept or reject a joint submissions on penalty.

14.

The basic principles are as follows:
(a)

The Tribunal is not obliged or required to accept a joint submission on penalty. The
Tribunal retains the obligation and responsibility to impose a fit sentence in the
circumstances of every case including those where a joint submission on penalty has
been proposed; 1

(b)

The companion obligation is that a joint submission on penalty may be rejected only in
circumstances where to give effect to it would be contrary to the public interest or
bring the administration of justice into disrepute. 2

(c)

A good expression of the test is that the Tribunal should only reject a joint submission
on penalty if it concludes that it is unreasonable or "unconscionable" for it to be
accepted. 3

1 University of Toronto v. S. . ~ (2014) at para 16
2

R. v. Tsucism (2006) 216 O.A.C I 04 at paras 18

3

law Society of Upper Canada v. Stephen Alexander Cooper, 2009 ONLSAP 007 at para 19 - referred to and adopted in

Sheran Fernando above.

6

15.

The Tribunal concluded that it would accept the Joint Submission on Penalty based on these
principles.

16.

An important aspect of our decision was the Student's agreement to permanently withdraw
from the University and not seek admission or readmission to the University at any time in the
future.

ORDER

17.

Accordingly, the Tribunal makes the following order:
(a)

impose a final grade of zero in Course CSC 369;

(b)

a suspension from the University from the date the Tribunal makes its order until
December 5, 2019; and

(c)

a permanent notation of the sanction on the Student's academic record and transcript;

(d)

That this case should be reported to the Provost for publication of a notice of the
decision of the Tribunal and the sanction or sanctions imposed with the name of the
Student withheld.

Dated at Toronto, this ~ y of December, 2015.

John

