Case 800

DATE:

   December 8, 2015

PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v S.E.

Hearing Date(s):

   November 23, 2015

Panel Members:

   John A. Keefe, Chair
   Joel Kirsh, Faculty Member
   Hayden Rodenkirchen, Student Member

Appearances:

   Robert A. Centa, Assistant Discipline Counsel
   Lauren Pearce, Articling Student, Paliare Roland Barristers
   Neil Wilson, Counsel for the Student
   Kristi Gourlay, Manager, Office of Student Academic Integrity
   Martin Loeffler, Director, Information Security and Enterprise
   Architecture
   Karen Reid, Department of Computer Science

In Attendance:

   Christopher Lang, Director, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances
   Krista Osbourne, Administrative Assistant, Appeals, Discipline and
   Faculty Grievances
   Student charged with three offences under s. B.i.3(a) , one offence
   under s. B.i.1(b) , one offence under s. B.i.1(d) and, in the
   alternative, two offences under s. B.i.3(b) of the Code . The charges
   related to two separate allegations; first that the Student knowingly
   forged or in any other way altered or falsified the mark recorded on
   Assignment #1 in the Course by hacking into the computer account of the
   Courseâs teaching assistant, and second that the Student knowingly used
   or obtained unauthorized assistance in connection with Assignment #2 in
   the Course by hacking into the account of a fellow student, copying his
   work, and submitting it as his own work. The evidence of these charges
   was overwhelming and not challenged by the Student. The Student was not
   present at the hearing, but he did appear through his counsel. Counsel
   for the Student indicated that the Student was entering a no contest
   plea. The hearing proceeded on the basis that the University would
   nonetheless prove its case even though the Student would not be
   challenging the evidence.
   The Student was found guilty with respect to the charges under s.
   B.i.3(a) , s. B.i.1(b) and s. B.i.1(d) . The University then withdrew
   the alternative charges under s. B.i.3(b) . The Panel accepted the
   partiesâ Agreed Statement of Facts and Joint Submission on Penalty.
   Â The Panel considered the fact that the Student agreed to permanently
   withdraw from the University and not to seek readmission at any time in
   the future as an important aspect of its decision to accept the Joint
   Submission on Penalty. The Panel imposed a grade assignment of zero in
   the Course; a 4-year suspension; a permanent notation on the Studentâs
   academic record and transcript; and that the case be reported to the
   Provost for publication.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12889
