Case #04-05-08

   Decision written in letter format (LF), companion case to Case
   #04-05-09
   DATE: May 31, 2005
   PARTIES: University of Toronto v. Mr. D. L.
   Hearing Date(s): May 16, 2004
   Panel Members:
   information not available
   Appearances:
   Mr. Jeremy Glick, DLS, for Student
   Mr. Robert Centa, for University
   Trial Division - s. B.i.1(b) and s. B.ii of Code â unauthorized aid â
   allowed another student to copy from exam answers â Agreed Statement of
   Facts â guilty plea â identical answers â other student admitted to
   receiving assistance â extenuating fact of other studentâs illness not
   helpful given honest options available â mitigating facts of guilty
   plea, expression of remorse, personal relationship with co-defendant,
   acceptance of appropriateness of sanctions â medical attention or
   deferral not sought â guilt not admitted at earliest opportunity â
   hearing three years after commission of offence - sufficient credits to
   graduate â Joint Submission on Penalty accepted â grade assignment of
   zero for course; two-year suspension; three-year notation; and report
   to Provost
   Student charged under s. B.i.1(b) and s. B.ii of the Code. The charges
   related to allegations that the Student collaborated with another
   student, and or used unauthorized aids during a term test. The parties
   submitted an Agreed Statement of Facts. The Studentâs test answers were
   virtually identical to the other studentâs. The Student admitted that
   he provided unauthorized assistance to the other student by permitting
   her to copy his answers into her examination booklet. The Student
   pleaded guilty to the charges. The Panel accepted his guilty plea. The
   parties submitted a Joint Submission with respect to sanction. The
   other student felt too ill to study for the test and when she advised
   the Student of her illness he offered to help her. The Panel noted the
   first paragraph of the Code and the first paragraph of Section B of the
   Code and found that the Studentâs actions struck at the heart of
   academic integrity and flew in the face of other students who had
   worked hard and studied appropriately for their examinations. The Panel
   considered the elements of premeditation and deceit, the nature of the
   offence and the way it was committed, and the options available to a
   student when too ill to write an examination. The Panel found that the
   extenuating circumstances of the other studentâs health were not that
   helpful given the other, honest options available. The Panel found that
   the mitigating facts were that the Student pleaded guilty; that he
   acknowledged that his actions were wrong and expressed remorse; that he
   was in a personal relationship with the co-defendant, and that he had
   offered to help her out of concern; and that he accepted that
   significant sanctions were appropriate. The Panel expressed concern
   regarding the following factors: the Student did not suggest to his
   co-defendant that she obtain a doctorâs letter about her condition or
   seek to defer the writing of her test because of illness; that the
   co-defendant did not seek medical attention for her illness; that he
   did not admit his guilt at the earliest opportunity; and that due to
   circumstances beyond the control of the Student and the University, the
   offence was not heard until three years after having been committed and
   after the Student had obtained sufficient credits to graduate. The
   Panel considered the factors in the case of Mr C., and previous similar
   Tribunal cases and accepted the Joint Submission with respect to
   Sanction. The Panel imposed a grade of zero in the course; a two-year
   suspension; a three-year notation; and that a report be issued to the
   Provost.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12723
