Case 931

DATE:

   October 27, 2017

PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v. C.W. (âthe Studentâ)

Hearing Date(s):

   July 28, 2017

Panel Members:

   Ms. Amanda Heale, Chair
   Professor Pascal van Lieshout, Faculty Panel Member
   Ms. Alanis Ortiz Espinoza, Student Panel Member

Appearances:

   Mr. Robert Centa, Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg
   Rothstein LLP

In Attendance:

   Ms. Lucy Gaspini, Manager, Academic Integrity & Affairs, Office of the
   Dean, UTM
   Ms. Alexandra Di Blasio, Academic Integrity Assistant, UTM
   Ms. Krista Osbourne, Administrative Clerk and Hearing Secretary, Office
   of the Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances
   Mr. Sean Lourim, IT Support, Office of the Governing Council
   Mr. Douglas Harrison, Tribunal Co-Chair, Observer

Not in Attendance:

   The Student
   The Student was charged with plagiarism contrary to s. B.i.1(d) of the
   Code , or in the alternative one charge of academic dishonesty not
   otherwise described contrary to s. B.i.3(b) of the Code . The charges
   related to an essay that the Student had written that contained text
   from the website Wikipedia that the Student had copied verbatim and
   expressed as her own ideas. At the Deanâs designate meeting, the
   Student admitted to submitting the plagiarized essay . The matter
   proceeded by way of an Agreed Statement of Facts, Joint Book of
   Documents and a Joint Submission on Penalty (JSP).Â  Upon acceptance of
   the Studentâs guilty plea in relation to the plagiarism charge, the
   University withdrew the alternative charge that had been laid under s.
   B.i.3(b) of the Code.
   The parties submitted a Joint Submission on Penalty (JSP) proposing:
   (a) a final grade of zero in the affected course; (b) suspension from
   the University for three years; (c) a notation of the sanction on the
   Studentâs academic record and transcript for four years; and (d) that
   the matter be reported to the Provost for publication. The JSP proposed
   that the 3 year suspension commence immediately following the
   conclusion of the 12 month suspension being served by the Student for a
   previous academic misconduct offence.Â  Â The Panel took into
   consideration the seriousness of the offence and the fact that the
   Student had previously been sanctioned for obtaining an academic
   advantage over other students and for unauthorized assistance and
   plagiarism. The plagiarism offence was admitted by the Student only
   three months prior to the conduct that gave rise to the charge in this
   case. Mitigating factors were that the Student had cooperated in the
   process and entered into the ASF and JSP, thereby showing insight and
   remorse. The Panel accepted the JSP including the Universityâs
   submission that sentences not overlap when they both arise from
   academic misconduct., and ordered a final grade of zero in the affected
   course; suspension from the University for three years to start after
   the current suspension expired; a notation of the sanction on the
   Studentâs academic record and transcript for four years; and that the
   matter be reported to the Provost for publication.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12956
