Report 324

DATE:

   March 30, 2008

PARTIES:

   Mr. D. V. (the Student) v. UTSC

Hearing Date(s):

   March 14, 2008

Committee Members:

   Assistant Dean Bonnie Goldberg, Chair
   Professor Ellen Hodnett
   Professor Yuki Johnson
   Mr Alex Kenjeev
   Professor Arthur Ripstein

In Attendance:

   Mr. D. V., the Student
   Professor John Scherk, Vice Dean, UTSC
   Ms Nancy Smart, Judicial Affairs Officer

   Request to defer 12 month academic suspension, write two âdeferredâ
   examinations and re-write a final examination. The death of the
   Studentâs uncle and aunt, and the requirement that he move out of his
   auntâs house, had monetarily and personally destabilized his life.
   Although not registered, the Student had reâattended classes he had
   failed, in the hopes that the Committee would retroactively overturn
   his suspension. The Student submitted several petitions and
   reâpetitions, however the Committee confined its deliberations to the
   remedies that formed part of the decisions under appeal. The Committee
   found that it was beyond its jurisdiction to consider retroactively
   allowing the Student to write the final exams for the courses he was
   reâattending as a nonâregistered student and have them count as his
   grades in the courses. The Committee considered the Studentâs personal
   circumstances and the conflict of these circumstances with the
   Universityâs course selection policies, and its method of applying
   these policies. The Committee found that there was little evidence to
   support that the Studentâs personal circumstances had become worse or
   did not resolve themselves at the time of the petition to the
   Divisional Appeal Committee and there was little evidence academically
   that the opportunity to write the finals would have lifted the
   Studentâs 12 month suspension given how poorly he had performed and
   given how little work he had done in the courses. The majority of the
   Committee found that the appeal should be denied. A minority of the
   Committee would have allowed the appeal on the grounds of the evidence
   submitted by the Student or, alternatively, that the Facultyâs decision
   should have given more weight to the surrounding circumstances
   affecting the Student. Appeal dismissed.
   [1]View Report

References

   1. file:///media/12576
