Case 1262 Appeal

   [1]Case 1262 - Tribunal

DATE:

   August 29, 2022

PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v. G.L. (‚the Student‚)

HEARING DATE(S):

   March 14, 2022, via Zoom with written submissions in May 2022

PANEL MEMBERS:

   Lisa Brownstone, Chair

APPEARANCES:

   Robert Centa, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg
   Rothstein LLP

Not in Attendance:

   The Student

HEARING SECRETARY:

   Carmelle Salomon-Labbe, Associate Director, Office of Appeals,
   Discipline and Faculty Grievances
   The Student appealed the University Tribunal‚s Trial Division decision
   on the basis that they were not in attendance and were not represented
   at the hearing. After submitting their Notice of Appeal, the Student
   engaged in very sporadic communication with Assistant Discipline
   Counsel and the Tribunal‚s administrative office. The Associate Chair
   noted that two Directions were issued to ensure that the appeal
   proceeded in a timely fashion. The Student did not respond nor did they
   act as required in accordance with the Directions. In accordance with
   the second Direction, the Provost moved for dismissal of the appeal.
   The Student was afforded an opportunity to respond the Provost‚s motion
   in writing. The Student did not respond.

   The Associate Chair outlined that there were two issues. The first
   issue was whether the Tribunal, as a single member, has jurisdiction to
   entertain the Provost‚s motion. The second issue was whether the
   Student‚s appeal should be dismissed on the grounds that it is
   frivolous, vexatious, or without foundation.

   With respect to the first issue, the Associate Chair agreed with the
   conclusion of the appeal motion in University of Toronto and R.S. (Case
   No. 1100, February 8, 2022) (‚ R.S.‚ ) that the Tribunal has
   jurisdiction to hear this appeal, sitting as a single member.
   Specifically, the Statutory Powers Procedure Act , R.S.O 1992, c. 22
   (‚SPPA‚) applies to appeals before the Discipline Appeals Board
   (‚Board‚) from decisions of the Tribunal‚s Trial Division, and section
   4.2.1(1) of the SPPA, permits a single member of the Board to decide a
   motion. The Associate Chair noted that historically university
   discipline tribunals were arguably not the sort of tribunals to which
   the SPPA would directly apply since the relationship between a student
   and a university has been characterized as contractual as opposed to
   statutory. However, the courts have long distinguished between
   procedural and substantive matters in this regard and have been willing
   to intervene on procedural matters ( Re Polten and Governing Council of
   University of Toronto (1976) , 8 O.R. (2d) 749 (Divisional Court); 1975
   CanLII 709 ). The Associate Chair further noted that the University has
   codified the relationship between the student and the University, when
   it comes to academic matters, in the Code of Behaviour on Academic
   Matters issued by the University‚s Governing Council (‚Code‚). Section
   C.ii.(a).7 of the Code provides that the procedures of the Tribunal
   shall conform to the requirements of the SPPA. Section C.ii.(a).11 of
   the Code provides that there are two divisions of the Tribunal: (a)
   Trial and (b) Appeal. Therefore, the Associate Chair found that the
   University has determined that SPPA procedures are to apply to hearings
   and appeals before its Tribunal, and that by including section
   C.ii.(a)7 in the Code, it has advised its students of such an
   application. The Associate Chair did not view the fact that the
   University had chosen to use the language ‚conform‚ rather than ‚apply‚
   to be a material distinction and was confident that the language
   distinction between ‚conform‚ and ‚apply‚ would not aid the University
   should it attempt not to comply with the SPPA. In considering section
   4.2.1(1) of the SPPA,¬ the Associate Chair noted that this section
   provides that the chair of a tribunal may decide that a proceeding be
   heard by a panel of one person and assign the person to hear the
   proceeding unless there is a statutory requirement in another Act that
   the proceeding be heard by a panel of more than one person. The
   Associate Chair agreed with the observation in R.S. that there is no
   statutory provision contrary to section 4.2.1(1) of the SPPA, and,
   therefore, concluded that section 4.2.1(1) of the SPPA applies, and
   they may hear the motion as a panel of one person.

   Having decided that they have jurisdiction to hear this appeal as a
   single member, the Associate Chair considered the second issue, namely,
   whether the appeal is frivolous, vexatious or without foundation. The
   Associate Chair noted that section E.7(a) of the Code gives the Board
   the power to dismiss an appeal summarily and without formal hearing if
   the appeal is frivolous, vexatious or without foundation. An appeal can
   be classified as frivolous or vexatious if the student takes no steps
   to move the appeal forward and fails to engage with the process or
   comply with Directions. The Associate Chair further noted that the
   failure to engage in the process or to be responsive to the Tribunal‚s,
   ADFG‚s, or counsel‚s attempts to move the matter forward can render the
   appeal frivolous or vexatious. Whether an appeal is without foundation
   is concerned with the merits of the appeal, and while it can be
   difficult to opine on the merits of an appeal in the absence of the
   full participation of the student, there are circumstances, such as
   this one, where such a determination can be made. The Student engaged
   in a pattern of non-responsiveness and failure to engage with the
   process and while the Student‚s subjective desire to appeal may exist,
   that is insufficient to overcome the frivolous and vexatious nature of
   the Student‚s conduct in failing to pursue the appeal. In determining
   whether the appeal was with or without foundation, the Associate Chair
   noted that the Student‚s own statements in an email to the ADFG Office
   indicated that the Student improperly used external aids in the
   assignment. The Student outlined that they received assistance from
   their brother and not Chegg.com, therefore, even if the Student were
   permitted to advance their version of events, they acknowledged that
   they violated the assignment‚s requirements to do the work
   independently.

   The Student‚s appeal was frivolous, vexatious, or without foundation.
   Motion granted. Appeal dismissed summarily and without formal hearing.
   [2]View Case

References

   1. https://governingcouncil.utoronto.ca/system/files/university-tribunal-decisions/Case%201262%20%281%29_0.pdf
   2. file:///media/30642
