Case 647

DATE:

   October 30, 2012

PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v. A.K.

Hearing Date(s):

   May 22, 2012; June 5, 2012; June 7, 2012; June 18, 2012

Panel Members:

   Mr. John A. Keefe, Chair
   Professor Gabriele DâEleuterio, Faculty Member
   Ms. Vy Nguyen, Student Member

Appearances:

   Ms. Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel for the University
   Ms. Sierra Robart, DLS for the Student
   Mr. Ab Gehani, Manager of Client Services at the University's Help Desk
   Dr. Sheryl Stevenson, Writing Specialist at the Scarborough and St.
   George campuses
   Mr. Kevin Lo, Managing Director, Digital Forensics and Electronic
   Discoveries at Froese Forensics

In Attendance:

   Ms. A.K., the Student
   Prof. Eleanor Irwin, Dean's Designate
   Ms. Betty-Ann Campbell, Law Clerk, Paliare Roland
   Ms.Â Natalie Ramtahal, Coordinator, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty
   Grievances
   Mr. Chrisopher Lang, Director, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty
   Grievances

   Student charged under s. B.i.1 (d) of the Code. The charges related to
   allegations that the Student submitted a purchased essay. An
   originality report by turnitin.com of the Studentâs essay showed a
   similarity index of 81%, meaning that 81% of the words in her essay
   matched a paper submitted by a student at York University. The Student
   claimed that the essay was her original work. To corroborate her claim,
   she submitted the electronic files of her essay and handwritten notes
   she claimed to have written while preparing for the essay. The Student
   also claimed that she sent her essay to a person named Bryan to receive
   assistance but was told he could not help with her essay. The issue at
   the hearings was whether the University could prove on a balance of
   probabilities that the essay was not the Studentâs original work. The
   metadata analysis of the file showed the author as Bryan and the
   company as ZAS. Bryan was known by the University as a disbarred lawyer
   who assisted students in writing papers. The Panel accepted the expert
   testimony that the only way the metadata on the Word document could
   show Bryan as the author and ZAS as the company would be if the
   document was created on Bryanâs computer. With regards to the notes,
   the Panel found that the Student prepared them during the course and
   that they showed that she had real input into the ideas and content of
   the essay. Based on the above evidence, the Panel concluded that the
   Student took notes and gave them to Bryan who took the words and ideas
   from the notes and put them into an essay form which the Student
   submitted as her own work. Consequently, the Panel concluded that the
   essay was prepared at least in part by Bryan and found the Student
   guilty under s. B.i.1(d) . However, the Panel was not convinced that
   the Student purchased the essay from Bryan. With regards to the
   proposed penalty, the Panel rejected the Studentâs submission that the
   suspension should commence on the date of the offence or the date of
   the notice of hearing. It was not appropriate to backdate the
   commencement of the suspension unless it was in close proximity to the
   date of the hearing. However, the Panel stated that it was appropriate
   for the suspension to commence on a date that would allow the Student
   to resume her studies in the summer term of 2014. Accordingly, the
   Panel backdated the commencement to May 1, 2012. In considering the
   penalty, the Panel noted that had it found that the Student purchased
   her essay, it would have imposed a far more severe penalty. The Panel
   found that a two-year suspension was appropriate for first offenders
   found guilty of plagiarism. The Panel noted that there was little
   likelihood of repetition as the Student completed all her courses
   necessary to graduate. The Panel found that there were no extenuating
   circumstances and emphasized the need for general deterrence without
   avoiding a penalty that unduly punishes the Student. The Panel imposed
   a grade assignment of zero for the course; a two-year suspension; a
   three-year notation on the transcript or until graduation whichever was
   to occur first; and a report be issued to the Provost.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/13020
