Case 450.

THE UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO

IN THE MATTER OF charges of academic dishonesty made on January 22, 2008;

AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic
Matters, 1995;

AND IN THE lYIATTER OF the University a/Toronto Act, 1971, S.O. 1971, c. 56 as amended
S.O. 1978, C. 88

BETWEEN:
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
- and-

As dictated on May S, 2008
Members of the Panel:
• Ms. Rodica David, Chair
• Professor Melanie Woodin, Faculty Panel Member
• Dr. Joan Saary, Student Panel Member
Appearances:
• Ms. Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel
•

Ms. ~ A !\.%#":\II\. the Student, did not attend

Transcription of Oral Reasons Delivered by the Chair at the Conclusion of the Hearing
[1]

52124

This is a situation where the Student has chosen not to attend and has chosen not to
provide us with any extenuating circumstances with respect to this extremely serious.
offence. The Student has admitted to two previous offences under the University o(
Toronto's Code of Behaviour, both of which, in our view, were serious and on which she
received relatively lenient sanctions. Note that those two previous offences occurred in
one year after the next; so we now have three successive years when the Student has
admitted to offences under the Code. The action that the Student took was clearly
deliberate and must have involved a significant amount of thought. She composed a

- 1-

Case 450

relatively long letter which turned out to be, on her own admission, a complete forgery in
every respect.
[2]

I would like to just review all of the criteria for sanction:
a. Character of the person charged
Well, we have no evidence before us directly on character. We do have the fact that in
three successive years she committed serious offences under the Code and that is a mark
of character.

b. Likelihood of repetition of the offence
\Ve have no evidence on that at all and I don't think that we can make any finding.

c. Nature of the offence

In our view this is an extremely serious offence as it essentially affects the reputation of
the University in terms of how it is portrayed to the public. However, we are also
concerned about the fact that this type of offence - at least the facts that we have been
provided with concerning this offence - could potentially even be the subject of criminal
charges. In onr view, an attempt to get money from a bank with a forged docnment could
have potential consequences with cri.tninal charges laid. Of conrse, when cri.tninal
charges are laid, the bnrden of proof is a stronger one, narndy beyond a reasonable doubt,
than it is when we are dealing with an offence under the University's Code. The bnrden
there is for clear and cogent evidence. However, because the natnre 6f the offence has
the potential for criminal charges, that has given us a great deal of concern. We feel
strongly that the University should not be implicated in behavionr that might otherwise
be considered cri.tninal. This is a very serious offence. Paragraph 16 of the R.W. case
contains an· extremely eloquent and well-stated analysis on serious offences and we
believe that the majority of that paragraph applies to this case.
d. Extenuating circumstances
We have not been made aware of any extenuating circumstances surrounding the
commission of this offence. If the Student, indeed, did not have the funds available to
continue to pnrsue her academic career, she had many potential options. She might have
attempted to speak to a faculty member about what financial concessions might be made;
she could have perhaps worked part-time; she could have taken a year off and worked.
She could have found other means of dealing with the challenge that presnmably she
thought she faced of not having enough funds to continue with her education. We also
query how she found the funds to continue with her education in any event because we
understand that she has taken more conrses in this most recent academic year after she
tendered this forged document. So in all, we do not find that there are any extenuating
circumstances.

e. Need for deterrence
This is the type of offence that must be brought ta the attention of students and a strong
sanction imposed so that there is a strong deterrent factor. We are very proud of onr
University and we have to make certain that people understand that any docnment that

52124

-2 -

Case 450

bears the name of the University is a legitimate document, composed by a person in
authority to compose it. It is unfortunate that .in this era of electronic information it
seems easier to forge documents than in the past. So, we feel that the deterrent factor is
very important and that the reputation of the University would be seriously diminished if
we did not take a very proactive and serious approach to this.
[3]

Having considered all of the factors we have decided unanimously to accept the Joint
Submission. Sanction will be imposed in accordance with the Joint Submission on
Penalty, which is Exhibit 5, specifically:
1.

The Tribunal recommend to the President that he recommend to the Governing
Council that the Student be expelled from the University; and

11.

Pending the decision of the Governing Council, that the Student be suspended from
the University for a period of up to five years.
·

[4]

The Student and the University submit that the Tribunal should report this case to the
Provost who may publish a notice of the decision of the Tribunal and the sanctions
imposed, with the Student's name withheld.

[5]

Ms. Harmer, thank you very much for your extremely well-reasoned and informative
submission, which has made our job much easier. This Tribunal is now adjourned.

Dated this

~~~~

/ ?t:iay o ~ , 2oof

/

52124

-3-

Rodica David, Chair

1
A

University of Toronto and R

(

JOINT SUBMISSION ON PENALTY

. ,\,\ \
1. The University of Toronto and RIIII A • • • submit to the Tribunal that the
• • ~•1.l : '\ .

' ·,' '.. ;, . :: '.

•-'_11._:•\t ,,

appropri~t~penalty in all the circurnstt;inlles of this case is that:
a. t~e Tribunal recommencLw. the.,President that he recommend to the
,t.1i i;.f..,.,
, .. ;, ,;: l111:::.:i ti<IT

.. "~-~~~~~'.~g :~~~-~'.'. ~~~~.~~;. ~.... fJ, be expelled from the University; and
tr.~

·.

t,n··t,

~-

· 1i:•· pe\iding the decision 'of the Governing Council, that Ms. A

be

·"" ·suspended fronrth'e'Unlversity for a period of up to five years.

2. The University of Toronto and Ms. A

submit that the Tribunal should report

this case to the Provost who may publish a notice of the decision of the Tribunal and
the sanctions Imposed, with Ms. A

3.

Ms. A

's name withheld.

acknowledges that the University of Toronto has advised her to

obtain independent legal advice before signing this Joint Submission on Penalty and
that she has done so.
Signed in Toronto on May

4, 2008.

Signed in Toronto on May

J..., 2008.

~16-~=

Lil Harm

Assistant Discipline Counsel
University of Toronto

68844&1

I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I

University of Toronto and R

A

(;

)

Agreed Statement of Facts on Sanction
First Offence

1.

Ms.A

admitted to the offence of plagiarism in a dean's meeting on

March 1, 2006 in connection with an essay submitted in the 2005 Fall Session in
ENGB42H3F. Ms. AM•■ included many paraphrases and direct
unacknowledged quotations from an online website for an estimated_?0-80% of
an essay submitted in this course. The essay was worth 30% of the course
mark.

2.

Ms.A

's explanation was that she had been rushed, and had

intended to put in the references in footnotes but woke late in the morning the
essay was due and failed to· put in the references.

3.

The Dean's Designate imposed a sanction of a mark of zero on the essay.

She further placed a notation on Ms. A

's transcript for a period of one

year from January 1, 2006.

4.

The Dean's Designate further advised Ms. A

that this was a

lenient sanction, and that all acts of academic dishonesty are taken seriously and
cannot be tolerated. Ms. Aa•■ was admonished not to do anything similar
again.

ff
o.

a
I

5.

A copy of a letter to Ms. A

from the Dean's Designate dated March

3, 2006 is attached at Tab 1.

A-

Second Offence

6.

Ms.

further admitted to having plagiarized an essay submitted in

ENGC56H3F in the 2006 Fall Session. Passages in the essay were taken

'
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•ll
II

Q

q
Q

q
Q

verbatim without attribution from four internet sources. Ms. A

made this

admission at a meeting on February 7, 2007 with the Dean's Designate,

7.

Ms.A

explained to the Dean's Designate that her father had died

at the end of October, 2006, two weeks before the essay was due, but that she
had not requested special consideration from the course instructor.

8.

The Dean's Designate imposed a sanction of a reduction in the course

grade of two times the value of the essay, for a total reduction of 50%, and a one
year notation on Ms. A

's transcript for a period of one year from January

1, 2007,
9,

A copy of a letter to Ms. A

Ifrom the Dean's Designate dated

February 13, 2007 is attached at Tab 2.

10.

Ms. A - acknowledges that the University of Toronto has advised

her to obtain independent legal advice before signing this Agreed Statement of
Facts and that she has done so .

Signed in Toronto on May

t/ ,2008.

Signed in Toronto on May J, , 2008.

