Case 450

DATE:

   July 17, 2009

PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v. R.A.

Hearing Date(s):

   May 5, 2008

Panel Members:

   Ms. Rodica David, Chair
   Professor Melanie Woodin, Faculty Member
   Dr. Joan Saary, Student Member

Appearances:

   Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel for the University

   Student charged under s. B.i.1(a) of the Code. The charges related to
   allegations that the Student forged and submitted a letter of
   admissions to the Royal Bank of Canada as supporting documentation for
   a student loan . The Student did not attend the hearing. The parties
   submitted an Agreed Statement of Facts and a Joint Submission on
   Penalty. The Panel found the Student guilty under s. B.i.1(a). The
   Panel noted that the Student had two previous offences on which she
   received relatively lenient sanctions and found that it was a mark of
   her character that she committed offences in three consecutive years.
   The Panel stated that the action that the Student took was clearly
   deliberate and must have involved a significant amount of thought. In
   discussing the nature of the offence, the Panel stated its view that an
   attempt to get money from a bank with a forged document could have
   potential consequences with criminal charges laid. As such, this was an
   extremely serious offence as it affected the public reputation of the
   University and that the University should not be implicated in
   behaviour that could be considered criminal. The Panel found that there
   were no extenuating circumstances. If the Student did not have the fund
   to continue her studies, she had many other options including speaking
   with a faculty member, working part-time, and taking a year off. The
   Panel also expressed its doubt as to whether the Student actually
   lacked the funds. The Panel found the need for deterrence to be very
   strong considering the potential damage to the Universityâs reputation.
   Based on its discussion of all of the factors, the Panel accepted the
   Joint Submission of Penalty and imposed a recommendation that the
   Student be expelled; a five-year suspension; and a report be issued to
   the Provost.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12745
