THE UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL OF THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO

IN THE MATTER OF charges of academic dishonesty filed on July 3, 2012,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters, 1995,

ANO IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Act, 1971, S.0. 1971, c. 56 as am. S.O. 1978, c. 88

BETWEEN:

THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
-AND-

REASONS FOR DECISION

Date of Hearing: Wednesday, August 14, 2013
Members of the Panel:
Mr. Jeffrey Leon, Barrister and Solicitor, Chair
Professor Markus Bussmann, Faculty of Applied Science and Engineering, Faculty
Panel Member
Ms. Susan Mazzatto, Student Panel Member
Appearances:
Ms. Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel for the University, Paliare Roland
Barristers
Ms. Amber Neumann, Legal Case Worker for The Student, Downtown Legal Services
In Attendance:
Mr. ~ CIIIII The Student
Dr. Kristi Gourlay, Manager and Academic Integrity Officer, Office of Student Academic
Integrity Faculty of Arts and Science
Ms. Natalie Ramtahal, Coordinator, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances

2

1.

The University Tribunal was convened on August 14, 2013 to hear two charges

under the Code of Behaviour Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters, 1995 (the
"Code") laid against the Student by letter dated July 3, 2012 from Professor Edith M.
Hillan, the Vice Provost Faculty and Academic Life, University of Toronto (the
"Charges").
2.

At the outset of the hearing, the Tribunal was advised that the matter would

proceed on the basis of an agreed statement of facts dated August 14, 2013 (the
"Agreed Statement of Facts").
3.

The Student was present at the hearing. The Tribunal was also advised that if

the Tribunal finds the Student, based on his admissions, guilty of academic misconduct
as set out in Charge 1 of the Charges, then Charge 2 will be withdrawn.
The Charges

4.

The Charges against the Student are as follows:
(i)

On or about April 16, 2012, you knowingly represented as your own an
idea or expression of an idea or the work of another in connection with an
essay titled "On Taxonomic lncommensurability and Truth-Claims about
Science" which you submitted for academic credit in HPS350H1S
("Essay), contrary to section B.1.1 (d) of the Code.

(ii)

In the alternative, on or about April 16, 2012, you knowingly engaged in a
form

of cheating,

academic

dishonesty or misconduct,

fraud

or

misrepresentation not otherwise described in the Code, in connection with

3
the Essay which you submitted for academic credit in HPS350H1S,
contrary to section B.l.3(b) of the Code.
The Agreed Statement of Facts
5.

The Tribunal was advised that the Student was prepared to admit that he was

guilty of academic misconduct as set out in Charge 1 of the Charges and he waived a
formal reading of the Charges.
6.

The Agreed Statement of Facts (Exhibit "2") was signed by counsel for the

University and by the Student. The Student acknowledged that the facts set out in the
Agreed Statements of Facts were true and that he executed the Agreed Statement of
Facts voluntarily and with the advice of legal counsel.
7.

The Agreed Statement of Facts set out the following:
(i)

At all material times, Mr.

GIii was a registered student at the University

of Toronto. He first enrolled in Fall 2005. After the 2007 Winter term he
was placed on an academic suspension for one year. Mr.

GIii was last

enrolled in courses in the 2012 Winter term. At that time, he earned 17.50
credits, and a cumulative grade point average of 1.95.

A copy of

Mr. CIiis academic record, dated August 7, 2013. is found in Exhibit "1",
the Joint Book of Documents ("JBD") at Tab 3.
(ii)

In the Winter 2012 term Mr.

GIii enrolled in HPS350H1: Revolutions in

Science, taught by Curtis Forbes ("Course").

The Course required the

4

submission of an essay worth 40% of the Course mark. A copy of the
Course syllabus is found in the JBD at Tab 4.
(iii)

The Course syllabus contained a detailed plagiarism policy, and advised
students that Turnitin.com would be used for all essays submitted in the
Course.

(iv)

On or about April 17, 2012, Mr.

<a submitted an essay in the Course

entitled "On Taxonomic lncommensurability and Truth-Claims about
Science" ("Essay"). A copy of the Essay is found in the JBD at Tab 5.
(v)

The Essay paraphrases extensively from at least three published articles
available on the internet. No attribution is given in the Essay to indicate
that the words used were taken from other sources, and were not

Mr. <:as own words. A copy of the Essay highlighted to indicate where
it copied the internet sources is found in the JBD at Tab 6. A copy of the
internet sources is found in the JBD at Tab 7.
(vi)

Mr.

<a admits that in submitting the Essay in HPS350H1 in April 2012

he knowingly submitted academic work in which he represented as his
own an idea or expression of an idea or work of another, contrary to
section B.1.1 (d) of the Code.
Tribunal's Decision

8.

As noted, the Student pied guilty to the Charges. The Tribunal considered the

facts as set out in the Agreed Statement of Facts. The Tribunal found that the facts

5
supported a finding of conduct contrary to Charge 1 and accepted the Student's plea of
guilty. Upon so advising the parties, counsel for the University withdrew Charge 2 of the
Charges.

Joint Submission on Sanction
9.

The parties submitted to the Tribunal an Agreed Statement of Facts on Sanction

dated August 14, 2013 (Exhibit "3"). The parties also submitted to the Tribunal a Joint
Submission on Penalty, also dated August 14, 2013 (Exhibit "4").
10.

In the Joint Submission on Penalty, the Provost and the Student submitted that

the appropriate penalty in all the circumstances should be as follows:
(i)

Assign a final grade of zero for HPS350H1;

(ii)

Suspend the Student from the University from August 5, 2013 until August
14, 2017;

(iii)

Place a notation on the Student's academic record and transcript for a
period of five years from the date of the order, to August 14, 2018.

(iv)

This case shall be reported to the Provost to publish a notice of the
Tribunal's decision and the sanctions imposed with the Student's name
withheld.

11.

The Student acknowledged that he had signed the Agreed Statement of Facts on

Sanction and the Joint Statement on Penalty freely and voluntarily, knowing the
potential consequences he faced, and that he did so with the benefit of legal counsel.

6

12.

The Agreed Statement of Facts on Sanction set out the following facts relevant to

penalty:
ENG202Y1

13.

In Fall 2006 and Winter 2007 Mr.

<a was enrolled in ENG202Y1 : Major

British Writers. On March 7, 2007, he submitted an essay in the course, worth 23% of
the final course mark. The essay was found to have been plagiarized from various
websites, without attribution.
14.

Mr.

<a admitted that his essay in ENG202Y1 was plagiarized at a meeting

with the Dean's Designate on June 4, 2007. He explained that his mother had been in a
car accident and had suffered a stroke, and he was therefore responsible to care for his
two younger siblings.
15.

The Dean's Designate imposed what he described as a lenient sanction of a

mark of zero for the essay, and a further reduction of 5 marks resulting in a mark in the
course of 51; and a notation on the Student's transcript from April 1, 2007 to March 31,
2008.

<a received a letter from the Dean's Designate dated June 4, 2007,
summarizing the meeting and the sanction imposed. This letter provided Mr. <a with
16.

Mr.

information about options available to him if he found himself in the future in
circumstances that made it impossible for him to meet course requirements. It further

<a that a second offence would be treated more severely. A copy of the
letter dated June 4, 2007 to Mr. <a from Professor D.W. Smith was attached as

warned Mr.

Tab A to the Agreed Statement of Facts on Sanction.

7
POL380H

17.

In Summer 2010 Mr. •

was enrolled in POL380H1:

Topics in

I.P. Insurgency/Counterinsurgency. Mr. ~ submitted an essay in this course worth
35% of the final course mark.
18.

With the exception of a few word changes, Mr. ~ s essay in this course was

taken from one unattributed article. All citations listed in Mr. ~ s essay were also
copied from the same article.
19.

Mr. ~ attended a Dean's meeting on July 28, 2010, at which he admitted that

his essay was plagiarized. He read a statement at the meeting in which he explained
that his mother was ill with suicidal tendencies, that they had been evicted from their
home in September of the previous year and he had moved into student housing, that
he felt heavy domestic and emotional stress, and that his mother had locked him out of
his apartment the night before the essay was due. Mr. • acknowledged that he
was aware of the options available to him to address such issues, and that he should
have availed himself of them. He further acknowledged that he knew plagiarism was
wrong and that he copied his paper in order to avoid a further academic suspension.
20.

Mr. •

provided two doctor's notes to support his explanation. The Dean's

meeting was adjourned to permit follow-up in relation to the doctor's notes. A copy of
the doctor's notes was attached as Tab B to the Agreed Statement of Facts on
Sanction.
21.

Subsequent to the Dean's meeting, the Office of Student Academic Integrity

("OSAI") followed up with the doctor's office to confirm the authenticity of the medical

8
notes provided by Mr. ~ The doctor's office confirmed that one of the notes was
not authentic.
22.

A further Dean's meeting was convened on August 25, 2010. At that meeting

Mr. • read from another statement in which he said he accepted full responsibility
for the "recent complication" of the forged medical note.

He claimed that his

thirteen-year old sister stole the doctor's note pad and wrote the note "out of fear for our
situation" due to a concern that he would lose their student housing if he was
sanctioned for academic misconduct with a suspension from the University.
23.

Mr. ~ made further claims such as having had to live on the street for two

months, and working full time with a full course load, which when investigated by OSAI
and discussed with him he agreed he had exaggerated. Mr. ~ lived on the street
for several days before being able to live in the vacated property of a family friend until
the family was able to secure housing.
24.

The Dean's Designate imposed a lenient sanction that he called a very rare,

"once in a lifetime ticket" of a mark of zero in the course, a four-month suspension, and
a notation until graduation. The reason given for the brevity of the period of suspension
was the Dean's Designate's concern to avoid the possible loss of Mr. C - s student
housing from a longer suspension. Instead, the Dean's Designate informed Mr. •
that he wished to give him a chance to do something about his life, to try to think and
reorganize his approach to his academic career.

Mr. •

acknowledged that he

understood that he was being given a once in a lifetime opportunity that he would not
overlook.

9

25.

Professor Sam Solecki, the Dean's Designate, sent Mr. •

a letter dated

September 1, 2010 in which he summarized the meetings of July 28 and August 25,
2010, and their outcome.

This letter set out the steps required to avoid plagiarism

allegations when writing a paper, and warned Mr. •

that any further offence would

likely be foiwarded to the Tribunal for sanctioning, regardless of his personal
circumstances. A copy of Professor Solecki's letter of September 1, 2010 was attached
as Tab C to the Agreed Statement of Facts on Sanction.
26.

After considering the Agreed Statement of Facts on Sanction, the Joint

Submission on Penalty, the submissions of counsel for the University and counsel for
the Student and the authorities provided by counsel for the University, as well as all
other factors deemed relevant by the Tribunal, the Tribunal concluded that it would
accept the recommended sanctions.
27.

The Tribunal was mindful that, in general, a joint submission in this context

should be accepted by the Tribunal unless to do so "would be contrary to the public
interest or bring the administration of justice into disrepute if effect was given to the
Joint Submission" (see R. v. Tsicos, 2006 CANUi 33849 (Ont. C.A. per Cronk, JA)).
The sanctions set out in the Joint Submission, while lenient under the circumstances,
fell within the reasonable range of sanctions for the conduct in issue. To accept these
recommended sanctions does not bring the administration of justice into disrepute.
28.

The factors to be considered when determining penalty by this Tribunal are

well-established:
(i)

The character of the person charged;

10
(ii)

The likelihood of a repetition of the offence;

(iii)

The nature of the offence committed;

(iv)

Any extenuating circumstances surrounding the commission of the
offence;

(v)

The detriment to the University occasioned by the offence;

(vi)

The need to deter others from committing a similar offence.

(See In the matter of the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour, an appeal by Mr. C,
November 1976, page 12.)
29.

The Student was in attendance at the hearing.

Through counsel he

acknowledged his guilt and the seriousness of his conduct.
30.

The Tribunal was also mindful of the need to achieve a proper balance between

emphasizing the absolute need for honest and ethical behaviour by students of the
University community and the need, in appropriate circumstances, for a student to have
some future prospect of resuming his academic studies at the University.
31.

As this Tribunal has stated elsewhere:
It should be emphasized that acceptance of principles of honesty and integrity
are fundamental to, and prerequisites for, acceptance as a student at the
University. Dishonest conduct in the nature of plagiarism, concocting purported
references in academic papers or other dishonest conduct is a serious offence
and runs contrary to the very foundations upon which the University functions.

11
Disregard of these principles has the potential to seriously damage and
undermine the University and its academic community and the relationship of
trust that is foundational to the University's academic program. It is for these
reasons that dishonest conduct of this nature must be dealt with severely and
without exception. (See In the matter of the University of Toronto Code of
Behaviour and M.O., August 2012.}

32.

The Tribunal trusts that the Student recognizes that the University has afforded

him significant opportunities to continue with his academic studies. The Tribunal also
trusts that the Student recognizes the importance of the principles of honesty and
integrity, regardless of whether he has faced significant personal challenges while
enrolled at the University.

If he chooses to continue his academic studies, at this

University or any other educational institution, it is hoped that he will have learned an
important lesson and conduct himself in the future with honesty and integrity in all his
dealings in the academic community.
Order

33.

At the conclusion of the hearing, the Panel conferred and made the following

order:
(i)

THAT Mr. C - is found guilty of one count of the academic offence of
plagiarism, contrary to section B.1.1 (d) of the Code of Behaviour on
Academic Matters;

12
(ii)

THAT the following sanctions shall be imposed on Mr. ~
(a)

He shall receive a final grade of 0 for HPS350H1 in the Winter 2012
term;

(b)

He shall be suspended from the University for a period of four years
fromAugu~15, 201 3toAugust14, 2017; and

(c)

That a notation be placed on his academic record and transcript for
a period of five years from the date of the order, to August 14,
2018.

(iii)

THAT this case shall be reported to the Provost for publication of a notice
of the decision of the Tribunal and the sanction or sanction imposed, with
the name of the student withheld.

DATED at Toronto, September 23, 2013.

