Case #671

   DATE: September 23, 2013
   PARTIES: University of Toronto v. A.C.
   Hearing Date(s): August 14, 2013
   Panel Members:
   Jeffery Leon, Chair
   Markus Bussmann,Â Faculty Member
   Susan Mazzatto, Student Member
   Appearances:
   Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel for the University
   Amber Neumann, Student Representative, DLS
   In Attendance:
   The Student
   Kristi Gourlay, Manager, Office of Academic Integrity
   Natalie Ramtahal, Coordinator, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty
   Grievances

   Trial Division â s. B.i.1(d) of the Code â plagiarism â submitted essay
   containing extensive paraphrasing without attribution â Agreed
   Statement of Facts â guilty plea accepted â Joint Submission on Penalty
   â fourth offence â two prior plagiarism offences â future prospect of
   resuming academic studies at University should be considered â Student
   acknowledged guilt â Joint Submission on Penalty accepted -- grade
   assignment of zero in one courses; four-year suspension; five year
   notation on transcript; report to Provost for publication

   Student charged with one offence under s. B.i.1(d), and in the
   alternative, one offence under s. B.i.3(b). The charges related to an
   allegation that the Student submitted an essay containing extensive
   paraphrasing from at least three published articles without
   attribution. The Student pleaded guilty and the matter proceeded by way
   of an Agreed Statement of Facts. The Panel accepted the Studentâs
   guilty plea and the University withdrew the alternative charge. The
   parties presented a Joint Submission on Penalty. The Student had been
   previously sanctioned for plagiarism on two prior occasions. The
   Student was sanctioned for the first prior offence at the Decanal
   level. At the Deanâs Meeting convened with regards to the second
   previous plagiarism offence, the Student submitted a forged medical
   note. The Student nevertheless received a very rare and lenient
   sanction at the Decanal level In light of the exceptional circumstances
   surrounding the commission of the offence, and the potential for a more
   severe sanction to result in the loss of the Studentâs student housing.
   In the case of the current offence before the Tribunal, the Panel noted
   that the Student had acknowledged his guilt and the seriousness of his
   conduct. The Panel observed the need to achieve a proper balance
   between emphasizing honest and ethical behavior and the need, in
   appropriate circumstances, for a student to have some future prospect
   of resuming his academic studies at the University. The Panel concluded
   that the sanctions set out in the joint submission were lenient, but
   fell within the reasonable range of sanctions for the conduct in issue.
   The Panel accepted the Joint Submission on Penalty and imposed a final
   grade of zero in one course, a four-year suspension, a five-year
   notation on the Studentâs transcript, and ordered that the case be
   reported to the Provost for publication.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/13021
