Case 847

DATE:

   September 6, 2016

PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v M.K.K.

Hearing Date(s):

   August 15, 2016

Panel Members:

   Roslyn Tsao, Chair
   Michael Saini, Faculty Member
   Yusra Qazi, Student Member

Appearances:

   Rob Centa, Assistant Discipline Counsel
   Ejona Xega, Law Student for the Student
   Martha Harris, Academic Integrity Officer

In Attendance:

   Tracey Gameiro, Associate Director, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty
   Grievances
   M.K.K., the Student
   Shaun Laubman, Observer
   Christopher Wirth, Observer
   Natashe Brein, Observer
   The Trial Division of the Tribunal held a hearing to consider charges
   11 brought by the University against the Student including plagiarism
   and the use of unauthorized assistance in four separate classes. The
   Student was represented by a student from DLS. The Student and the
   University entered into an Agreed Statement of Facts (ASF). In the ASF
   the Student admitted to knowingly including verbatim excerpts from
   uncited sources in her exams contrary to s. B.i.1(d) or, in the
   alternative, s. B.i.3(b) of the Code .
   On this basis the Panel entered a finding of guilty on three charges.
   The University withdrew the other eight charges.
   The Hearing proceeded on the basis of an Agreed Statement of Facts
   relating to Penalty (ASFP) and the parties presented a Joint Submission
   on Penalty recommending a grade of zero in the courses; a four-year
   suspension; and a five-year notation on the Studentâs academic record
   and transcript. The Student had two prior sanctions on matters of
   plagiarism since attending the University in 2011. In both instances
   the Student received a written letter warning her not to reoffend. The
   Panel felt that the Student had ignored the sentiment and committed the
   offense in an exam setting.
   The Panel also noted the presence of mitigating factors including the
   Studentâs cooperation and full admission. Â Finally, the Panel noted
   that the JSP was light and without it the Panel would have been
   inclined to give a greater punishment.
   The Panel imposed penalty of a grade of zero in the course, a four-year
   suspension; a five-year notation on the Studentâs transcript; and that
   a report be issued to the Provost and the Universityâs newspapers.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/13031
