Report 389

DATE:

   August 23, 2017

PARTIES:

   Mr. C.O. (the âStudentâ) v. the Faculty of Applied Sciences and
   Engineering

Hearing Date(s):

   June 29, 2017

Committee Members:

   Professor Hamish Stewart, Chair
   Professor Jan Mahrt-Smith, Faculty Panel Member
   Ms. Susan Froom, Student Panel Member

Secretary:

   Ms. Krista Osbourne, Administrative Clerk and Hearing Secretary,
   Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances

Appearances:

For the Student:

   Mr. C.O. (the Student)
   Ms. Clara Ryu, Law Student, Downtown Legal Services
   Ms. Jennifer Fehr, Staff Lawyer, Downtown Legal Services

For the Faculty of Arts and Science/Woodsworth College:

   Professor James Davis, Associate Professor, Teaching Stream
   Mr. Don MacMillan, Faculty Registrar

In Attendance:

   Ms. Vanessa Laufer, New Chair of the Academic Appeals Committee
   (Observer)
   Mr. John F. Monahan, New Chair of the Academic Appeals Committee
   (Observer)

   Request for late withdrawal from four courses without academic penalty.
   At the end of the first term of the Studentâs final year of his
   program, he finished his final exams with a cumulative GPA was 1.51 and
   a sessional average was 55%. The Faculty deemed the Student to have
   failed the term and refused him readmission to the program. The Student
   appealed a grade in one of his courses, which was dismissed by the
   AAB.Â  The Student then brought this petition for a late withdrawal
   without academic penalty from the four courses that he had failed,
   which was dismissed by the AAB. He appealed this dismissal to the
   Committee, asking for a late withdrawal without academic penalty from
   the four courses that he had failed on the basis that he was suffering
   an anxiety disorder at the time of the exams, as well as grieving the
   recent deaths of his grandfather and his uncle.

   The Studentâs anxiety disorder had been diagnosed prior to his final
   year of the program. The Student had applied for, and received,
   academic accommodations for his chronic and severe anxiety throughout
   his time at the University. Prior to the semester at issue, the Student
   had attended counselling sessions over the summer with the Universityâs
   Health and Wellness services. He was registered with Accessibility
   Services, and had received an accommodation of extra time to write one
   of his mid-term exams. He did not apply for any other accommodations or
   bring his difficulties to the attention of the Faculty.

   The Studentâs grandfather died in the summer preceding the start of the
   term and his uncle died in the fall of his final year in the program.
   There was no evidence on the record that the Student sought medical
   assistance or counselling to help to deal with his sadness following
   these deaths.Â  All of these mental health issues occurred prior to the
   Facultyâs âdrop dateâ for the fall term.

   The Committee referred to Report #375, Report #264, Report #314, Report
   #367, and Report #373 which set out that the remedy of late withdrawal
   without penalty is an extraordinary remedy, reserved for unusual and
   unique situations. The University sets drop dates and expects its
   students to decide by that time whether or not they will continue with
   their studies.Â  Exceptions to this policy are rare, but could include
   situations where unexpected and unforeseeable circumstances occur after
   the drop date, where already existing circumstances become
   unpredictably worse, or where already existing circumstances do not
   reasonably resolve. In the absence of an exceptional circumstance, the
   Committee found that the decisions of the CoE and the AAB were fair and
   reasonable applications of the Facultyâs and the Universityâs policies.

   The Committee found that the fact that the Student was almost complete
   his program and the consequence of a refusal to readmit on the
   Studentâs ability to pursue a minor program of his choice were
   irrelevant in assessing the reasonableness of a divisionâs
   decision-making (Report #280).

   The Committee did find however, that the CoE and the AAB had failed to
   provide the Student with adequate reasons for their decisions. Relying
   on Report #367, the Committee found that it is a âbasic and
   uncontroversial principle of procedural fairness that a tribunal that
   makes decisions affecting the rights and interests of the parties
   before it should provide the parties with reasons for its decision for
   the benefit of the parties, the public, and any Tribunal who might
   review the decision.âÂ  The Committee found that the Student is
   entitled to know why their petition was dismissed, and that decisions
   should indicate the facts and the principles that led the tribunal to
   its conclusions even if they are just in a summary form (Report #258 of
   the Academic Appeals Committee, December 14, 2001). The Committee held
   that it was clear that the AAB had carefully considered the Studentâs
   petition and had good reasons for dismissing it; but that they should
   have been outlined in the letter to the Student.

   Appeal dismissed.
   [1]View Report

References

   1. file:///media/12635
