Case #979

   DATE: October 30, 2018
   PARTIES: University of Toronto v. K.L. (âthe Studentâ)
   Hearing Date(s):Â  Â  August 1, 2018
   Panel Members:
   Ms. Cheryl Woodin, Chair
   Professor Ernest Lam, Faculty Panel Member
   Ms. Yusra Qazi, Student Panel Member
   Appearances:
   Ms. Lily Harmer, Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenbert Rothstein
   LLP
   In Attendance:
   Ms. Krista Osbourne, Administrative Clerk and Hearing Secretary, Office
   of the Appeals, Discipline, Faculty Grievances
   Ms. Lucy Gaspini, Manager, Academic Success & Integrity Officer, Office
   of the Dean, UTM
   Ms. Lisa Devereauz, Academic Integrity Officer, Academic Success &
   Integrity, Office of the Dean, UTM
   Not in Attendance:
   The Student
   Trial Division - s. B.i.3(a) â forging or falsifying an academic
   recordÂ  Â â forged transcriptÂ  âÂ  student did not attend hearingÂ
   Â â suspension ofÂ  five years pending expulsion and a report to the
   Provost with the Studentâs name withheld.
   The Student was charged with one charge of forging or falsifying an
   academic record contrary to s.B.i.3(a) of the Code , or in the
   alternative, one charge of academic dishonesty not otherwise described
   contrary to s. B.i.3(b) of the Code. The charges related to an
   application that the Student had made to another University where the
   transcript was a forgery.Â  The Tribunal found that the University had
   taken appropriate steps to notify the Student of the hearing.Â  Â The
   Tribunal heard evidence that the University had attempted to contact
   the Student numerous times through email, as well, the University had
   managed to speak with the Student and he had indicated that he would
   attend a meeting with the Dean. He did not attend that meeting, and
   subsequent contact to the Student through the email, telephone and
   addresses provided in ROSI were unsuccessful. The hearing proceeded in
   the Studentâs absence.
   The Tribunal found that the Student was guilty of forging an academic
   record on the basis of affidavit evidence that the Student had provided
   a Certificate of Degree and an Academic History to another University
   in his application to be admitted into their programs. The transcript
   that the Student had provided listed much higher grades than the
   Studentâs actual grades had been, listed courses that the Student had
   never been enrolled in and indicated that the Student was âin good
   standingâ when the Student was in fact on academic probation.Upon the
   Tribunalâs finding of guilt, the University withdrew the alternative
   charge. The University withdrew the alternative charges.Â  The Tribunal
   accepted the Universityâs submission on penalty, given the seriousness
   of the offence, the lack of any evidence of mitigating circumstances
   given the Studentâs failure to participate in the process and present
   any, the Studentâs limited progress towards obtaining a degree at the
   University (which made reformation of little relevance), and the need
   to protect the credibility and academic quality of the institution for
   the benefit of those who rely on the academic record. The Tribunal
   ordered: an immediate suspension for a period of up to five years; a
   recommendation to the President that the Student be expelled; and that
   the case be reported to the Provost with the Studentâs name withheld.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12977
