Case #663

   DATE: May 9, 2013
   PARTIES: University of Toronto v. A.N.
   Hearing Date(s): April 19, 2013
   Panel Members:
   Ms. Roslyn Tsao, Chair
   Prof. Kathi Wilson, Faculty Member
   Mr. Michael Dick, Student Member
   Appearances:
   Rob Centa, Assistant Discipline Counsel for the University
   Effiette Sauer,Â Course Instructor
   Diane Kruger, Forensic Document Examiner
   Eleanor Irwin, Dean's Designate
   In Attendance:
   Natalie Ramtahal, Coordinator, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty
   Grievances
   Trial Division â s. B.i.1(c) of the Code â impersonation â Student had
   someone personate them for term test and final exam â Student did not
   attend hearing â individual writing exam wore a niqab and Student did
   not â finding of guilt â no mitigating factors â two instances of
   personation â poor academic record â serious and premeditated offence â
   preserving integrity of academic evaluation a paramount concern â grade
   assignment of zero in the course; recommendation that the Student be
   expelled; five-year suspension; report to Provost for publication

   Student charged with two offences under s. B.i.1(c) and in the
   alternative, two offences under s. B.i.3(b) of the Code. The charges
   related to an allegation that the Student had someone personate them at
   both a mid-term test and final exam. The Student did not attend the
   hearing, but the Panel was satisfied notice requirements were met and
   therefore proceeded. The course instructor testified that she observed
   an individual wearing a niqab in the course on only two occasions:
   during the mid-term test and the final exam. The individual wearing a
   niqab handed in the final exam in half the allotted time. The course
   instructor took the exam and reviewed it, noting that it would receive
   a very good grade. This exam was handed in under the Studentâs name.
   The Student nevertheless failed the course because the Student did not
   attend the final two compulsory lab sessions. The Student emailed the
   course instructor after final marks were released and requested a
   meeting with the course instructor. Having observed an individual
   wearing a niqab hand in the final exam under the Studentâs name, the
   course instructor was expecting the Student to be wearing a niqab at
   the meeting. The Student was, however, dressed in âeveryday clothes.â
   The course TAs and the lab coordinator informed the course instructor
   that they did not recall ever encountering a student wearing a niqab.
   The course instructor requested the Studentâs in-class lab book, lab
   notes, quizzes and early assessment test, which had been signed by the
   Student. The course instructor formed the view that the handwriting
   between the work known to have been that of the Student and that which
   was submitted under the Studentâs name by an individual wearing a niqab
   were different. At the Deanâs Meeting, the Student advised that the
   Student wore a hijab at home and had not had time to change clothes
   before the final exam. The Student indicated that government
   identification showing the Student wearing a hijab could be provided.
   The Student did not ever provide any such identification. A forensic
   document examiner produced a report and provided oral testimony to the
   effect that the person who wrote the mid-term test and the final exam
   was not the same person as the person who had written the work known to
   have been the Studentâs. The Panel found the Student guilty. The Panel
   noted that there were two instances of personation, the Student had a
   poor academic record, and there was no evidence of any mitigating
   factors. The Panel also noted that the integrity of academic evaluation
   is a paramount concern and that the Studentâs conduct was a serious and
   premeditated breach of this integrity. The Panel imposed a final grade
   of zero in the course, a recommendation that the Student be expelled
   from the University, a five-year suspension, and ordered that the case
   be reported to the Provost for publication.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12801
