Case No.: 971
UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO

IN THE MATTER OF charges of academic dishonesty made on April 24, 2018,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic
Matters, 1995,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Act, 1971, S.O. 1971, c. 56 as amended
S.O. 1978, c. 88
B E T W E E N:
UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO (the "University")
- AND –
M

-

A

(the "Student")

REASONS FOR DECISION

Hearing Date: September 19, 2018
Panel Members:
Ms. Roslyn M. Tsao, Chair
Professor Ken Derry, Faculty Panel Member
Mr. Bradley Au, Student Panel Member
Appearances:
Mr. Robert A. Centa, Assistant Discipline Counsel for University, Paliare Roland Barristers
Not In Attendance:
The Student
Hearing Secretary
Ms. Tracey Gameiro, Associate Director, Office of Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances

Charges and Appearances
l.

The Trial Division of the Tribunal heard this matter on September 19, 2018. The Student
was charged on April 24, 2018 as follows:
Charge 1:

On or about December 7, 2016, you knowingly represented the ideas of
another, or the expressions of the ideas of another as your own work in an
essay titled “Why the Principle of All-Affected Interests is Wrong”
(“Essay”) that you submitted in partial completion of the course
requirements in POL484H1F 2016(9) (the “Course”), contrary to section
B.I.1(d) of the Code;

Charge 2:

On or about December 7, 2016, you knowingly obtained unauthorized
assistance in connection with the Essay, which you submitted for academic
credit in the Course, contrary to section B.I.1(b) of the Code;

Charge 3:

On or about December 7, 2016, you knowingly submitted the Essay,
which contained concocted references to one or more sources, contrary to
section B.I.1(f) of the Code;

Charge 4:

In the alternative to the charges above, on or about December 7, 2016, you
knowingly engaged in a form of cheating, academic dishonesty or
misconduct, fraud or misrepresentation not otherwise described in the
Code to obtain academic credit or other academic advantage of any kind,
contrary to section B.I.3(b) of the Code,

the "Charges".

Service on Student
2.

Pursuant to the Affidavit of Service of Ms. Susan Murphy sworn May 11, 2018, we are
satisfied that a statement of the Charges was sent to the Student by email dated April 24,
2018 to the Student's ROSI email address.

2

3.

Pursuant to the Affidavit of Service of Ms. Krista Osbourne sworn September 11, 2018,
we are also satisfied that the Notice of Hearing scheduled for September 19, 2018 was
sent to the Student by email dated July 27, 2018 to the Student's ROSI email address.

4.

There was also evidence tendered by way of an email from Mike Wiseman the Associate
Director, Information Security of Information Technology Services at the University, that
the Student's ROSI account was last accessed on August 7, 2018 and that there was no
auto-forwarding of messages from that account to another account.

5.

The Student did not respond in any way to Discipline Counsel in advance of hearing date
and it was not expected that the Student would attend.

6.

The Student did not attend for this Hearing.

7.

The Panel is satisfied that valid and proper service was effected on the Student pursuant
to the Rules and that the Hearing may proceed in the absence of the Student.

8.

Though the Student was last enrolled at the University in the Fall 2016 term (the term of
the subject Course), there was evidence that his ROSI email account was being checked
until as recently as August 7, 2018.

Findings on Charges
Facts
9.

The University tendered evidence by way of an Affidavit affirmed September 11, 2018 of
Professor Joseph Carens, the professor who taught the Course to the Student. This
Affidavit and Exhibits thereto were served on the Student by email to his ROSI email
address on September 12, 2018 based on the Affidavit of Service of Robert Centa sworn
September 13, 2018.

10.

Professor Carens affirmed the following facts:
(a)

Professor Carens taught the Course, a 4th year course, in the Fall of 2016 to the
Student.

3

(b)

Evaluation in the Course was based on two papers worth 40% and 60%. The first
paper was due on October 26, 2016 and the second paper was due December 7,
2016. The students were required to submit their papers in Word format and not
through the "Turnitin.com" platform.

(c)

The Student submitted his first paper on October 25, 2016 and Professor Carens
graded the paper with a 65% mark.

(d)

On December 4, 2016, the Student emailed Professor Carens seeking input as to
how he could improve his grade on his second paper. Professor Carens referred
the Student to his detailed comments on the Student's first paper.

(e)

On December 8, 2016, the Student submitted his second paper via e-mail and
explained that the tardiness of his paper was due to an unexpected Toronto Hydro
shutdown. Professor Carens accepted the paper without late penalty.

(f)

Professor Carens reviewed the second paper carefully, including the footnotes and
citations therein. Professor Carens noted that a number of cited sources made no
sense given the topic of the paper and he was careful to review the actual sources
in the paper where he could locate same electronically.

(g)

In particular, Professor Carens cited 15 footnotes which he found to be concocted
references for the following range of reasons:
(i)

the cited source material lacked any relevance to the portion of the
Student's paper (or otherwise);

(ii)

the footnotes lacked any pinpoint references to support the Student's
argument and such cited article did not provide any support for Student's
argument as a whole in Professor's opinion;

(iii)

some pinpoint citations did not support the proposition advanced by the
Student; and

(iv)

a footnote incompletely cited an article.

4

(h)

Professor Carens also noted that the Bibliography cited an article though there
were no footnotes referring to same in the text.

(i)

In addition, in Professor Caren's opinion, there were passages in the Student's
paper that were "uncharacteristically sophisticated" in style.

(j)

As a result of his concerns, Professor Carens emailed the Student on December
23, 2016 to request a meeting by phone or in person. Professor Carens wrote:
"I have some questions about your essay. I'd like to talk with you
about this either by phone or in person…Which would you
prefer?"

(k)

On January 2, 2017, Professor Carens sent another email to the Student informing
him that he would have to give him a temporary grade of zero on his second paper
as the class marks were being delayed pending a mark for the Student. The
Student was again invited to meet with Professor Carens to discuss. In particular,
Dr Carens stated:
…"This is not a permanent resolution of the matter, however. If
you can satisfy me that my concerns are unfounded, I will be able
to assign a normal grade for your paper and revise the final grade
on emarks to reflect that. If I continue to have these concerns, I
will have to initiate a formal process with the Office of Student
Academic Integrity..."

(l)

On January 15, 2017, Professor Carens emailed the Student once more to advise
that he would be entering a notation of "NGA" (no grade available) for the Course
instead of a zero grade as he learned of this alternative pending method of
addressing the situation so that the class grades could be submitted. Professor
Carens invited the Student yet again for a meeting to discuss matters.

(m)

The Student did not contact Professor Carens. On January 23, 2017, Professor
Carens submitted a formal notification of his concerns regarding academic
dishonesty to his department chair.

5

11.

In response to a question from the Tribunal, the Tribunal was advised that the delay
between the January 2017 investigation and the hearing date (September 2018) was due,
in part, to Professor Carens dealing with a loss in his family.

Analysis of Charges
12.

The University has charged the Student based on three distinct modes of academic
dishonesty: plagiarism, use of unauthorized assistance and concoction of references.
Although the University is proceeding on a concurrent basis, it is open for the Tribunal to
consider these charges in the alternative to each other.

Professor's Concern That Reference Material Was Not Relevant or Did Not Support the
Student's Argument
13.

In a case such as this, the Tribunal must be careful to balance the "red flags" raised by the
professor who has a subject-matter expertise of the course material which informs
his/her determination of "relevance" of cited material to the student's work against the
possibility that the student is a poor student unable to properly interpret the material or
formulate a sound argument.

Concluding that there is "concoction" may be

understandable when viewed through the lens of the professor but may not meet the
burden of demonstrating academic dishonesty that the University must discharge.
14.

Since members of the Tribunal may not have the expertise in the particular subject matter
of the course in question, the exercise of determining culpability will be based on the
quality of the instructor's review of the matter and his/her articulation and explanation of
the "red flags".

15.

In general, the Tribunal is not required to conclude that the University's version is the
only version of the facts but some common sense testing is warranted to satisfy the
Tribunal that the University's version is more likely than not.

16.

When there is no Student or defence presented, as in this case, the Tribunal must still
objectively weigh the University's evidence.

6

17.

In this case, the Tribunal reviewed the Student's (11 page) Essay and was provided with
10 articles/papers (9 of which were referenced by the Student in his Essay) to consider in
assessing Professor Caren's conclusions that the references/footnotes referred to
irrelevant and/or unsupportive material. These articles/papers ranged from 2 to 41 pages
in length.

18.

Although the members of the panel are thoughtful and have attained varying degrees of
matriculation to date, a certain reliance upon Professor Caren's suspicions about
academic dishonesty is required given that the panel cannot substantively digest the
subject matter and thesis of the Essay in the course of the hearing.

19.

A detailed review of the examples advanced by Professor Carens was conducted by the
panel during a recess. Although some of the cited footnotes could have been a product of
misinterpretation or poor argument on the Student's part, when all examples were
considered together and in the context of a 4th year student, the panel found that there
was clear and convincing evidence of concocted references. The cited material, in many
of the cases, was clearly not on point (even to a non-subject expert).

20.

The conclusion is that the cited references were, as submitted by Mr. Centa, included to
provide a "patina of academic rigour".

21.

In so finding, there can also be no doubt that the concoction of offending
references/footnotes was done "knowingly" by the Student or that he ought to have
known that they were concocted.

Plagiarism and Unauthorized Aid Not Established
22.

The evidence of Professor Carens above does not, however, establish that the Student
plagiarized or used any unauthorized aids in completing the Essay. Indeed, Professor
Carens indicates in his letter to his faculty chair of January 23, 2017 that he regrets not
requiring the students to submit their essays using turnitin.com nor assigning any formal
weight to class participation.

7

23.

There was no evidence that any part of the Essay was plagiarized from another original
source or that the Student had unauthorized assistance from another person as set out in
the Charges.

Conclusion on Charges

24.

The Student is found guilty of Charge 3 relating to "concoction".

25.

The Student is found not guilty of Charges 1 and 2 relating to "plagiarism" and "use of
unauthorized aid", respectively.

26.

The University withdrew Charge 4.

Penalty

27.

The University sought the following penalty:
(a)

a final grade of zero in the Course;

(b)

a suspension from the University for two years commencing from the date of the
Order;

(c)

a notation of the sanction on his academic record and ti·anscript for three years
from the day the Tribunal makes its order; and

(d)

that this case be repo1ted to the Provost for publication of a notice of the decision
of the Tribunal and the sanction or sanctions imposed, with the name of the
student withheld.

28.

In determining penalty, the Panel is directed to consider the ~ f actors (Case No.

1976/77-3, November 5, 1976), to achieve the goals of refonnation, detenence and
protection of the public. None of these three goals has priority over the other but the
Panel may consider how the facts of each case may demand that one has more relevance
over the other.

8

29.

The Student has no prior discipline history and, in his 4th year of studies at the University,
had earned 19 credits. As stated above, the Student last attended at the University in the
2016 Fall Term.

30.

In this case, the goal of individual rehabilitation is of minor importance given that the
Student has been inactive at the University since 2016.

Discipline Counsel

acknowledged that it was important to fashion a sanction that would allow the Student to
return to the University to complete his degree if he desired.
31.

A review of other decisions of the Tribunal with similar circumstances confirms that a
recommendation for a two year suspension is in keeping with this body of cases.

32.

However, there has been a significant delay from January 2017 until the hearing date.
The University has advised that the file was referred to Discipline Counsel on April 18,
2018.

As such, the file appears to have been appropriately and reasonably moved

forward by Discipline Counsel from that time to hearing in September, 2018.
33.

As for the delay between January 2017 to April, 2018, some of the delay was explained
by an aborted Dean's Designate meeting but a significant portion of that period, some 6-8
months, was not explained and was not, in any event, attributable to the Student.

34.

The panel was of the view that, had there been less delay in moving this case forward,
this hearing might have been heard in January of this year instead of September. To be
clear, the panel is not attributing blame or being critical of the University in this matter
but is simply noting the unexplained delay in bringing this matter to a hearing in a
reasonable time.

35.

The panel agrees with the recommendation of the University on sanction except that the
two year suspension is to commence on January 1, 2018.

36.

An Order with the above relief was signed by the Panel on September 19, 2018.

9

Dated at Toronto, this 28th day of November, 2018

______________________________
Roslyn Tsao, Co-Chair

10

