Case 971

DATE:

   November 28, 2019

PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v. M.A. (âthe Studentâ)

Hearing Date(s):

   September 19, 2018

Panel Members:

   Ms. Roslyn M. Tsao, Chair
   Professor Ken Derry, Faculty Panel Member
   Mr. Bradley Au, Student Panel Member

Appearances:

   Mr. Robert A. Centa, Assistant Discipline Counsel for University,
   Paliare Roland Barristers

Hearing Secretary:

   Ms. Tracey Gameiro, Associate Director, Office of Appeals, Discipline
   and Faculty Grievances

Not in Attendance:

   The Student

   The Student was charged with three charges related to an essay that had
   been submitted for course credit: (1) attributing the expressions of
   the ideas of another as their own work contrary to s.B.i.1(d) of the
   Code ; (2) unauthorized assistance contrary to s. B.i.1(b) of the Code
   ; (3) concocting sources, contrary to s. B.i.1(f) of the Code ; or in
   the alternative, academic dishonesty not otherwise described contrary
   to s. B.i.3(b) of the Code .

   The Student did not attend the hearing. The Tribunal found that notice
   of the hearing had been effected on the Student on the basis of
   affidavit evidence that numerous emails had been sent to the Studentâs
   ROSI email account, and that the account had been accessed since notice
   had first been sent via email. The Tribunal found that the hearing
   could proceed in the Studentâs absence.

   While the University advanced the charges on a concurrent basis, the
   Tribunal found that it was open to them to consider the charges in the
   alternative as they related to a single essay. The Tribunal found that
   the evidence supported a finding of concoction on the basis of examples
   advanced by the professor that showed that, in many cases, the sources
   cited were clearly not on point (even to the non-expert Tribunal) and
   were included to provide a âpatina of academic rigourâ to the essay.
   The Tribunal found the Student not guilty on charges 1 and 2 relating
   to "plagiarism" and "use of unauthorized aid". Upon the Tribunalâs
   finding of guilt on charge 3, the University withdrew the alternative
   charge of academic dishonesty not otherwise specified.

   In determining the appropriate penalty, the Tribunal considered the Mr.
   C. factors (Case No. 1976/77-3, November 5, 1976). The Student had no
   prior discipline history but had only earned 19 credits in his four
   years at the University and last attended in the Fall 2016 Term, so
   rehabilitation was of minor importance given that the Student was
   inactive. The Tribunal accepted that it was important that the sanction
   would allow the Student to return to the University should he choose to
   resume his studies. The Tribunal accepted the Universityâs proposed
   penalty, awarding: (a) a final grade of zero in the Course; (b) a
   suspension from the University for two years starting January 1, 2018
   (to account for delay that is not attributable to the Student); (c) a
   notation of the sanction on his academic record and transcript for
   three years; and (d) that the case be reported to the Provost for
   publication of a notice of the decision with the name of the Student
   withheld.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12979
