Case 1197

DATE:

   May 3, 2022

PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v. W.K. ("the Student")

HEARING DATE:

   March 28, 2022, via Zoom

PANEL MEMBERS:

   Ms. Alexandra Clark, Chair
   Professor Glen Jones, Faculty Panel Member
   Ms. Madison Kerr, Student Panel Member

APPEARANCES:

   Ms. Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg
   Rothstein LLP
   The Student

HEARING SECRETARY:

   Ms. Carmelle Salomon-Labbe, Associate Director, Office of Appeals,
   Discipline and Faculty Grievances

   The Student was charged under s. B.i.3(a) of the‚ØCode of Behaviour on
   Academic Matters, 1995‚Ø(‚Code‚) on the basis that the Student
   knowingly forged or in any other way altered or falsified an academic
   record, and/or uttered, circulated or made use of such forged, altered
   or falsified record, namely, a document which purported to be a degree
   certificate from the University. The Student was also charged under s.
   B.i.3(b) of the Code on the basis that the Student engaged in a form of
   cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or misrepresentation
   not otherwise described in the Code in order to obtain academic credit
   or other academic advantage in connection with a document that
   purported to be a degree certificate from the University.

   The Panel received an Agreed Statement of Facts (‚ASF‚) which outlined
   that the Student admitted that, as part of an application for
   employment, he misrepresented his academic status by altering and
   falsifying a copy of another person‚s degree certificate to make it
   appear as if it was his degree certificate and that he had graduated
   from the University of Toronto. The Panel confirmed with the Student
   that his admission was voluntary, informed, and unequivocal. The ASF
   further outlined that the Student had only earned 20.5 credits and had
   never graduated from the University. The Panel noted that the ASF
   outlined that the Office of Convocation received an email from a
   background verification service seeking confirmation that the Student
   had been conferred a Bachelor of Arts degree by the University. The
   Office of Convocation advised the verification service company that the
   Student had not been granted a degree by the University. Subsequent to
   this, the Office of Convocation forwarded the email along with a copy
   of the degree certificate to the Associate Registrar for further
   investigation. The ASF further outlined that the Associate Registrar
   determined that the Student had not graduated from the University and
   the Degree was not legitimate. The Student attended a meeting with the
   Dean‚s Designate and at the meeting, the Student admitted to the
   academic offence and apologized for his actions. The Panel noted that
   the evidence contained in the ASF and accompanying documents clearly
   proved that the Student had knowingly forged a degree certificate and
   had made use of this forged document as part of a job application.
   Therefore, the Panel found the Student guilty of the first charge. The
   University withdrew the second charge.

   The parties entered a Joint Submission on Penalty (‚JSP‚), which was
   provided to the Panel for consideration. The Panel noted while it
   retains the discretion to reject joint submissions in appropriate
   cases, the fact that adversarial parties have agreed on the appropriate
   sanction is a strong indication that the appropriate balancing of
   interests has occurred. The Student tendered a book of documents
   relating to his personal circumstances at the time of the offence. The
   Panel noted that the Student and his family experienced significant
   financial hardship brough on by the Covid-19 pandemic, and that
   familial conflicts magnified during this time. In an attempt to secure
   employment that would allow him to live independently and escape his
   difficult family situation, he forged the degree certificate to support
   his application. The Panel considered the factors and principles
   relevant to sanction set out by this Tribunal in University of Toronto
   and Mr. C (Case No. 1976/77-3, November 5, 1976). The Panel noted that
   this was the Student‚s first offence, he entered into an agreed
   statement of facts and a joint submission on penalty, attended and
   participated in the Tribunal‚s hearing, and accepted responsibility for
   his actions. Regarding the likelihood of a repetition of the offence,
   the Panel noted that although the Student admitted to the offence at
   the first opportunity and understood the seriousness of the offence, it
   was concerned that the offence may not have come to light if the
   prospective employer had not employed a verification service to check
   on the Student‚s academic qualifications. The Panel noted that a
   falsified degree certificate in order to secure employment is one of
   the most serious academic offences a student can commit, and this
   offence can devalue the University‚s reputation for academic excellence
   and is profoundly unfair to students who fully complete their degrees.
   The Panel further noted that deliberate dishonesty must always be
   denounced and deterred in order to protect the academic integrity of
   the University.¬  The Panel also considered other cases of the Tribunal
   that dealt with similar offences. The Panel noted that although the
   Tribunal is not bound by past decision, it strives to develop a
   consistent body of case law so that students are treated fairly and
   equitably. The Panel was satisfied that the facts of this case did not
   warrant expulsion, and that a five-year suspension was an appropriate
   penalty. The Panel noted that it was persuaded by the Student‚s
   expression of remorse, his acceptance of responsibility for the
   offence, and the significant difficulties that he was experiencing at
   the time of the offence. The Panel sought clarification from the
   University about the joint proposal for a notation on the Student‚s
   academic record and transcript until graduation because the authorities
   presented by the University appeared to show that a five-year
   suspension is usually accompanied by a seven-year notation. The
   University could not point to an express discussion of the issue in
   existing case law. The Panel noted that, in its view, one of the
   central purposes of the notation is to ensure that future professors
   and invigilators are aware of the Student‚s disciplinary history and
   are able to provide appropriate scrutiny of the Student‚s work. In
   light of this central purpose and the significant mitigating factors in
   this case, the Panel agreed that a notation ‚until graduation‚ was
   flexible and would fulfil the aims of the sanction. Therefore, the
   Panel noted that the JSP does not bring the administration of justice
   into disrepute and is not otherwise contrary to the public interest. It
   strikes a fair balance between the mitigating and aggravating factors.
   The Panel imposed the following sanctions: a five-year suspension; a
   notation on the transcript until graduation; and a report to the
   Provost for publication.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/30485
