Case 994 - Sanction

DATE:

   August 24, 2020

PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v. H.W.

HEARING DATE:

   May 29, 2020, via Zoom

Panel Members:

   Mr. Dean F. Embry, Chair
   Professor Lynne Howarth, Faculty Panel Member
   Ms. Julie Farmer, Student Panel Member

Appearances:

   Ms. Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg
   Rothstein LLP
   Mr. Giancarlo Gillespie, Representative for the Student, Downtown Legal
   Services
   The Student

In Attendance:

   Mr. Christopher Lang, Director, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty
   Grievances

   The StudentÂ wasÂ found guiltyÂ ofÂ the following
   offences:Â (1)Â oneÂ count ofÂ having intent to commit the offence of
   forging or in any other way altering or falsifying an academic
   recordÂ underÂ s. B.i.3(a)Â and B.ii.2Â of theÂ CodeÂ of Behaviour on
   Academic Matters, 1995â¯(the âCodeâ);Â (2)Â two counts ofÂ knowingly
   engaging in a form ofÂ cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct,
   fraud or misrepresentation not otherwise described inÂ theÂ CodeÂ in
   order to obtain academic credit or advantage under s. B.i.3(b);Â and
   (3)Â oneÂ count ofÂ plagiarism under s. B.i.1(d).

   InÂ determiningÂ sanction, the PanelÂ consideredÂ a Joint Submission on
   Penalty (âJSPâ)Â from the partiesÂ along with a Book of Documents on
   Sanction from the UniversityÂ andÂ a Book of Authorities on
   SanctionÂ from the Studentâs representative.Â The Panel noted that in
   accordance withÂ University of Toronto and M.A.Â (Case No. 837,
   December 22, 2016)Â andÂ R. v. Anthony-Cook, 2016 SCC 43, the Tribunal
   should only refuse to imposeÂ aÂ penaltyÂ thatÂ is jointly submitted if
   that penalty would beÂ fundamentallyÂ contraryÂ to the interests of the
   University community andÂ unreasonable orÂ unconscionable.

   The Panel heard submissions from the parties that focused on four major
   factors: the character of the Student, the likelihood of repetition of
   offences, the nature of the offences and the detrimental effect the
   offences had on the University.Â With regard toÂ the character of the
   Student, the Panel noted that the Student had no prior finding of
   academic dishonesty and treatedÂ her admission of guilt to
   theÂ plagiarismÂ offence as an indication of remorse and willingness to
   take responsibility.Â Juxtaposed to thisÂ isÂ the fact that
   theÂ StudentÂ did not admitÂ guilt,Â and therefore,Â there isÂ no
   indication of remorse or willingness to take responsibilityÂ as it
   relates to the more serious offence of intent to forge documents. This
   intent stemsÂ from theÂ purchaseÂ of a stamp and sealÂ thatÂ contained
   text and design elements almost identical to the stamps andÂ embosser
   used by the Office of the Registrar ofÂ UTM. The Panel was not provided
   with any further mitigating circumstances that would explain the
   Studentâs behaviour.Â Â The Panel was asked to consider the sequence of
   events thatÂ led to both charges as anÂ aggravatingÂ factor in
   analyzing the Studentâs character and likelihood of futureÂ offences.
   The Panel found thatÂ toÂ treat the sequence of events as an
   aggravating factor would amount to improperly treating the first
   offence as a âprior offenceâ in the absence of a finding of
   guilt.Â Therefore, since a finding of guilt had not been made on the
   first offence, the Panel refused to treatÂ that asÂ a prior offence or
   an aggravating factor.Â The Panel noted that the nature of the offences
   is a significant factor.Â The Panel outlined that plagiarism strikes to
   the very core of the relationship between the University and its
   students and that an attempted forgery offence is evenÂ more serious.
   The Panel foundÂ that theÂ plan to research and acquire an official
   looking stampÂ and seal was deliberate and premeditated, therefore,
   theÂ potential mischief that theÂ stamp and seal could have brought
   would have been extensive.Â The Panel treated this potential as
   aÂ detrimentÂ to theÂ UniversityÂ and found that the potential
   detrimental effect on the University must be deterred.

   TheÂ Panel imposed the following sanctions:Â a
   gradeÂ assignmentÂ ofÂ zeroÂ in theÂ course;Â three-year
   suspension;Â four-year notationÂ on the StudentâsÂ academic record and
   transcript;Â andÂ aÂ report to the ProvostÂ for publication.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/29399
