Case 675

DATE:

   April 23, 2014

PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v O.K.

Hearing Date(s):

   March 4, 2014

Panel Members:

   Sana Halwani, Chair
   Joel Kirsh, Faculty Member
   Jenna Jacobson, Student Member

Appearances:

   Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel
   Sylvia Schumacher, Lawyer for the Student

In Attendance:

   The Student
   David Walders, Acting Secretary, Governing Council Secretariat,
   Observer
   Natalie Ramtahal, Coordinator, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty
   Grievances
   The Trial Division of the Tribunal was convened to consider charges
   under s. B.i.1(d) and, in the alternative, s. B.i.3(b) of the Code laid
   against the Student. The Student appeared unrepresented and was granted
   an adjournment to retain counsel. A second Notice of Hearing was issued
   with new panel members. On the basis of a joint request by the Student
   and University, the original Chair ordered the matter could proceed
   before a new Panel as the original panel had not heard any evidence.
   The Student pleaded guilty, the matter proceeded on the basis of an
   Agreed Statement of Facts and the University advised that if the
   Studentâs plea was accepted, the alternative charge would be withdrawn.
   The charges arose from an assignment the Student submitted in hardcopy
   and on Turnitin.com, an online plagiarism detector, which detected
   significant similarities between the Studentâs paper and online
   sources. The Professor met with the Student and referred the case to
   the Office of the Dean. The Student then attended a Deanâs Designate
   meeting where she indicated she hadnât intentionally plagiarized and
   abstained from pleading. The matter was then forwarded to the Provost.
   The Studentâs guilty plea was accepted, and the alternative charge was
   withdrawn. The Student had committed two previous plagiarism offences.
   She was given mark deduction penalties and a one-year transcript
   notation. The Student had also entered and Undertaking to complete
   eight Academic Skills Workshops and she would be unable to graduate
   until their completion. The Undertaking formed the basis of the Joint
   Submission on Penalty which contemplated a three year suspension. The
   Panel considered cases of Undertaking, appreciating their value, but
   felt they are more appropriate at discovery of a first offence, not
   when the Student is facing expulsion. The Student spoke and expressed
   remorse. The high threshold for rejecting a Joint Submission on Penalty
   was not met and the Panel accepted the partiesâ submission.
   The Panel found the Student guilty of plagiarism contrary to s.
   B.i.1(d) , assigned a grade of zero in the course, Â imposed a
   three-year suspension from the date of the hearing, ordered a notation
   on the Studentâs transcript for four years or until graduation and
   ordered that the case be reported to the Provost for publication.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12831
