THE UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL (DISCIPLINE APPEALS BOARD)
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO

IN THE MATTER OF charges of academic dishonesty made on October 30, 2008
AND IN Tl-IE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic
lvfatters, 1995 (the "Code")
AND IN TIIE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Act, 1971, S.O. 1971, c. 56 as
amended S.O. 1978, c.·.88

BETWEEN:

UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
Respondent
- and -

M

M
Appellant

Appeal Hearing Date: September 8, 2010
Members of the Discipline Appeal Board Panel:

Ms. Patricia D.S. Jackson, Chair
Ms. Margaret Kim, Student Panel Member
Professor Elizabeth Cowper, Faculty Panel Member
Ms. Jemy Joseph, Student Panel Member
Appearances:

Mt·. Robert A. Rast0111, for the Appellant, M:
M
Mr. Robert A. Centa for the Respondent, The University of Toronto
Parties and Their Representatives in Attendance:

the Student
Mr. M
M
Ms. Lucy Gaspini, Academic Aniiirs Office, The University of Toronto Mississauga

-2Rf<:ASONS FOR DECISION

I.

Mr. M

("the student") was charged and convicted of the following academic

offence:
On or about November 19, 2007, you knowingly represented
as your own an idea or expression oJ' an idea or work of
another in connection with an essay entitled "the Ode Qasicla" (the "Essay"), which you submitted for acade111ic
credit in RLG 204 HSF, contrary to section B.1.1.(cl) of the
Code.
2.

The pmicl hearing the case imposed:
"(I) a final grade of zero in the comse RLG 204;

(2)

a two-year suspension and a notation of the sanction on the student's
transcript for two years; and

(3)

a report of the decision and sanction to the Provost for publication
by the University, presumably with the na111c of the student
withheld."

3.

The student, who did not appear at the hearing at which he was convicted, appeals
from the conviction and the sentence that was imposed.

4.

In su1nnrnry, the grounds of his appeal are:
•

he was nol adequately notified oJ' the hearing al which he was convicted
and sentenced;

•

the Tribunal erred in proceeding in his absence;

o

tlrnt in the result lie did not have the opportunity to pul before the Tribunal
evidence regarding character and mitigating circumstances that would have
affected the verdict and/or the sentence; and

-J -

•

he has suffered delay in being advised or the result of that hearing and has
accordingly been prejudiced by being denied an entire academic year of
study and credit towards his degree progrnm.

5.

The student also asked the Discipline Appeals Board to admit evidence which he
snys should have been heard at the hearing as to his eharneter and mitigating
factors. Specifically, he says that as an immigrant to Canada with no·expcricnee
in the Cmrndian educational system he did not fully understand the nature,
pnrticulars, seriousness or consequences ol'plagiarism prior to be being charged
with the offence. He says that this is either an adequate excuse or in any event
constitutes an absence of the requisite mens rea for a conviction. He says that the
1rnture and seriousness of the offence was not adequately explained to him, but that
he now fully understands the seriousness and consequences and solemnly vows
never to engnge in any behaviour that could reasonably be constrncd as plagiarism
or any other form of economic dishonesty.

6.

Finally, and in the alternative, the appellant asks that the penalty be reduced by
reason of these circumstances, because he has already lost one full academic year
as a result of the charges and disciplinary process against him and that because or
this and the resulting significant personal and family hardship resulting from
co11vietio11, the two year suspension should be reduced to one year.

7.

For the reasons which follow, we deny the appeal both as to conviction and as to
sentence. While we do not consider that this is an appropriate case for the
admission of new evidence, we find that, in any event, the prnposed new evidence
does not constitute a basis upon which it would be appropriate to disturb either the
original conviction 01· the penalty imposed.

8.

Because the student takes the position that he did not have proper notice of the
hearing al which he was convicted, the parties agreed that it would be appropriate
to lead affidavit evidence and the trnnseripls of resulting cross-examinations 011

-4-

this appeal. The Discipline Appeals 13oard has considered that evidence and it is
reflected in the factual su1rnnary which follows.
Factual Backgronncl

9.

The student first registered at the tvfississauga campus of the University of Toronto
("UTM") in the foll of 2007.

10.

ln his first year of study, the student enrolled in five courses. Ile received a fowl
grade ofF in four of those courses. The filth course, RLG 204 I-l5F: "Introduction
lo Islam" (the "Course"), is the subject oflhis appeal.

11.

As a result of his very low grades, the student was placed on academic probation.
His grade point average was so low that even ifhc had earned an A+ in the Course
his overall grade point average would still have been al a level that would result in
his being on academic probation.

12.

In his second year, the student enrnlled in two courses. I-le received a final grade
or r in both courses and his grade point average remained at zero.

13.

In the result, the student was automatically suspended for one year from May 2009
to May 2010. In other words, and contrary to the student's grounds of appeal, his
academic standing prevented him from registering for the 2009-10 academic year
il'l'cspective of the currcnt discipline proceedings.

14.

The Course in which the student enrolled in 2007 was an Introduction to Islamic
Studies.

15.

In the foll of2007 two guest speakers, the Head of Acaclcrnic Skills Centre nl
UTM and the Librarian, attended the Comse to speak to the students on how to
conduct research, nnd showed examples of plagiarism and discussed how to avoid

iI.

-5-

16.

The following week the Comsc Prof'essor talked abot1t plagiarism quite
extensively.

17.

In an al'lillavit l1led in st1pport of the appcnl, the appellant says he wns not present
on either of these occasions.

18.

Dt1ring the Call term stmlcnts were required lo submit a "Wikipedia-style article".
The Cot1rsc description warned students regarding plagiarism in this assignment as
follows:
Your encyclopedia entries will be submitted through the
"lurnilin.com" lilcilily throt1gh our course website.
Plagiarism and inadequate referencing of sot1rccs will be
penalized in accordance with the University's Rules and
Regt1la1ions
(W_[p://www.utm.t1toro1110.ca/regcal/WE13GEN 117 .html). Ir
you wish to use an alternative to the turnitin.corn facility,
please speak with yom designated TA to discuss allernalives.
Participation in writing clinics can help students who find
writing a challenge lo increase their grade. Cleo Boyd and
Debbie Fornn al UTM's Academic Skill Centre arc available
for consultation to improve )'Olli' general writing and
reference skills.

19.

The student handed in the Essay through the turnilin.com facility on the course
website. The turnitin originality report on the Essay generated an overall
similarity index of 72%. The leaching assistant responsible for reviewing the
turnitin.com reports was concerned that the Essay contained plagiarism and she
reported her concerns to the professor.

20.

On April 30, 2008 the Assistant Dean at UTM sent the student a registered letter to
the mailing address he had provided lo the university (the "Mailing Address"). 11
set out the nnllll'e of the report that had been rcccivccl from the Professor, that the
conduct described would constitute an offence under section B.I. l .(d) of the Code
(a copy o!'which was enclosed in the lct1er), that he was entitled lo an opportunity

-6-

lo discuss the allegation with the Dean or his representative and al that 111eeling to
be accompanied by counsel. further particulars with respect to his rights and
options were set out. ln hold face the letter directed the student to contacl the
Academic Affairs Officer before Wednesday, ivlay 111, 2008 and provided the
relevant phone number. The student did not do so.
21.

The University ol'Toronto provides students with a free email service called
UTORnrnil. Students create their own c111ail addresses, which must include
"@utoronto.ca". The student created such an account in the summer of 2007. The
designated address is that email account (his "utoronto address"). At the same
time, he set the account to auto111atically forward all messages received at that
address lo a designated holmail address which incorporated portions of his name
(his "hotnrnil address"). These settings were never changed. In cross-examination
the student confirmed that the hotnrnil.co111 address was his primary e111ail account
and that he checked it once or twice each week.

22.

Having received no response to its registered letter, on August 7, 2008 the Dean's
oflice sent an email message to the student at the utoronto address requesting a
response. On cross examination, the student agreed that this was an cxa111ple of an
email message that was sent lo his utoronlo address and forwarded automatically
lo his holmail address.

23.

On August 8, 2008 the student replied to the message fro111 his hotmail address. In
the email he told the Dean's office that he remembered reading the registered
letter (thereby acknowledging receiving ii) but that he was on vacation and would
not be back in Toronto until August 25th. On cross examination, he said that he
did not know that the registered letter required him to contact the Dean's office
before fvfay 14, because he did not read that portion of the letter.

211.

The student did not contact the Dean's offke when he returned to Canada from his
vacation.

-

25.

-, -

On September 4 mid again on October I, 2008 the UT!Vl sent follow-up enrnils to
the student's utoronto address asking him to contact the Dean's onice to set up a
meeting. The student did not respond. 1\lthough on cross examination the student
stated that he did not recall receiving these messages, he acknowledged checking
his hotmail address once or twice each week.

26.

Also on October I, UTtvf sent the student a second registered letter, again to the
Mailing Address he had provided to the University. (A copy of the letler was also
attached to the October I email sent to the student's utoronto address). Once
again the letter directed the student to the frtct that the conduct described
constituted an offence under the Code. Once again a copy of the Code was
enclosed. In bold face letters the letter again directed him that if he wished to
meet with the Dean, he needed to advise of his availability by October I0, 2008
foiling which it would be assumed he was declining tlrnt opportunity. The student
did not deny receiving this letter, although on cross-examination he said he could
not recall having done so. He did not respond to the letter.

27.

On October 30, 2008, the Provost wrote to the student to advise hi111 that he had
been charged under the Code. The letter was sent both by mail to the student at
the Mailing Address and by email to his utoronto address. While the student said
that he did not receive the charges in October of 2008, he acknowledged that they
had been sent to the l\'1ailing Address, and while he couldn't relllembcr whether it
was emailed to him at his utoronto address, he again acknowledged that such
emails were automatically forwarded to his hotlllail account which he checked
once or twice a week.

28.

On Nove111bcr 5, 2008, the Judicial Affairs Officer in the Office of Governing
Council sent a letter by email to the student's utoronto address and by courier to
the Mailing Address. The letter described the procedures under the Code, It urged
the student to consider retaining legal counsel and advised him that Downtown

-8-

Legal Services ("DLS") or the Law Society's Lawyer Referral Service were
potential sources of such representation. The letter told him the case would be
heard by a three person panel comprised of a lawyer, faculty member and student
member. ll directed him to past Tribunal decisions on the internet. Once again,
the student's evidence did not deny receipt of these comnrnnications, he said only
that he did not remember them.
29.

On March 2, 2009, Discipline Counsel for the University sent a letter and
disclosmc package both by courier to the Mailing Address and to the utoronto
address. Discipline Counsel suggested hearings on one of March 31, April 7 or
April 14, 2009 and asked the student to contact the office 110 later than March 5,
2009 to discuss the hearing date. She advised the student that in the absence of
contact she would assume he was available on any of the proposed dates. Once
again, the student did not deny receiving these communications, simply stated he
did not recall receiving them either at the l\'1ailing Address or at the utoronto
address. I-le acknowledged that he did not contact Discipline Counsel by March 5,
2009.

30.

On March 10, 2009, Discipline Counsel's office sent a message to the student's
utoronto address proposing ten different hearing dates in May and June, 2009.
The message indicated that failing contact by lvlarch 12, 2009, the Judicial Affairs
Officer would be asked to schedule a hearing on one of the proposed elates. The
student did not respond. The student again testified that he did not remember
receiving this message. He acknowledged he made no contact in response to it.

31.

On March 13, 2009, Discipline Counsel's office asked the Judicial Affairs Officer
to schedule a hearing for May 5, 2009, copying that message to the student at his
utoronto address. The student acknowledged that he did receive this message, but
did not respond.

-9-

32.

On March 18, 2009, the Judicial Affoirs Officer issued a Notice of Hearing for
May 5, 2009. The Notice was sent to the student's utoronto address and by
courier to the Mailing Address as well as to the permanent address provided by the
student (the "Permanent Address"). Also enclosed were copies of earlier
correspondence, and another copy of the Code. The student acknowledged that he
received this Notice of Hearing.

33.

On March 25, 2009 the student sent an email Jllessage from his hotnrnil address lo
the Academic Affairs Officer in the office of the Dean al UTM acknowledging
that he had been charged under the Code and that his hearing was scheduled for
May 5, 2009.

34.

On March 31, 2009, the student emailed the Judicial Affairs Officer requesting the
May 5 hearing dale be adjourned for until after May 19, Lo facilitate his potential
representation by DLS. There followed an exchange of email correspondence
about the adjournlllent request, the student responding from and receiving al the
hotmail address that the evidence indicated he regularly used.

35.

During a subsequent conversation between the student and the Office of Discipline
Counsel, he again confirmed his understanding that, in the absence of an
adjournment, the hearing would proceed on May 5, 2009.

36.

Shortly thercalter, the Chair of the Tribunal panel that was to hear the student's
case granted his request that the hearing be adjourned until aner May 19, 2009 lo
enable him to arrange representation by DLS.

37.

The student agrees that the next day he was contacted by Discipline Counsel's
office who advised him to gel in touch with the Judicial Affairs Officer and sought
confirmation of how he could be contacted about the hearing. He confirms that he
advised he could be reached al 64 7-669-1713 or at his hotmail email address.

- IO -

38.

Some weeks later, on June 4, 2009, a representative in Discipline Counsel's office
reached the student by telephone. The student advised Discipline Counsel that,
notwithstanding the basis upon which he had sought an adjournment of the May 5
hearing elate, he had not made an appointment to meet with anyone al DLS after
that adjournment. He was told the hearing could be scheduled on any or July 2, 3,
6 or 8, 2009. The student advised that while he could not attend on July 2, all the
other elates were acceptable. The student agrees that he was told this and also told
that the hearing would be scheduled for either July 3, 6 or 8 and that he would be
copied on the message seeking a specific hearing date.

39.

Two days later, on June 5, 2009 Discipline Counsel's office emailed the Judicial
Affoirs Ot'lieer, copied to the student at both his utoronlo and hotmail aclclresses,
asking that the hearing be scheduled for July 3, 2009. The same email asked that
the Notice of Hearing be directed lo the student at the same two email addresses.
The student does not deny that he received this message but docs say he doesn't
remember reading it. Although he admits that he was told he would be copied on
this message, he never called Discipline Counsel's office to say that he had not
received the message or to otherwise inquire about the timing of the hearing he
knew would be scheduled on July 2, 3, 6 or 8.

40.

On June 11, 2009, as requested in the message copied to the student's two email
addresses, the Judicial Affairs Officer sent a Notice of Hearing for July 3, 2009 to
the student al both his utoronto and hotmail addresses. The University's post
office audit trail continns that the email containing the Notice of Hearing
successfully passed on this message to the hotnrnil post office which accepted
responsibility for delivering it lo the student's hotnrnil address. The student says
he does not recall receiving this Notice of Hearing.

41.

On June 23, 2009 Assistant Discipline Counsel sent an email message to the
student al his hotrnail address referring to the upcoming hearing on July 3, 2009

- 11 -

and requesling !he student lo contact him as soon as possible. The studcnl did nol
recall receiving this message. He agreed he did nol respond to it.
42.

On June 25, 2009, !he Judicial Alfairs Officer sent the student a message al his
utoronto and hot111ail addresses advising him that one panel member scheduled lo
hear the July 3, 2009 case had been replaced by another person.

43.

On June 30, 2009, Discipline Counsel telephoned the student at the telephone
number he had provided. Al!hough no one answered the call there was a
voicemail greeting left by a male voice who said "M

". Discipline Counsel left

his na111e, staled that he was calling about the hearing scheduled for July 3 and said
that it was very i111portant that !he student call him back. He further advised that if
the student did not attend the hearing Discipline Counsel would ask the Tribunal
to proceed in his absence. The student did not call back. Although he said he did
not reme111ber whether he had received the voice111ail message, the student
acknowledged that he had a voicemail account on !hat telephone number on tlrnl
date and !hat he was the only one who relricvcd voicemail messages !or thal
telephone number.
44.

When the University Tribunal convened on July 3, 2009 the student did not
appear. Discipline Counsel presented evidence outlining the sleps taken by the
univcrsily to provide notice oflhe hearing to the student as outlined above (except
for references to the student's cross-examination which, as noted, occmrcd in
connection wilh !his appeal), and the Tribunal determined to proceed in the
studenl's absence.

45.

Following evidence and submissions, the panel made a finding of academic
111iseonduct and imposed the penalties described al the beginning of these reasons.

- 12 -

The Provision of Reasonable Notice of the .July 3 Hearing
46.

There is no issue as to the legal requirelllcnt on the University to provide
reasonable notice lo the sluclcnl of the hearing. The issue raised by the appellant is
his assertion that he did not receive reasonable notice.

47.

While not determinative, it is illlportant to note that the notice provided to the
student was made in the con lex! of !he University's Policy on Ot1icial
Correspondence with Students (the "Policy"). It:

48.

(a)

authorizes the University to use electronic mail and/or postal mail to deliver
ollkial correspondence to students;

(b)

obliges students to mlvise the University via ROSI of a current valid postal
address and the address for University-issued electronic mail account and to
keep this information current;

(c)

warns students that foiling to do so may result in students missing imporlanl
information and will not be considered an acceptable rationale for failing lo
receive ot1icial correspondence;

(cl)

obliges students to monitor and retrieve their mail, including electronic
mail, on a frequent ,111d consistent basis; and

(e)

permits students to forward messages from their University-issued
electronic mail account to another account, but warns students that they
remain responsible for ensuring that all University electronic message
communication sent to the official Universit)'-issued account is received
and read.

The Policy reads, in part, as follows:
"The University and its divisions may use the postal mail
system and/or electronic message services (e.g., electronic
mail mid other computer-based on-line correspondence
systems as mechanisms for delivering official correspondence
lo students.
Official correspondence may include, but is no! limited to,
matters relating to students' participation in their academic
programs, important infonm1lion concerning University 1111d

- 13 -

program schcdulillg, fees information, atld other matters
cotlcerning the adminislratioll and governance of the
University.
Postal Addresses and Electronic Mail Accounts
Students arc rcspotlsible for rnainlainillg and advisillg the
University Oil the University's student information system
(currently ROSI), of a currellt alld valid postal address as well
as the address for a University-issued electronic mail account
that meets the standard of service set by the Vicc-Prcsidelll
and Provost. [Footnote omitted]
Failure lo do so may result in a student missing important
information and will not be considered an acccp!able
rationale for failing to receive official correspondence from
the University ....

Students' Rights and Responsibilities Regarding Retrieval
of Official Correspondence
Students are expected lo monitor and retrieve their mail,
including elec!ronic messaging account[s] issued lo them by
the Universi!y, on a frequent and consistent basis. Students
have the responsibility lo recognize that certain
com1m111ications may be time-critical. Students have the right
to forward their University-issued electronic mail account to
another electronic mail service provider address but remain
responsible for cnsming that all University electronic
message communication sent lo the official University-issued
account is read and received."
49.

The Policy in effect codifies, and notifies students of the mechanism by which
they will be provided with notice of important information concerning their
academic careers al the University, in other words how the University will provide
them with reasonable notice.

50.

The University has taken a number of steps to bring the importance of the Policy
and its content to the attention of students:
•

it is available on the University's website;

- 14 -

•

the UTM calendar warns students tlrnt they arc subject to and required to be
fomiliar with the Policy, explains the importance of establishing and
maintaining a utoronto.ca email account and checking it on a regular basis,
and explains that it is the responsibility of the student to ensure that contact
information is corrcelly recorded in ROSI and to monitor, read and
understm1d infonnation sent to them via the utoronto.ca email account;

•

the Student Web Service home page advises students of the Policy as
follows:
"Policy on Official Correspondence with Students: You

are responsible for setting up a UTOR mail account and for
correspondence sent to you by the University at that account.
It is important that you read the policy. Only Universitysponsored email addresses (those ending in utoronto.ca or
toronto.cdu) can be updated through the Student Web
Service. Please make certain you update your U ofT email
address as soon as possible and before classes begin."

51.

The evidence indicated that the student frequently logged in through the Student
Web Service, and that he monitored and received a number of messages at the
utoronto and the fo1warded hotmail addresses.

52.

In this case, the University nol only complied with the steps the Policy advised the
students would be when to provide him with notice, the University did much
more.

53.

ln our view, the steps taken by the University in this case lo notity the student of
the hearing and its consequences, to consult with him with respect to dates, lo
accommodate him by an adjournment, and to provide him with further notice and
updated communications with respect to the rescheduled hearing arc more than
adequate to achieve the requirement of reasonable notice. In this respect we agree
with the conclusion of the Tribunal Panel. Indeed, on the basis of the expanded

- 15 -

evidence on this issue which was placed before us, we conclude lhal lhc sludenl
was more than adequately informed of the prnceedings and the hearing dates.
Trilrnnal Proceeding in the Student's Absence
54.

On this appeal, the student argued thal even ifhe had received reasonable notice
and should have attended, the Tribunal Panel erred in deciding to prnceed in his
absence rather than adjourn for "a week or two" before prnceeding. We disagree.

55.

A finding that the Tribunal should have adjourned, in the face of the evidence as lo
the substantial notice provided lo the student, would undermine the seriousness of
the process of providing a notice of hearing. ll would be a clear (and undesirable)
message that would only serve to encourage other students to approach discipline
proceedings on the basis thal they can delay or ignore them indefinitely.

56.

Moreover, the scheduling of a hearing such as the one below, and any
rescheduling, involves coordinating the schedules of the student, the student's
counsel, if any, Discipline Counsel, lhc members oflhc University inslrncling
Discipline Counsel, the University's witnesses, the student's witnesses, ifm1y, and
the schedules of the volunteer panel members hearing lhe case, a task made
substantially more difficult by the fact thal virtually all of these people have fulltime occupations. Any adjournment inevitably leads lo substantial delay, which is
one of the reasons why lhc University makes substantial efforts lo consult on lhc
hearing lime in advance, as it did on multiple occasions with the student in this
case.

New Evidence of Character and Mitigating Circumstances
57.

The student asks this Discipline Appeal Board to adrnil and consider evidence lhal
was not before lhc Tribunal panel, concerning "character and mitigating
circumstances that would atTccl my verdict and/or my sentence if the verdict is
upheld on appeal".

- I6 -

58.

Specifically, the new evidence the students asks to introduce is contained in an
affidavit in which he deposes that as an immigrant to Canada he had no experience
with a Canadian educational system prior to his registration at the University and
in consequence did not understand until he was charged with the offence in issue
in these proceedings the nature, particulars, seriousness or consequences or
plagiarism. The student has filed 11n affidavit setting forth these facts, as well as
his assertion tlrnl he was not present when the nature and gravity of plagiarism
were explained by guest lecturers or the professor in this course, that he did not
read in any detail the written course outline or syllabus for the class, but that in
any event that outline or syllabus did not fully explain the consequences of
plagiarism.

59.

His affidavit continues that now he has been charged with the offence he fully
understands the nature, particulars and seriousness and consequences or plagiarism
and solemnly vows never to engage in any behaviour tlrnt could be construed as
plagiarism or any other form of academic dishonesty.

60.

Section E.8 orthe Code permits this Board lo receive fresh evidence in
exceptional circumstances:
An appeal shall not be fried de novo, but in circumstances
which it considers to be exceptimrnl, the Discipline Appeal
Board may allow the introduction or further evidence on
appeal which was not available or was adduced at trial, in
such manner and upon such terms as the members of the
board hearing the appeal my direct.

61.

The Provost has submitted that when exercising its discretion, the Board should be
guided by the well-established test for admitting fresh evidence on appeal.
Specifically, the Provost submits that the pmty seeking to adduce fresh evidence
must show all or the fol lowing:

· 17 ·

62.

(a)

the evidence was not available al the time of the hearing by the exercise of
due diligence;

(b)

it must be relevant to a potentially decisive issue at first instance;

(c)

it must be credible; and

(cl)

it could if believed and taken together with the rest of the evidence,
reasonably to be expected lo affect the initial decision.

We do not think that in every case a party seeking to adduce fresh evidence on an
appeal must satisfy all of these criteria to be successful. In the first place, section
E.8 of the Code appears lo us to contemplate potentially a greater level of
discretion in the introduction of new evidence that exists in other forums. We
note, as well, that the Supreme Court of Canada has only recently determined that
it may not be necessary in every case to show that the evidence was not availnble
al the time of the hearing by the exercise of due diligence, particularly when there
is a reasonable explanation for the failure to adduce the evidence. (R. v. J.A.A.,
2011 sec 17)

63.

However, we do think it is appropriate to considet· these four criteria in deciding
whether to admit new evidence.

64.

The reason that the student did not advance the evidence he now seeks to adduce
al the hearing is not that the evidence was not then available to him, but rather that
he was not at the hearing. We have already agreed with the Tribunal Panel that the
student's failure to attend cannot be excused on the basis that he did not have
reasonable notice of it. We do not agree that it is appropriate (at least in the
absence of special circumstances) that a student who has failed to appear at a
hearing of which he has reasonable notice should be entitled to introduce the
evidence he otherwise would have lead at that hearing on appeal.

65.

Equally importantly, although we do not consider that this is an appropriate case
for the introduction of new evidence, we have nonetheless considered the

- 18 -

proposed evidence and have concluded that il neither would nor ought to have
changed the result of the hearing below either on the issue of liability or on
sentence.
66.

In the fast place, even if one accepted that the student did not appreciate the
significance of plagiarism al the commencement of his academic year any
continuing failure lo appreciate the significance of plagiarism was not due to his
having arrived from another academic culture, but to his having not attended the
two lectures al which the significance of plagiarism was canvassed at length, and
having not familiarized himself with the provisions of the syllabus and course
description.

67.

Moreover, there could be no doubt that the seriousness of the offence of
plagiarism was brought home to the student on the multiple occasions of
com1m1nications in connection with these proceedings, starting with the April 30,
2008 letter from the Assistant Dean and the l'urthcr emails, letters and
conversations that occurred subsequent to that letter up to and including the
hearing itself.

68.

In other words, even when there could have been no doubt that the seriousness of
the offence of plagiarism had been repeatedly brought to the attention of the
student, he did not provide any explanation for his behaviour, any indication of
remorse, or any expressed intention never lo engage in such behaviour in the
future. Rather, the student's response was to ignore the processes for dealing with
such behaviour.

69.

The student's actions are entirely inconsistent with the position the student now
advances that the plagiarism that he engaged in was due lo his ignorance that it
was a serious offence and that once apprised of the seriousness he will behave
(and by implication would have behaved) differently.

- 19 -

70.

ln the circurnstances, we do not think the student's very lately expressed regret is
consistent with his actions up lo the time of the hearing. ol'tlrnt it would or should
have affected the result below.

Dclny
71.

1\s noted above, 011 the basis ol'his academic record the student would not have
been able lo enroll in the 2009-2010 academic year. This was not as a result ol'lhc
discipline proceedings against him. In any event, given that we have upheld the
result below he is ineligible [o enroll until the 20I0-2011 academic year.

Disposition
72.

For these reasons, the appeal is dismissed.

Dale: April 14,2011

