Case 1047 - Sanction

   [1]Case 1047 - Finding

DATE:

   July 21, 2020

PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v. M.S.D.

HEARING DATE:

   June 24, 2020, via Zoom

Panel Members:

   Ms. Cynthia B. Kuehl, Chair
   Professor Richard B. Day, Faculty Panel Member
   Ms. Alice Zhu, Student Panel Member

Appearances:

   Ms. Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg
   Rothstein LLP
   Mr. Eunwoo Lee, The Student's Representative, Downtown Legal Services

In Attendance:

   Mr. Christopher Lang, Director, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty
   Grievances

   In a decisionÂ datedÂ November 18, 2019, theÂ PanelÂ found the Student
   guilty of one charge under theÂ Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters,
   1995Â (the âCodeâ), namely that he knew or ought to have reasonably
   known that he possessed an unauthorized aid sheet in connection
   withÂ aÂ final examination, contrary to s.Â B.i.l(b)Â of theÂ Code.

   On June 24, 2020, theÂ Panel reconvened to determine the appropriate
   sanction in light of this finding (the âpenalty hearingâ).Â The Panel
   explained theÂ unusualÂ seven-monthÂ delayÂ between theÂ finding
   andÂ the penalty hearing.Â The delay wasÂ partlyÂ due to
   theÂ unanticipated and unavoidableÂ Covid-19Â pandemic.Â The Panel
   granted adjournmentsÂ soÂ theÂ StudentÂ couldÂ seek representationÂ and
   to allow his new representativeÂ to prepare for the penalty
   hearing.Â TheÂ partiesâÂ AgreedÂ Statement of FactsÂ (âASFâ)Â included
   details of two prior academic offences by the
   StudentÂ (i.e.Â plagiarism and possession ofÂ an unauthorized aid
   during aÂ final examination)Â and supplementedÂ the Studentâs
   evidence.Â The Student also submitted an affidavit.Â The parties
   madeÂ joint submissions on penalty.

   TheÂ PanelÂ wasÂ mindful that aÂ JointÂ Submission
   onÂ PenaltyÂ (âJSPâ)Â ought notÂ to be disturbed unless to do so would
   bring the administration of justice into disrepute or beÂ contrary to
   the values of the University.Â ItÂ alsoÂ addedÂ that theÂ threshold to
   reject a joint submission hadÂ not been metÂ givenÂ the very unusual
   circumstances ofÂ theÂ global pandemic, the implications on the
   Studentâs life and the presence of mitigating
   factors.Â ItÂ alsoÂ notedÂ thatÂ theÂ extraordinary circumstances of
   the pandemic resulted in its acceptance ofÂ the JSPÂ thatÂ results in a
   suspension, which,Â while intended to be three years, in practical
   effectÂ wasÂ substantially less.

   The Panel imposed the following sanctions:Â grade assignment of
   zeroÂ in theÂ course;Â a suspension of just over 26 months;Â a
   four-yearÂ notation onÂ theÂ transcript;Â report to Provost for
   publication with the Studentâs name withheld.
   [2]View Case

References

   1. https://governingcouncil.utoronto.ca/sites/default/files/university-tribunal-decisions/Case%201047.pdf
   2. file:///media/29390
