UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL - TRIAL DIVISION

IN THE MATTER of the University of1oronto Act, 1971, S.O. 1971, c. 56 as amended S.O.
1978, C. 88;
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic
Mallers. I 995;

BETWEEN:
THE lJNIVERSITY OF TORONTO

and
Mr. O.M.

Members of the panel:
•
John A. Keefe, Chair
•
Professor William Weiss, Faculty Panel Member
•
Ms. Sujata Pokhrel, Student Panel Member
Appearances:
•
Ms. Lily Harmer, Counsel for the University of Toronto
•
Mr. Maurice Vaturi, Counsel for the Student

1.

The Trial Division of the University Tribunal was convened for a hearing on Thursday,
May 29, 2008 to consider two charges under the Code of Behaviour on Academic
Mallers, 1995 ("Code") brought against the Student on August 15, 2007. A copy of the
charges is attached as Appendix A.

2.

There were two charges, but it was acknowledged by counsel for the University that if
there was a conviction on count one it would not be necessary to proceed on count two.

3.

The charges relate to course WDW360H: Law and Psychiatry taught at the downtown
campus in the Fall of 2006.

4.

The allegation relates to an in-class term test held on Tuesday December 5, 2006. This
was the third in-class term test in this course worth 25% of the course mark.

5.

The allegation is that the Student brought a completed test booklet to the examination
room and substituted this test booklet for the blank test booklet that was handed out by
the professor at the beginning of the test.

2

6.

The Student denied that this occurred.

7.

The issue at the hearing was a factual issue and, specifically, whether or not the
University was able to prove that the Student substituted the completed test booklet for
the blank test booklet distributed by the professor.

8.

The course was taught by Professor William Watson. The course aims to describe the
history and current forms of the involvement of mental health professionals with the
criminal justice system. It is an upper year course.

9.

At the beginning of the term, Professor Watson distributed an outline of the course to the
students. This outline contained a description of the course and it also provided a very
detailed description of the method of evaluation.

IO.

There were three scheduled term tests: Test I, held on Tuesday October 17, 2006, was
worth 5% of the course mark; Test 2, held on Tuesday November 14, 2006, was worth
25% of the course mark; Test 3, held on Tuesday December 5, 2006, was worth 25% of
the course mark.

11.

In the course outline, the students were advised that for each term test they would be
permitted to choose one question from 4 possible topics. The topics that would be on
each test were described in the course outline and there was a specimen question under
each topic heading. Based on the course outline, students preparing for the test would
know well in advance that they could focus on one of the listed topics and they could
prepare for the test by preparing an answer to this specimen question.

12.

In the first two tests, the questions were similar to the specimen questions in the course
outline. The questions on the tests were different, but Professor Watson in his evidence
testified that if a student prepared an answer to a specimen question they would be able to
pass the test. The difference between a "passing" mark and an "A" paper was in
recognizing the subtleties in the test question versus the specimen question.

13.

Professor Watson taught the same course in a separate session during the same fall term
of 2006. He had been teaching this course for some time and had been using this method
of evaluation for some years.

14.

In the winter term of 2006, in this course, Professor Watson had an incident with another
student who had cheated on one of these in-class tests by bringing a completed test
booklet into the test room and substituting it for the blank test booklet distributed at the
test. As a result of this incident, Professor Watson had modified his practice and he
became very diligent in the way he distributed the booklets during the test.

15.

Professor Watson described in great detail his practice in the administering of the tests in
this course following this incident. His practice was as follows:
(a)

The normal class size for a test is approximately 50.

3

(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)

(f)
(g)

(h)

He attended at an office in the Woodsworth College building where the blank test
booklets are stored.
Professor Watson would take a bundle of test booklets from the storage area. The
bundles were in batches of 125.
The test booklets come in two different colours: one is pure white; the other is
off-white with a shade of green.
Professor Watson would take the bundle of 125 booklets and place it on his desk
which was cleared for this exercise. He would remove 25 booklets from the pile
of 125 booklets and put the 25 booklets in his desk drawer, leaving 100 booklets
on his desk.
He would then count out 60 booklets.
He would then apply the same random stamp number to each of the 60 booklets.
The random stamp number was different for each test.
As he was stamping each booklet, he would count the booklets again. After the
60 booklets were stamped and counted, he would put the 60 booklets into a bag
which he described as a plastic shopping bag. He would then place the remaining
40 unstamped booklets in a separate plastic bag and he would put the stamp
marker in the same bag as the 40 unstamped booklets.

16.

Professor Watson described that he was meticulous in the way in which he counted the
booklets because he acknowledged that it would be extremely unfair to falsely accuse a
student of bringing a completed test booklet into the test.

17.

Professor Watson did not always retrieve a batch of 125 bound booklets for each test. On
occasion, he would have enough booklets from his desk drawer so that it would not be
necessary for him to attend at the storage room. Professor Watson acknowledged that
sometimes the booklets in his drawer were not all from the same batch and may not all
have been of the same colour.

18.

Professor Watson testified that, with respect to the test in question, he recalls going to the
storage room and obtaining a new batch of pure white booklets. He said that he did not
retrieve the booklets from his bottom drawer for this test.

19.

The test in question was held on Tuesday December 5, 2006. Professor Watson was
teaching the same course during the same term on Wednesdays. Test 3 for the
Wednesday class was being held on Wednesday December 6, 2006. Professor Watson
had no specific recollection of the practice he followed with respect to the retrieval or
numbering of the test booklets for the Wednesday test.

20.

Professor Watson described in detail what happened on December 5, 2006:
(a)
The test is conducted in a classroom at Woodsworth College.
(b)
The class room has long tables.
(c)
The Student was seated in the back row at the right corner of the classroom
immediately adjacent to an aisle. There are three aisles - two at each end and one
in the middle.
(d)
At the beginning of the test, the stamped test booklets were distributed by
Professor Watson and a teaching assistant. They gave the booklets to the students

4

(e)
(f)

(g)
(h)
(i)

U)
(k)

(1)

(m)

(n)
(o)

(p)

(q)

(r)

on the end of the aisles and the students then hand them to the other students
along the same table.
The teaching assistant was present throughout the test.
Students from the Wednesday class were able to take the test with the Tuesday
class. The Wednesday class students were instructed to write "Wednesday" on
their test booklets.
Professor Watson did not count the total number of Tuesday students taking the
test, but he testified that it was approximately 50.
Professor Watson did not count the Wednesday students that were taking the test
on Tuesday.
Professor Watson did not count the number of stamped booklets that were initially
distributed to the students at the beginning of the test.
Students wanting a second booklet during the test would put up their hand and a
second booklet would be distributed to them out of the booklets remaining from
the stamped 60 booklets.
During the test, Professor Watson would take unstamped booklets from the plastic
bag where the 40 booklets were placed and he would stamp them at the front
desk. He did not count the number of the booklets that he stamped during the test.
Professor Watson did not count the number of books that were distributed after
the initial 60 booklets were distributed. He did not count the total number of
booklets that were distributed or the total number of unstamped booklets
remaining in the bag.
Professor Watson did not count the total number of test booklets that were
returned at the end of the test. He did not count the number of Tuesday and
Wednesday test booklets that were returned at the end of the test.
At the end of the test, the Wednesday test booklets were separated from the
Tuesday booklets.
When the test booklets were returned to Professor Watson, he noted that one test
booklet had a slightly different coloration. It was off-white with the green tint.
He then noticed that it did not have a number stamp on it. All of the other
booklets were stamped. The one test booklet in question was the one submitted
by the Student.
Professor Watson also noted that the ink and penmanship on page I of the
Student's test booklet was different from the remaining pages of the test. Page I
of the Student's test booklet was written with a ballpoint pen in cursive
penmanship. The remaining pages of the booklet were written with a black felttipped pen and the penmanship was in a print form. This corroborated Professor
Watson's belief that the Student's test booklet had been brought into the test by
the Student.
Professor Watson also noted that there were pencil marks on parts of the
Student's test booklet that had been written over in black felt tipped ink pen.
Professor Watson inferred from this that the Student had written the answers to
the specimen question in the test booklet in pencil and that he had used the black
felt-tipped marker pen to write over the pencil marks during the test.
During the test, Professor Watson noted that the Student had placed a coat on the
desk. Prior to the commencement of the test, the Student was asked to remove the
coat from the desk. He placed it on the chair beside him. Otherwise, Professor
Watson did not notice any unusual behaviour by the Student during the test.

5

21.

There was no direct evidence that the Student hrought a completed test booklet into the
test. No one observed the Student switching the test booklet. No one found the blank
test booklet that was allegedly handed to the Student at the beginning of the test.

22.

The teaching assistant was present throughout the test. The teaching assistant did not
testify at the hearing.

23.

The Student testified. He denied that he had brought a completed test booklet into the
classroom. He testified that he prepared for the test and then wrote his answers during
the test period. He testified that he did the readings. He submitted the readings with his
highlighting and margin notes. He could not explain why the test booklet he submitted
was of a slightly different colour and did not have a stamp on it.

24.

He explained the difference in ink and penmanship in the test booklet. While the change
in ink and penmanship at first looked very unusual, the panel was presented with tests
completed by the Student in this and other courses. We noted that in many cases the
Student frequently switched his penmanship. In some cases he did so even in the course
of a single sentence. We find the Student's explanation credible and we accepted his
evidence on this point.

25.

He explained the pencil marks in the test booklet. He stated that he had a practice of
writing certain important portions of the test in pencil in order to get it right, after which
he would write over the pencil in ink. We looked at other tests submitted by the Student
in other courses and noticed that he engaged in this practice in other completely unrelated
test booklets. We concluded that no inference could be drawn from the pencil marks on
the test booklet. We found the Student's explanation credible and we accepted his
evidence on this point.

26.

No inference could be drawn from the substance of the test answer in the test booklet that
he was responding to the specimen question versus the test question. In fact, it is
arguable that the answer to the question in the test booklet is more responsive to the test
question than to the specimen question. Professor Watson acknowledged that he could
not draw an inference from the substance of the answer.

27.

Overall, there is no direct evidence that the Student brought a completed test booklet into
the test and switched it for the blank test booklet that was distributed during the test. No
one observed him switching the booklet. No one observed any unusual behaviour during
the course of the test.

28.

The issue for the panel was whether, taking all the evidence into consideration, the fact
that the Student submitted an unstamped booklet of a slightly different colour was
sufficient to warrant a conviction. These facts are circumstantial evidence that would
permit an inference to be drawn that he did bring a completed test booklet into the test.
The question was whether this circumstantial evidence is sufficient to satisfy the onus of
proof on the University. We were called upon to examine the evidence very carefully,
including all the inferences that could be drawn from the surrounding circumstances, to

6

determine ifwe were satisfied that the University had established sufficient proof that the
Student had cheated in this way.
29.

The onus of proof on the University is set out in the Code of Behaviour at paragraph
C.ii.(a).9:
"The onus of proof shall be on the prosecutor, who must show on
clear and convincing evidence that the accused has committed the
alleged offence."

30.

We recognize that these are serious allegations which have serious implications for the
Student.

31.

The Student is a student in criminology. The course in question is an upper-year course.
The Student had achieved reasonably good grades in the prior tests in this course. He had
also achieved good grades in his other courses. There were no other academic offences
in his academic career. There is no indication of anything improper or unusual in his
other academic activities.

32.

The Student testified that he intends to apply to law school and that a conviction for this
academic offence would have a significant impact on his future.

33.

Having considered all the evidence and weighed all the available inferences from the
circumstantial evidence, the panel concluded that the University had not satisfied the
onus of proof in this case.

34.

Although Professor Watson was meticulous in counting and stamping the 60 booklets, he
did not count the total number of booklets that were distributed and returned. Without
such a count being done it cannot be determined conclusively or by necessary inference
that the booklet submitted by the Student had not been handed out by Professor Watson
during the test.

35.

Professor Watson testified in a clear manner and we do not question his credibility.
However, there is no independent corroboration of his evidence.

36.

Without all the booklets distributed and returned being counted, there are many
possibilities that are inconsistent with an inference of guilt.

37.

In the circumstances, we concluded that the Student should be found not guilty.

