Case 923

DATE:

   August 30, 2017

PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v. O.E. (âthe Studentâ)

Hearing Date(s):

   August 9, 2017

Panel Members:

   Mr. Paul Michell, Chair
   Prof. Pascal van Lieshout, Faculty Panel Member
   Ms. Sherice Robertson, Student Panel Member

Appearances:

   Ms. Tina Lie, Assistant Discipline Counsel for the University, Palaire
   Roland Barristers
   Ms. Lucy Gaspini, Manager, Academic Integrity & Affairs, Office of the
   Dean, University of Toronto Mississauga
   Ms. Alexandra Di Blasio. Academic Integrity Assistant, University of
   Toronto Mississauga
   Mr. Robert Sniderman, Law Student, Downtown Legal Services, for the
   Student

In Attendance:

   The Student
   Ms. Tracey Gameiro, Associate Director, Office of Appeals, Discipline
   and Faculty Grievances
   Mr. Sean Lourim, Technology Assistant, Office of the Governing Council
   Ms. Breese Davies, New Co-Chair (observing)
   The Student was charged with one charge plagiarism contrary to s.
   B.i.1(d) of the Code , or in the alternative, one charge of
   unauthorized assistance contrary to s. B.i.1(b) of the Code ; or in the
   further alternative, one charge of academic misconduct not otherwise
   described contrary to s.B.i.3(b) of the Code . The charges related to
   an essay that the Student had submitted for course credit that
   contained passages that were verbatim or nearly verbatim to those
   contained in an essay that another student had submitted in the
   previous term. The matter proceeded by way of agreed statement of facts
   and a joint book of documents. The Student pled guilty to the first
   charge of plagiarism contrary to s. B.i.1(d) of the Code . Upon the
   Panel accepting the Studentâs guilty plea to the first charge, the
   University withdrew the alternative charges.
   The parties submitted a Joint Submission on Penalty (JSP) requesting:
   (a) final grade of zero in the course; (b) a four-year suspension; (c)
   the sanction be recorded on academic record and transcript for seven
   years or until graduation, whichever is earlier; and (d) that the
   decision be reported to the Provost for publication with the Student's
   name withheld. The JSP was accompanied by an undertaking that the
   Student complete at least six writing workshops offered by the
   University within the first two terms in which she is next registered
   for a course at the University. The parties did not seek an order with
   regards to the undertaking, and clarified for the Panel that it was a
   separate agreement between the Provost and the Student as the Code
   provides no authority to the Panel to order a Student to give such an
   undertaking. The Panel reviewed the case University of Toronto v. O.O.
   [Case No. 651; June 13, 2012], at para. 22 and University of Toronto v.
   S.A. [Case No. 591.; May 13, 2011] in accepting that an undertaking is
   a mitigating factor supporting a JSP.
   In deciding whether to accept the Panel considered the Mr. C. factors
   [Case No. 1976/77-3; Nov. 5, 1976] and a number of cases where students
   had been expelled for committing fewer plagiarism offences ( University
   of Toronto v. K.P. [Case No. 660, February 6, 2012 - (two plagiarism
   offences: prior plagiarism offence)]; University of Toronto v. O.O .
   [(plagiarism offence: two prior plagiarism offences)], and University
   of Toronto v. S.A.M. [Case No. 657; September 11, 2012, (plagiarism
   offence: two prior plagiarism offences)]. Based on these cases, the
   Panel concluded that the present case would have warranted a more
   stringent penalty than that proposed by the parties, were it not for
   the JSP.
   Despite these cases, the Panel found that the narrow circumstances that
   would permit them to depart from the JSP were not present.Â  The Panel
   referred to the DAB decisions University of Toronto v. M.A. [Case No.
   837; December 22, 2016], University of Toronto v. S.F . [DAB Case No.
   690; October 20, 2014] as well as the Tribunalâs prior decision in
   University of Toronto v. Z.Z . [Case No. 918; March 28, 2017] which
   emphasize the key role of JSPs in the University's discipline process
   and the narrow circumstances where the Tribunal may depart from them.Â
   The Panel found that mere disagreement with a JSP is not enough, and
   that the JSP here did not meet the test of bringing âthe administration
   of justice into dispute," nor was it "fundamentally offensive", or
   "truly unreasonable or unconscionable" ( M.A. ., paras. 24-26). The
   Panel accepted the partiesâ JSP and ordered:(a) final grade of zero in
   the course; (b) a suspension until August 31, 2021 (from date of
   Tribunal Order); (c) the sanction be recorded on academic record and
   transcript for seven years or until graduation, whichever is earlier;
   and (d) that the decision be reported to the Provost for publication
   with the Student's name withheld.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/13044
