Case 1100

   DATE: April 23, 2021
   PARTIES: University of Toronto v. R.S.

   HEARING DATE: January 15, 2021 & February 17, 2021, via Zoom

   Panel Members:
   Ms. Dena Varah, Chair
   Professor Pierre Desrochers, Faculty Panel Member
   Ms. Arlinda Ruco, Student Panel Member

   Appearances:
   Ms. Tina Lie, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg
   Rothstein LLP

   In Attendance:
   Ms. Carmelle Salomon-Labbe, Associate Director,Â Appeals, Discipline
   and Faculty Grievances

   Not in Attendance:
   The Student

   TheÂ StudentÂ was charged underâ¯s. B.i.1(d) of theâ¯Code of Behaviour
   on Academic Matters, 1995â¯(the âCodeâ) on the basis
   thatÂ theÂ Studentâ¯knowingly represented an idea or expression of an
   idea or work of another asâ¯theirâ¯own in aÂ final
   exam.Â TheÂ StudentÂ wasÂ charged alternatively under ss. B.i.1(b) and
   B.i.3(b) of the Code forÂ knowingly obtaining unauthorized assistance
   in connection with the final exam and knowingly engaging in a form of
   cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or misrepresentation
   not otherwise described in the Code in order to obtain academic credit
   or other academic advantage.

   ThisÂ matter was originally scheduled to proceed onÂ JanuaryÂ 15,
   2021,Â at which timeÂ Assistant Discipline CounselÂ attended, and
   theÂ StudentÂ did not.Â Assistant Discipline Counsel advisedÂ the
   PanelÂ that theÂ StudentÂ reached out toÂ UniversityÂ members the
   morning of the hearing asking about the Tribunal hearing.Â The Panel
   heard evidenceÂ fromÂ an Academic Integrity Coordinator at the School
   of Applied SciencesÂ confirming the same.Â As a result of this
   evidence, the Panel adjourned the matterÂ to afford theÂ StudentÂ an
   opportunity to participate in the proceedings.Â Pursuant to the Panelâs
   Order, theÂ adjournedÂ hearing dateÂ was markedÂ asÂ peremptory on
   theÂ Student.Â At the adjourned date, neither theÂ StudentÂ nor a legal
   representative of theÂ StudentÂ appeared at the hearing.Â The
   University provided evidenceÂ to indicateÂ thatÂ subsequent
   toÂ theÂ adjournment, theÂ StudentÂ did not answer any further
   correspondence from the University.Â The University further provided
   evidence of their attempts to communicate with theÂ StudentÂ via email
   to advise of the newÂ hearingÂ date and invite him to participate;
   these attempts also went unanswered.Â TheÂ StudentÂ did not advise that
   he required any further adjournments or that he was unable to
   participate in the matter as scheduled.Â Therefore,Â givenÂ that
   theÂ StudentÂ did not respondÂ to the subsequent communication from the
   UniversityÂ andÂ the ample notice of hearing, the Panel ordered that
   the hearing could proceed in theÂ StudentâsÂ absence.

   Regarding the chargesÂ laid under s. B.i.1(d) of theÂ Code, the
   PanelÂ examined the evidence ofâ¯the Professor who taughtâ¯the course
   for which theÂ final examÂ in question was submitted.Â The exam was
   submittedÂ through a code checker which identified two issues:
   (1)Â similarities between theÂ StudentâsÂ submission and the code of
   another student forÂ two questions;Â and (2) the answer to one of
   theÂ StudentâsÂ questionsÂ contained a different variable than the one
   provided to him as part of his exam.Â The Professor indicated that he
   reviewed theÂ code and determined that it was identical to the one
   provided to another student in a differentÂ group as theÂ Student. The
   similarities between the two examsÂ areÂ the most persuasive evidence.
   The evidence is clear that, at least, theÂ StudentÂ and the other
   students, collaborated on the exam. This collaboration is a breach of
   the Code and could support a findingÂ on both the firstÂ orÂ second
   charge. The PanelÂ was satisfied that theÂ StudentâsÂ use of the
   starter code of another student makes it more likely that he was
   relying on the other studentâs work and ideas rather than the other way
   around.Â TheÂ Panel found that theÂ StudentÂ was guilty ofÂ one count
   ofÂ knowingly representing an idea or expression of an idea or work of
   another as his own in connection with a final exam, contrary to s.
   B.i.1(d) of theÂ Code. Given the Panelâs finding, the University
   withdrewÂ theÂ charges under ss. B.i.1(b) and B.i.3(b) of theÂ Code.

   In determining sanction, the Panel consideredÂ the facts of the
   case,Â theÂ principles,Â andÂ theÂ factors relevant to sanction.Â Given
   that theÂ StudentÂ did not participate in the hearing, there was no
   evidence of any mitigating factors or the character of
   theÂ Student.Â The PanelÂ considered the serious nature of the offence,
   the detriment to the University and the needÂ for general deterrence.
   In their consideration, the Panel noted that theÂ seriousnessÂ of the
   offence cannot be overlooked as it undermines the very foundation of
   academic integrityÂ and if plagiarism is left unchecked, it can
   undermine the credibility of the institutions.Â Upon review of the
   Universityâs submissions as well as the relevant case law, the
   PanelÂ accepted the sanction proposed by the University. The Panel
   imposed the following sanctions: a final grade of zero in the course;
   aÂ suspensionÂ for just over 22 months; a notationÂ on
   theÂ transcriptÂ for just over 34 months; and aÂ report to
   theÂ ProvostÂ for aÂ publication.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/29826
