Case 1186

   DATE: September 21, 2021
   PARTIES: University of Toronto v. N.A. ("the Student")

   HEARING DATE: June 21, 2021, via Zoom

   Panel Members:
   Mr. R.S.M Woods, Chair
   Professor Ian Crandall, Faculty Panel Member
   Ms. Madison Kerr, Student Panel Member

   Appearances:
   Mr. Robert Centa, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland
   Rosenberg Rothstein LLP

   Not in Attendance:
   The Student

   Hearing Secretary:
   Ms. Nadia Bruno, Special Projects Officer, Office of Appeals,
   Discipline and Faculty Grievances

   Theâ¯Studentâ¯was charged underâ¯s. B.i.1(d)â¯of theâ¯Code of Behaviour
   on Academic Matters, 1995â¯(theÂ âCodeâ) on the basis thatÂ she
   knowingly represented the ideas of another, or the expressions of the
   ideas of another, asÂ herÂ own work inÂ a mid-term essay.â¯In the
   alternative, theâ¯Studentâ¯was charged under s.â¯B.i.3(b) of
   theâ¯Codeâ¯on the basis that theâ¯Studentâ¯knowingly engaged in a form
   of cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or
   misrepresentationâ¯in order toâ¯obtain academic credit or other
   academic advantageâ¯in connection withâ¯theÂ mid-term essay.

   Neither the Student nor a legal representative of
   theâ¯Studentâ¯appeared at the hearing.â¯The
   PanelÂ waitedÂ 15Â minutesÂ after the hearing was scheduled to
   commenceÂ to allow for theÂ StudentÂ toÂ appear.Â AfterÂ that time, the
   University requested thatÂ the PanelÂ proceed in the absence of
   theÂ StudentÂ pursuant to theÂ University TribunalâsÂ Rules of Practice
   and ProcedureÂ (âRulesâ).Â The University provided evidence that
   theâ¯Studentâ¯had been served at herÂ ROSI-listed email address with
   theâ¯charges, a disclosure brief,â¯andÂ theÂ notice of
   hearing.â¯Furthermore, the Student did not respond to any requests to
   schedule a meeting with the Deanâs Designate.â¯Rule 9(c)Â of
   theâ¯Rulesâ¯provides thatâ¯service can beâ¯effectedâ¯viaâ¯email to the
   studentâs email addressÂ containedÂ in ROSI.â¯Based on the evidence,
   the Panel was satisfied thatÂ theÂ StudentÂ received proper and
   adequate notice of the charges and the hearing.Â TheÂ Panel noted that
   evidenceÂ that theÂ StudentÂ had personally accessed their ROSI email
   accountÂ after the charges and the notice of hearing were sentÂ would
   have established actual notice of the charges and the notice hearing.
   However, the RulesÂ do not require the University to establish actual
   notice.Â The PanelÂ furtherÂ noted that students are responsible for
   monitoring their account and they fail to do so at their own
   risk.Â Since the charges and the notice of hearingÂ wereÂ sent via
   email to the Studentâs ROSI listed email address, the Panel foundÂ that
   theÂ StudentÂ had reasonable noticeÂ of the charges and the
   hearingÂ pursuant to rule 13 of the Rules. The Panel therefore
   proceeded to hearÂ and consider the Universityâs evidence in
   theÂ StudentâsÂ absence pursuant toÂ rule 17 of the Rules.

   Theâ¯PanelÂ consideredÂ the affidavit
   evidenceÂ ofâ¯theÂ AssistantÂ Professor who taughtâ¯the course for
   which theÂ mid-term essayÂ in question was submitted.â¯It was
   theÂ AssistantÂ Professorâs evidence thatÂ theÂ syllabus advised the
   students that their written work would be scanned for plagiarism using
   Turnitin.com.Â UponÂ review of theÂ StudentâsÂ essay, Turnitin.com
   discoveredÂ that the mid-term essay contained numerous verbatim and
   nearly verbatim passages from a variety of sources, none of which were
   cited.Â The Panel noted thatÂ the third to fifth paragraphs of the
   mid-term essay were taken almost verbatim from one sourceÂ without
   proper attribution. The Panel further noted that such a
   large-scaleÂ incorporation of anotherâs workÂ could not
   haveÂ beenÂ accidental.Â Â On the evidenceâ¯presented by the
   University,â¯theâ¯Panel found thatâ¯theâ¯Studentâ¯was guilty ofâ¯one
   count ofÂ knowingly representing, as their own, the ideasÂ or
   expressions of ideas of a source,Â contrary to section B.i.1(d) the
   Code.Â Given the Panelâs finding, the University withdrew the charge
   underâ¯s.â¯B.i.3(b).

   In determining sanction,â¯theâ¯PanelÂ received affidavit evidence
   ofÂ an Academic Integrity SpecialistÂ (âAISâ) with the Student Academic
   Integrity team at the Faculty of Arts and Science.Â The AISâ affidavit
   confirmed that theÂ StudentÂ had committed an act of plagiarism in
   connection with anÂ assignmentÂ in another courseÂ and this matter was
   resolved at the departmental levelÂ where a final grade of zero was
   imposed.Â The PanelÂ considered the principles and factors relevant to
   sanctionâ¯discussed inâ¯University of Toronto and Mr. C.â¯(âMr. C.
   factorsâ).Â Regarding the character of the student, the Panel noted
   thatÂ there was no evidence before themÂ of theÂ StudentâsÂ character,
   however, the PanelÂ notedÂ that theÂ StudentÂ committed a similar
   offence just a few monthsÂ prior toÂ the current offence. Given the
   evidence of theÂ prior offence, the Panel noted that thereÂ was a real
   risk ofÂ a repetition of the same offence.Â Regarding the nature of the
   offence, detriment to the University and deterrence, the Panel noted
   thatÂ plagiarism is a very serious offenceÂ thatÂ strikes
   atÂ theÂ heart of theÂ Universityâs core values of honesty
   andÂ integrityÂ andÂ harms the reputation of the University as a whole.
   It has the potential to affect otherÂ students adversely by allowing
   cheaters to obtain grades higher than theyÂ actually
   meritÂ byÂ presenting the work of others as their own.Â Plagiarism
   cannot be tolerated and in order to discourage others from committing
   similar offences, plagiarism merits serious
   sanctions.Â TheÂ Panelâ¯found no evidence
   ofÂ extenuatingÂ circumstances.Â Upon review of the relevant case law
   and the Mr. C. factors, the Panelâ¯found that theÂ sanction proposed by
   the UniversityÂ was appropriateÂ as it was within the typical range of
   sanctions imposed on students found guilty of a second plagiarism
   offence.â¯Theâ¯Panelâ¯imposedâ¯the following sanctions:â¯a final grade
   of zero in the course;â¯aâ¯three-year suspension;â¯aâ¯four-year
   notation on the transcript; andÂ a report to theÂ ProvostÂ for
   publication.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/30005
