Case 1560

   DATE:

   June 3, 2024

   PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v. T.D. ("the Student")

   HEARING DATE:

   March 25, 2024¬ , via Zoom

   PANEL MEMBERS:

   Alexandra Clark, Chair
   Professor George Cree, Faculty Panel Member
   Alwin Xie, Student Panel Member

   APPEARANCES:
   William Webb, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg
   Rothstein LLP
   Yan Li, Representative for the Student

   HEARING SECRETARY:

   Samanthe Huang, Coordinator and Hearing Secretary, Office of Appeals,
   Discipline and Faculty Grievances

   The Student was charged with one count under ss. B.i.1(b) and/or B.ii.2
   of the Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters, 2019 (the ‚Code‚) for
   using and/or possessing an unauthorized aid or obtaining unauthorized
   assistance in connection with a final exam in a course (the ‚Final
   Exam‚). The Student was also charged with one count under sections
   B.i.1(d) and/or B.ii.2 of the Code for knowingly representing as their
   own an idea or expression of an idea or work of another in connection
   with the Final Exam. In the alternative, the Student was charged with
   one count under section B.i.3(b) of the Code for knowingly engaging in
   a form of cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or
   misrepresentation not otherwise described in the Code in order to
   obtain academic credit or other academic advantage of any kind in
   connection with the final exam.

   The Student did not participate in the hearing but was represented by a
   licensed paralegal. The hearing proceeded on the basis of an Agreed
   Statement of Facts executed by the Student and the University, as well
   as a Book of Documents. The ASF detailed that the Student was enrolled
   in a course in which students were required to write a final exam,
   worth 40% of their grade in the course. During the Final Exam, an
   invigilator noticed that the student lifting their exam paper and
   holding it parallel to their torso. The invigilator also noted a large
   button on the Student‚s shirt and suspected that the student was using
   a miniature camera to take pictures of the exam. An Exam Coordinator
   spoke to the Student who denied that they possessed an unauthorized
   aid. The Exam Coordinator did not ask the Student to turn out the
   contents of their pockets or to check their bag. At the Dean‚s
   Designate meeting, the Student admitted that they had a miniature
   button camera in their possession, and planned to use it, but could not
   use it because they had left their cellphone at the back of the exam
   room. The Student then admitted to committing an academic offence. The
   Student admitted in the ASF that they did, in fact, use a miniature
   camera to take and send images of the questions on the final exam to a
   tutor whom they paid to provide answers during the Final Exam.

   Based on the facts and admissions contained in the ASF, the Panel found
   the Student guilty of obtaining unauthorized assistance during the
   Final Exam, contrary to ss. B.i.1(b) of the Code. In light of the
   finding, the University withdrew the second and third counts.

   In determining the appropriate sanction, the Panel considered a written
   agreement regarding sanction (the ‚Agreement‚) and a further Book of
   Authorities submitted jointly by the University and the Student. The
   Agreement contained an undertaking offered by the Student that they
   would not register or re-enroll for any courses at the University at
   the conclusion of their suspension. The Panel also considered the
   sanctioning factors enumerated in the decision of the University of
   Toronto and Mr. C (Case No. 1976/77-3). The Panel found that the
   sanction proposed in the Agreement was neither unconscionable or
   unreasonable and was consistent with previous decisions of the
   University Tribunal. The Panel further indicated that while the form of
   cheating committed by the Student was egregious and may warrant an
   order of expulsion, the Student confessed to their actions and was
   cooperative during the disciplinary process. The Panel also took
   particular note of the Student‚s undertaking to never re-apply or
   re-enroll at the University.

   The Panel imposed the following sanction: a final grade of zero in the
   Course; a five-year suspension; a seven-year notation on the Student‚s
   academic record and transcript; and a report to the Provost for
   publication.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/31776
