Case #733

   DATE: September 11, 2014
   PARTIES: University of Toronto v M.C.
   Hearing Date(s): July 3, 2014
   Panel Members:
   Sarah Kraicer, Chair
   Joel Kirsh, Faculty Member
   Susan Mazzatto, Student Member
   Appearances:
   Tina Lie, Assistant Discipline Counsel
   Sherylin Biason, Assistant Registrar, UTS
   In Attendance:
   Wayne Dowler, Deanâs Designate, UTS
   Natalie Ramtahal, Coordinator, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty
   Grievances
   Trial Division â s. B.i.1(a) of the Code â forged medical documents â
   documents requesting inappropriate academic accommodation â Â Student
   did not attend hearing â Â finding of guilt â five-year suspension;
   grade of zero in course; two year suspension; notation on transcript
   for three years â report to Provost for publication
   The Student was not present at the hearing but the Panel was satisfied
   that the Student had reasonable notice of the hearing and had been
   served by email, phone calls, and courier, in accordance with the Rules
   of Practice and Procedure of the University Tribunal.
   The Student was charged with an offence under s. B.i.1(a) and in the
   alternative, an offence under s. B.i.3(a) of the Code . The charges
   related to allegations that the student had knowingly falsified a
   Medical Certificate to request academic accommodation for a missed
   exam. The University stated that if the Student was found guilty on the
   first charge, the alternative charge would be dropped.
   The Assistant Registrar at University of Toronto Scarborough testified
   that she received a petition requesting an exam deferral due to illness
   accompanied by a Medical Certificate purportedly completed by a
   physician. Though the name was not clearly written the witness was
   unable to find any doctor going by a similar name on the clinic
   website. An executive and Chief of Staff at the hospital were both
   unable to identify the doctor with the name and registration number
   appearing on the form, and the stamp appearing on the form had never
   been used before. The evidence was compelling and the Panel found the
   Student guilty of the first charge. The University withdrew the second
   charge.
   The University sought a penalty of a final grade of zero in the course,
   a suspension of two years to start on the date the Tribunal makes its
   order, a notation on the Studentâs transcript for three years, and that
   the case be reported to the Provost for publication.
   The Panel then considered the penalty factors from the Mr. C case,
   considering the seriousness of the offence, need for deterrence, and
   the Studentâs lack of participation and remorse in the process. The
   Panel considered like cases and found the Universityâs suggested
   penalty to be fair and appropriate. The Panel imposed a grade of zero
   in the course, a suspension of two years from the date of the order, a
   notation on the Studentâs transcript for three years, and that the case
   be reported to the Provost for publication.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12859
