THE UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
IN THE MATTER OF charges of academic dishonesty made on October 21 , 2013,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters, 1995,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Act, 1971, S.O. 1971, c. 56 as amended S.O. 1978,

c . 88

BETWEEN:

UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO

- and -

REASONS FOR DECISION

Hearing Date: Thursday July 3, 2014

Members of the Panel:
Ms. Sarah Kraicer, Barrister and Solicitor, Chair
Dr. Joel Kirsh, Faculty of Medicine, Faculty Panel Member
Ms. Susan Mazzatto, Student Panel Member
Appearances:
Ms. Tina Lie, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland, Barristers
Ms. Sherylin Biason, Assistant Registrar, University of Toronto Scarborough
In Attendance:
Professor Wayne Dowler, Dean's Designate, University of Toronto Scarborough
Ms. Natalie Ramtahal, Coordinator, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances

2

1.

The Trial Division of the University Tribunal was convened on July 3, 2014 to consider

charges brought by the University of Toronto ("the University") against M s . ~

ca

("the

Student") under the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters, 1995 ("the
Code").

Preliminary Issue: Proceeding in the Absence of the Student

2.

The Tribunal waited 10 minutes after the scheduled time to begin the proceeding.

Neither the Student nor a representative of the Student appeared.
3.

Pursuant to sections 6 and 7 of the Statutory Powers Procedure Act ("the Act"), and

section 17 of the University Tribunal Rules of Practice and Procedure ("the Rules"), where
reasonable notice of an oral hearing has been given to a party in accordance with the Act and
the party does not attend at the hearing, the Tribunal may proceed in the absence of the party
and the party is not entitled to any further notice in the proceeding.
4.

A notice of hearing may be served on a student "by sending a copy of the document by

courier to the student's mailing address contained in ROSI" [Repository of Student
Information] , "by emailing a copy of the document to the student's email address contained in
ROSI" or "by other means authorized under the University's Policy on Official Correspondence
with Students" (the "Policy") (Rules 9 (b)(c) and (d).
5.

The Policy states that Students are responsible for maintaining on ROSI a current and

valid postal address and a University-issued email account. Students are expected to monitor
and retrieve their mail, including electronic messaging accounts issued to them by the
University, on a frequent and consistent basis.
6.

The onus of proof is on the University under the Act and the Rules to establish that it

provided the Student with reasonable notice of the hearing in accordance with these
provisions. The University requested to proceed with this hearing.
7.

The University filed evidence from Natalie Ramtahal, Coordinator, Appeals, Discipline

and Faculty Grievances with the Office of the Governing Council of the University, and from
Janice Patterson, legal assistant at Paliare Roland Rosenberg Rothstein, counsel to the

3

University, relating to the efforts that were made by the University to provide notice of this
hearing to the Student.
8.

The Student's street address on ROSI is

•.

(the

"John

Street

address")

The

Student's

email

address

in

ROSI

is

mail.utoronto.ca. {the "ROSI email address").
9.

The Student provided a different email address to the University in the Personal

Information section of her Petition for an Exam Deferral dated April 24, 2012:
hotmail.com. ("the hotmail address").
10.

As set out in more detail below, the University and counsel for the University sent the

Notice of Hearing to the Student via email and via courier to these three addresses.

In

addition, the University and counsel for the University made numerous attempts to
communicate with the Student about this proceeding by email and phone. While the Student
did not respond to any of these communications, the Tribunal is satisfied, on reviewing the
evidence outlined below, that she received reasonable notice of this hearing.
11.

In May 2012, upon review of the Student's Petition for Deferral, the Assistant Registrar

Petitions at the University of Toronto Scarborough, Ms. Sherylin Biason, unsuccessfully
attempted to reach the Student by telephone at the number listed on ROSI, and at the hotmail
address. On May 29, 2012, Ms. Biason, posted a message to the Student on the Office of the
Registrar's eservice website advising that the Petition had been denied, that "the medical
document submitted is not adequate to support your request for a deferred exam" and asking
the Student to contact the Registrar's Office. The eservice website allows for communication
between a student and the Registrar's office, and tracks the time messages are posted and
viewed. A student accesses his or her messages on this website by logging in with their
unique student ID number. The eservice log indicates that the Student viewed this message
on the same day it was posted by Ms. Biason. This message should have alerted the Student
that there was an issue with the medical documentation she had submitted and that she
should contact the Registrar's Office.
Student.

Ms. Biason did not receive any response from the

4

12.

From June 2012 to March 2013, the University made further attempts to contact the

Student regarding this issue, via correspondence sent to the John Street address and email
set to the ROSI email address, to which no response was received.

This correspondence

was not returned and there was no "bounceback" on the email messages indicating they had
not been delivered.
13.

The Office of the Vice Provost served the Charges in this matter on the Student on

October 21, 2013 via email to the Student's ROSI email address. On October 22, 2013, the
University sent further correspondence relating to the Charges to the Student via the ROSI
email address and via courier to her John Street address. The courier package was returned
the same day to the University because it could not be delivered to that address. On January
8, 2014, Paliare Roland sent further correspondence about the Charges to the Student by
email to both the ROSI email address and the hotmail address and by courier to the John
Street address. Again, the courier package was returned undelivered and the courier advised
that the recipient had moved. No responses or "bounceback" messages were received to the
emails.
14.

From November 2013 to June 2014 Paliare Roland made numerous efforts to contact

the Student by phone at the phone number she had provided in ROSI , but the cellular number
was either not assigned or was later assigned to a different person. During this period, the
firm also sent numerous emails to the Student regarding the charges and the hearing at both
the ROSI email address and the hotmail address. They received no response to these emails.
Paliare Roland undertook online searches of " ~

<=a" but did not find any further

address information for the Student.
15.

On June 4, 2014, the University served the Student with a copy of the Notice of

Hearing for Thursday July 3, 2014 at 5:45 p.m. by email to the ROSI email address, by email
to the hotmail address, and by courier to the John Street address. The courier package was
not returned.

The person indicated as having taken delivery of the courier package was

named "Meelad".

There is no evidence to indicate who this person is. No bounceback

messages were received from the emails.
16.

The Tribunal has considered the evidence before it and the submissions of counsel for

the University and has concluded that the Student has been given reasonable notice of the

5

hearing in compliance with the notice requirements of the Act and the Rules. The content of
the Notice of Hearing complies with the requirements of the Act and the Rules. The Notice of
Hearing was sent to the Student via email to the ROSI address and via courier to the John
street address in ROSI, as authorized by the Rules. The Student is responsible for ensuring
that the contact information in ROSI is up to date. In addition, the Notice of Hearing was sent
to the Student via the hotmail address she had provided to the University in her Petition
documentation. No "bounceback" was received to the emails. While the Student did not likely
receive the couriered Notices sent to the John Street address, which were either returned to
counsel for the University or delivered to an unknown person, the Student was responsible for
updating her mailing address in ROSI and had failed to do so, and the University had no other
street address for her, despite making online searches.
17.

The Student would have been aware from accessing the eservice website message on

May 29, 2012 that there was an issue with the medical documentation accompanying her
petition, and that the University sought to communicate with her about it. In addition to the
Notice of Hearing itself, the University and counsel made numerous attempts to communicate
with the Student and left messages via telephone, email and mail with information about the
allegations, the charges and this hearing. The University advised the Student that it would be
using the Student's ROSI contact information and the hotmail address for urgent
communications, and asked that she provide any updated contact information. Despite these
efforts by the University, no response was ever received from the Student.
18.

The Tribunal determined that the University provided reasonable notice of this hearing

to the Student, and it would proceed to hear the case on its merits.
The Charges

19.

The Charges and Particulars are as follows:
1)

On or about April 26, 2012, you knowingly forged or in any other way altered
or falsified a document or evidence required by the University of Toronto, or
uttered, circulated or made use of such forged, altered or falsified document,
namely a University of Toronto Medical Certificate dated April 23, 2012,
which you submitted in support of your request for academic accommodation
or relief in MATA37H3, contrary to Section B.1.1 (a) of the Code.

6

2)

In the alternative, on or about April 26, 2012, you knowingly engaged in a
form of cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or
misrepresentation not otherwise described in order to obtain academic credit
or other academic advantage of any kind by submitting a forged, altered or
falsified document, namely a University of Toronto Medical Certificate dated
April 23, 2012, in support of your request for academic accommodation or
relief in MATA37H3, contrary to Section B.l.3(b) of the Code.

A. Particulars

3)

At all material times you were a student at the University of Toronto
Scarborough.

4)

On April 23, 2012, you were scheduled to attend the final examination in
MATA37H3 (the "Course"), which was taught by Leo Goldmakher. You did
not attend the final examination.

5)

On April 26, 2012, you submitted a petition to defer the final examination in
the Course. In support of your petition, you submitted a University of
Toronto Medical Certificate dated April 23, 2012, purportedly prepared and
signed by a physician from The Scarborough Hospital General Campus (the
"Medical Certificate"). You submitted the Medical Certificate to obtain
academic accommodation or relief in the Course, namely, to defer the final
examination in the Course.

6)

The Medical Certificate that you submitted contained false information and
was not prepared or signed by a physician from The Scarborough Hospital
General Campus.

7)

You knowingly submitted the forged, altered or falsified Medical Certificate:
(a) understanding that the University of Toronto Scarborough required
legitimate medical documentation and evidence to be presented in
order to obtain the academic accommodation or relief you sought;
(b) with the intention that the University of Toronto Scarborough rely on
the Medical Certificate in considering whether or not to provide you
with the academic accommodation or relief you requested; and
(c) in an attempt to obtain an academic advantage.

20.

At the outset of its submissions, counsel for the University stated that if the Tribunal

were to find the Student guilty of Charge 1, it would withdraw Charge 2.
The Evidence

7

21.

The Tribunal heard the evidence of Ms. Sherylin Biason, Assistant Registrar at the

University of Toronto Scarborough.

She is responsible for overseeing the review of the

approximately 400 - 500 petitions received each semester at the University from students
seeking accommodations, deferrals of tests and examinations, and other requested
measures. She is very experienced in this role.
22.

The petition process requires students to submit petitions online through the eservice

website. The petition online form requires a student to provide contact information, a
statement

of what they seek, and a description of supporting information. Supporting

documentation must be submitted in person and receipt of documentation is logged on to the
eservice website by Registrar staff.
23.

On April 26, 2012 the Student submitted a petition seeking to "Write deferred exam" in

Course MATA37H3 in the 2012 Winter Term. Her statement was "I missed the final exam of
the above listed course due to illness and this petition for an exam deferral". She indicated
that her supporting documentation was "UTSC Medical Certificate completed by my
physician".

The Student submitted a University of Toronto Student Medical Certificate in

person to the Registrar's office on May 1, 2013.
24.

Ms. Biason reviewed the Student's petition and verified that the Student had not in fact

written the final exam.

Ms. Biason also reviewed the Medical Certificate the Student

submitted and noted that neither the name of the physician nor the physician registration
number was clearly written on the certificate. Nor did she recognize the physician's name as
one of the physicians who commonly treat University of Toronto Scarborough students. She
searched the College of Physicians and Surgeons ("CPSO")

website for the physician

number listed on the Certificate, trying all of the possible numbers she could decipher from the
handwritten document (62655, 62455 and 62955), and none of them matched to a physician
in Scarborough with a name beginning in "Ch". She also searched the CPSO website for all
physicians named "Chu" and "Chan" (the possible names that she could decipher from the
physician signature on the certificate) and found that none of them had both a physician
number that resembled the number on the Certificate and were at the Scarborough Hospital.
25.

On May 29, 2012 Ms. Biason attempted to reach the Student by phone and email and

by leaving a message for the Student on the eservice website indicating that the petition had

8

been denied and the medical documentation was not sufficient as set out above at paragraph
11. The eservice log indicated that the Student viewed this message on the same day it was
posted.
26.

The University also relied on the affidavit of Pam Marshall, Executive Director of

Patient Relations and Legal Affairs at the Scarborough Hospital since 2011.

Ms. Marshall

reviewed the Certificate submitted by the Student. Her evidence was that there are several
physicians with the last name "Chu" who have worked at the Hospital, but she was unable to
identify any physician on the Hospital's list of physicians whose name matches what appears
to be the full name and CPSO registration number of the physician on the Certificate. Ms.
Marshall also showed the Certificate to Dr. Tom Chan, the Chief of Staff of the Hospital who
was Chief of Emergency Medicine from 2004 to 2012, and who has worked at the Hospital
since 1996. He advised her that he has never heard of any physician with a name resembling
what appears to be the full name of the physician listed on the Certificate.
27.

The stamp on the Certificate is not, and has never been, a stamp of the Hospital. The

Certificate has a blue ink stamp on the lower right corner that purports to be of "the
Scarborough Hospital General campus". In Ms. Marshall's experience, the Hospital has never
used a "General Campus" stamp like the one on the Certificate. She also noted that the stamp
on the Certificate contains a typographical error in the address: "3050 Lawrence Aveneue [sic]
East".

It is her belief that the Hospital would not use a stamp that contained such a

typographical error. Yvonne Ragnitz, the Corporate Executive Assistant at the Hospital, who
has been with the Hospital for 18 years, also reviewed the Certificate and advised Ms.
Marshall that she does not recognize the stamp on the Certificate.
28.

Physicians who fill out documentation for a patient typically include their own direct

contact information, or departmental contact information, not the general contact information
for the Hospital.

Ms. Marshall does not recall any physicians at the hospital using the

Hospital's general contact information for documentation of this nature.
Decision of the Tribunal on the Charges

29.

Charge 1 under Section B.1.1(a) of the Code includes both knowingly forging, altering

or falsifying a document, or knowingly circulating or making use of a forged, altered or falsified

9

document. The Code provides that "knowingly" includes where a person ought reasonably to
have known.
30.

The Tribunal is of the view that the evidence establishes that the Student submitted a

falsified Medical Certificate in support of her Petition for a deferred final examination. There
was no physician working at the Scarborough Hospital at the relevant time with a full name
and registration number that resembled that found on the Certificate [the full physician name
appears to be "Kerry Chu"]. The stamp applied to the Certificate was never one used by the
Hospital and was not recognized by long term Hospital employees with access to patient
documentation. Further, the stamp contains a typographical error, and it is unlikely that the
Hospital would use a stamp with such an error. Moreover, use of the stamp on a medical
certificate is inconsistent with physician practice at the Hospital, as physicians typically
provide their own direct contact information or departmental contact information on such
patient documentation. The Student submitted this Certificate to the Registrar's Office in
person, and knew or reasonably ought to have known that it was false and contained a forged
signature and a falsified Hospital stamp. The evidence is cogent and compelling and has met
the University's burden of proof with respect to Charge 1
31.

The Tribunal finds that the Student is guilty of Charge 1.

32.

Charge 2 was withdrawn by the University.

Decision of the Tribunal on Penalty
33.

The University sought the following sanction:

•

A mark of O in the course MATA37H3

•

2 years suspension from the University from the date the Tribunal makes
its order

•

Notation of the sanction on the Student's transcript for 3 years from the
date of the Order

10

•

Reporting of the decision to the Provost, with the Student's name
withheld, for publication of a notice of the decision and the sanction

34.

The University did not lead any additional evidence with respect to the sanction.

35.

The Tribunal has considered the principles and factors relevant to sanction set out in

University of Toronto and Mr. C (Case No. 1976/77-3; November 5, 1976).

For the reasons

set out below, the Tribunal has determined that the University's proposed penalty is
appropriate.
36.

The nature of offence committed by the Student is very serious.

She submitted a

falsified Medical Certificate in an attempt to excuse her non-attendance at a final examination.
Her submission of the document in person, and the use of a false Hospital stamp to add
authenticity to the Certificate are strong indications of planning and deliberation, which
elevates its seriousness. Providing a false medical excuse for a missed final exam
undermines the integrity of the University's evaluation process and its process for
accommodation of a student's legitimate medical circumstances. Forging of a medical
certificate additionally implicates the integrity of medical professionals and medical institutions,
and makes it more difficult for the University to rely on the authenticity of those documents in
its petition process which relies on self-reporting by students (see University of Toronto and
S.P., Case No. 702; March 5, 2013). The volume of petitions received by the Registrar's

Office is high, and falsification is difficult to detect, so the need for general deterrence is an
important consideration.
37.

The Student has not participated in the discipline process and has not responded to

any communications from the Registrar, Dean's Office or counsel to the University regarding
these allegations of misconduct. There is accordingly no evidence before us of mitigating
circumstances, good character, remorse or insight.
38.

On the other hand, there is no indication that there is a likelihood that the Student will

repeat the offence. This is her first offence and there is no evidence of any prior discipline
concerns. The offence consisted of a single Certificate and Petition arising from one event.
There is no pattern of conduct that would suggest that she will repeat the offence.

11

39.

The proposed two year suspension is in our view generally consistent with other

decisions of this Tribunal. A first offence of plagiarism (also a serious offence) has generally
received a sanction of approximately two years (See University of Toronto and B.S (Case No.
697; January 17, 2014), University of Toronto and M.H.H. (Case No. 521; January 12, 2009).
Cases dealing with multiple instances of forged documents, or multiple prior offences, have
given rise to longer periods of suspension ( University of Toronto and S.P. (Case No. 702;
March 5, 2013), University of Toronto and K.C.Y (Case No. 646; February 20, 2013)
University of Toronto and S.M. (Case No. 696; August 19, 2013).

40.

The University has also asked for a 3 year period of notation of the sanction. The

Student presently only has 8 credits. Should the Student resume her studies at the University
following the period of suspension, this notation will remain on her record for the first year
after she returns, but will in all likelihood not remain all the way to graduation. This reflects the
fact that this is the Student's first offence.
41 .

In all of the circumstances, the Tribunal is satisfied that the University's proposed

penalty is fair and appropriate.
Order of the Tribunal

42.

The Tribunal issued the following Order on July 3, 2014:
1.

THAT Ms.

ca is guilty of one count of knowingly forging or in any other way

altering or falsifying a document or evidence required by the University of
Toronto, or uttering, circulating or making use of such forged, altered or falsified
document, contrary to section 8.1.1 .(a) of the Code;

ca:

2.

THAT the following sanctions shall be imposed on Ms.

(a)

a final grade of zero in the course MATA37H3;

(b)

a suspension from the University of Toronto from the date of this order for a
period of two years, ending on July 2, 2016; and

12

(c)

a notation of the sanction on her academic record and transcript from the date of
this order for a period of three years, ending on July 2, 2017.

3.

THAT this case be reported to the Provost for publication of a notice of the
decision of the Tribunal and the sanction imposed, with Ms.
withheld.

Dated at Toronto this

Ms. ~

/I day of September, 2014
.

ca•sname

