Report #358

   DATE: July 26, 2011
   PARTIES: F.G.,Â  (the Student) v. the School of Graduate Studies
   Hearing Date(s): June 24, 2011
   Committee Members:
   Prof. Ed Morgan, Chair
   Prof. Andrea Sass-Kortsak
   Ms. Natalie Melton
   Secretary:
   Chistopher Lang, Director, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances

   Appearances:
   For the Student Appellant:
   Ms. F.G. (the Student)
   For the School of Graduate Studies:
   Dr. Brian Corman
   Dr. Jeanne Watson
   Ms. Sari Springer

   School of Graduate Studies â course grade appeal â program coordinator
   acted outside her scope of authority and recommended changing the grade
   from B+ to A- â course instructor re-read the paper and confirmed B+ â
   another faculty member re-read the paper and confirmed B+ â Student was
   treated incorrectly due to the procedural error â Divisional Appeal
   Board assigned a grade of CR â Committee could not raise the grade as
   the paper had been re-read twice by experts in the field and it had no
   authority to change a grade â CR designation was the most appropriate
   remedy as it helped the Student in that it would not reduce her average
   â appeal dismissed
   Appeal from a grade of B+ in a course. The program coordinator
   recommended changing the grade from a B+ to an A-, misleading the
   Student to believe that the coordinator actually had the power to do
   so. The course instructor re-read the paper and confirmed the B+. Upon
   appeal by the Student, another faculty member re-read the paper and
   also confirmed the B+. The Student further appealed, and the Divisional
   Appeal Board ordered to change the grade from a B+ to a CR, reasoning
   that the Student had been treated incorrectly because of the procedural
   error made by the program coordinator. The Committee confirmed this
   finding, stating that it could not raise the grade as it had been
   re-read twice by faculty members who are expert in the field. The
   Committee found that the CR designation was the most appropriate way to
   remedy the procedural error because it helped the Student in that it
   would not reduce her average in any way. The Committee dismissed the
   Studentâs complaints about the admission process and allegations of
   discrimination by the Department due to lack of evidence. Appeal
   dismissed.
   [1]View Report

References

   1. file:///media/12674
