THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
THE GOVERNING COUNCIL
Report #358 of the Academic Appeals Committee
July 26, 2011

To the Academic Board
University of Toronto

Your Committee reports that it held a hearing on Friday, June 24, 2011, at which the
following members were present:
Professor Edward Morgan, Chair
Professor Andrea Sass-Kmisak
Ms. Natalie Melton
Secretary: Christopher Lang, Director, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty
Grievances

Appearances:
For the Student Appellant:
Ms, F

G

, ("the Student")

For the University of Toronto:
Dr, Brian Corman, Dean, School of Graduate Studies
Dr. Jeanne Watson, Associate Dean, Chair of Adult Education and Counselling
Psychology Program
Ms. Sari Springer, Counsel for the School of Graduate Studies

I.

Appeal

Ms. F
G
appeals to this Committee from the decision of the Graduate
Academic Appeals Board ("GAAB") dated November 25, 2009, with respect to her grade
in one course: AEC 1131 - Corporate Ethics in the Global Economy: The Caring and
Serving Dimensions of Enterprise. This is an OISE/UT course offered by the Depai1ment
of Adult Education and Counseling Psychology (the "Depai1ment"). Ms. G
began her studies in that department in the fall of 2005 and received her M.Ed in June
2007.

2

II.

Preliminary Issue

At the outset of the hearing the Chair mentioned to the parties that he was also an
alternate Chair for the GAAB, but that he was appointed after the GAAB's decision was
released in this case. Neither party raised an objection so the hearing proceeded.

III.

Facts

The course in issue was taught by Professor Laurent Leduc. The evaluation was
composed of three components, namely class participation (40%), weekly reflection
papers (30%), and project presentation and final papet· (30%). Ms. G
received
an A (80%) for participation, a B+ (76%) for her weekly reflection papers, and a B+
(77%) for her final paper, for an overall course grade ofB+. As an aside, the panel notes
that pat1icipation portion of the grade appears to have contained a clerical etTor, since an
80% numerical grade would translate into an A- rather than an A under the applicable
grading guidelines. However, this did not impact the final grade, which averaged out to a
B+.
In any case, Ms. G
was not satisfied with the grade on her final paper, and
several months later spoke with Ms. Nancy Jackson, the Department's program
coordinator, about it. Ms. Jackson recommended changing the final grade from a B+ to
an A-, and submitted a grade revision form to the registrar reflecting this changed grade.
Ms. Jackson had no authority to unilaterally change a student's final grade. That can only
be done with the agreement of the course instructor. Professor Leduc never agreed to the
change recommended by Ms. Jackson; indeed, Professor Leduc re-read the paper at Ms.
Jackson's behest and confirmed that the grade of B+ (77%) should remain in place. At
the same time, he provided extensive comments to Ms. G
about the paper.
Ms. G
then appealed her grade to the Depm1ment's academic appeals
committee. That committee had the paper re-read by another faculty member in the
Depat1ment, who confirmed the B+ grade that Professor Leduc had assigned it. Ms.
G
's appeal was therefore dismissed. She further appealed to the GAAB, which
heard tile appeal in the fall of 2009. GAAB was of the view that since the original course
instructor and a second reader had dete1mined that the final paper merited no more than a
B+, there were no grounds on which the grade could be raised. However, it also
considered that the Depat1ment had made a procedural error when Ms. Jackson, the
Department's own project coordinator, took it on herself to unilaterally change the grade,
and that Ms. G
had as a consequence been treated incotTectly, The GAAB's
solution was to change the grade from a B+ to a CR on Ms. G
's final transcript.
The CR designation is a neutral one, and does not effect the student's overall average one
way or another.

3
IV.

Decision

This Committee is in agreement with the GAAB. Ms. Jackson acted outside the scope of
her authority and caused substantial confusion in Ms. G
's mind with respect to
her grade. This improper procedure has increased the burden on Ms. G
and is
the cause of these protracted appeal proceedings.
That said, Ms. G
's paper has been re-read twice, once by the course ins.tructor
and once by another faculty member, and has been found to merit a B+. In light of these
evaluations by facult)' members who are expert in the field in which the paper was
written, this Committee cannot raise Ms. G
's final grade above the B+ that she
initially received. In fact, this Committee could not do so even if it were so inclined, as it
does not have the expertise or the authority to re-grade the paper on its own.
As an aside, the Committee notes that at the hearing Ms. G
presented a litany of
complaints about OISE/UT and the Department. These primarily had to do with enors
that she says were made in the admissions process, whereby she was admitted to the
wrong program. Her complaints also included some vague allegations of discrimination
against her. None of those complaints present a valid ground of appeal. The Committee
has no mandate to consider any enors in the admissions process, and none of the
allegations of discrimination have been substantiated or in any way suppo1ied in evidence
by Ms. G
The Committee does, however, have considerable sympathy for the fact that Ms.
G
was mislead by the improper procedures followed by Ms. Jackson. It
therefore affirms the decision of the GAAB to convert the final course grade as it appears
on Ms. G
's transcript from B+ to CR. Ms. G
indicated during the
hearing that she thought that there are negative optics in a CR designation, and that
anyone reading her transcript would perceive that to indicate a near failure. In that,
however, she seems to be mistaken. The point of a CR is to simply designate that the
course has been passed, without any further comment about the student's performance in
the course. If Ms. G
's overall average is higher than B+, the CR designation
will help her in that it will not reduce her average in any way. The Committee is of the
view that a CR is therefore the most appropriate way to remedy the procedural en·or
made by the Department at the early stages of the appeal process.
Ms. G
's transcript should be amended to substitute the grade of CR in place of
B+ for AEC 1131 - Corporate Ethics in the Global Economy: The Caring and Serving
Dimensions of Enterprise.

