Case 1184

FILE:

   Case # 1184 (2022-2023)

DATE:

   September 7, 2022

PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v. G.K.R. (‚the Student‚)

HEARING DATE(S):

   June 8, 2022, via Zoom

PANEL MEMBERS:

   Douglas Harrison, Chair

   Professor Margaret MacNeill, Faculty Panel Member

   Madison Kerr, Student Panel Member

APPEARANCES:

   Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg
   Rothstein LLP

   The Student

HEARING SECRETARY:

   Carmelle Salomon-Labbe, Director, Office of Appeals, Discipline and
   Faculty Grievances

   The Student was charged with eight offences under the Code of Behaviour
   on Academic Matters, 1995 (the ‚ Code ‚ ), three of which were made in
   the addition and in the alternative. The Student was charged with two
   counts of knowingly representing as their own an idea or expression of
   an idea or the work of another in two assignments contrary to s.
   B.i.1(d) of the Code. The Student was also charged with three counts of
   knowingly using or possessing an unauthorized aid or aids obtained
   unauthorized assistance in connection with academic work in a course,
   contrary to s. B.i.1(b) of the Code. In addition and in the
   alternative, the Student was charged with three counts of knowingly
   engaging in a form of cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct,
   fraud or misrepresentation not otherwise described in the Code in order
   to obtain academic credit or other academic advantage, contrary to s.
   B.i.3(b) Code.

   The hearing proceeded on the basis of an Agreed Statement of Facts
   (‚ASF‚) and a Joint Submission on Penalty (‚JSP‚). The ASF outlined
   that the professor who taught the course became aware that the
   solutions to the assignments in the course were posted on Chegg.com.
   The professor requested that the assignment questions and posted
   solutions be removed from the website and that an investigation be
   opened. Chegg.com provided the professor with the relevant information
   pertaining to who accessed the questions and answers. Upon review of
   this data, the professor determined that the answers given by the
   Student to questions in two assignments were virtually identical to the
   Chegg solutions. The ASF also outlined that at the Dean‚s Designate
   meeting, the Student denied copying the answers to the assignments from
   Chegg.com but admitted to using videos from Khan Academy to assist in
   ‚learning how to solve the problem‚ and that the answers on the
   assignments were exactly how the online solution was answered on Khan
   Academy. The Student also denied that they had committed an academic
   offence. The Panel noted that the ASF outlined that the Student
   admitted to accessing Chegg.com to obtain unauthorized assistance while
   working on two assignments, and in doing so used the answers that had
   been posted to Chegg.com to provide answers to some of the questions on
   the assignments. The Student also admitted to obtaining unauthorized
   assistance on the assignments. The Student acknowledged that they
   signed the ASF freely and voluntarily, knowing of the potential
   consequences, and that they were given the opportunity to seek the
   advice of counsel before doing so. On the basis of both the Student‚s
   admissions and the ASF, the Panel was satisfied that the offence of
   knowingly using or possessing unauthorized aid, or aids, or obtaining
   unauthorized assistance in both assignments was made out by the
   University. The Panel found the Student guilty of two counts of
   knowingly using or possessing an unauthorized aid or aids or obtaining
   unauthorized assistance in both assignments, contrary to s. B.i.1(b) of
   the Code. The University withdrew the remaining six charges.

   In determining sanction, the Panel reviewed and considered the JSP as
   well as the Agreed Statement of Facts on Sanction. The Agreed Statement
   of Facts on Sanction outlined that the Student had committed four prior
   offences of academic misconduct. In support of the JSP, the Panel was
   directed to a number of previous Tribunal decisions. The Panel noted
   that while the Student admitted to knowingly accessing Chegg.com to
   obtain unauthorized assistance, there was no proof that the Student
   paid money for that access. Furthermore, the Student did not submit an
   entire assignment based on answers from Chegg.com. However, the Student
   had four prior offences on their record. The Panel noted that although
   the Student ultimately cooperated with the University, the Student
   initially denied the misconduct. The Panel noted that the proposed
   penalty is serious and lengthy, and that the Student will not be able
   to graduate until the suspension expires. The Panel further noted that
   the temptation to cheat on assignments, due to access to websites like
   Chegg.com is great, and it must do what it can to assist the University
   in ensuring that the penalties for those who are caught are harsh
   enough to make a potential cheater think twice. The Panel did not
   recommend expulsion in this case as there was no proof that the Student
   paid for access to Chegg.com, and the Student did eventually cooperate
   with the University in this matter. The Panel found that a lengthy
   suspension and notation were appropriate in this case. Therefore, the
   Panel accepted that the JSP was reasonable and within the range of
   appropriate sanctions for the offences the Student was found to have
   committed. The Panel imposed the following sanctions: a grade of zero
   in the course; a suspension of just under five-years; a six-year
   notation or until graduation on the transcript, whichever comes first;
   and a report to the Provost for publication.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/30662
