Case 531

DATE:

   April 20, 2009

PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v. Mr. F.C.

Hearing Date(s):

   Information not available

Panel Members:

   Ms. Rodica David Q.C., Chair
   Professor Bruno Magliocchetti, Faculty Member
   Mr. Sam Liu, Student Member

Appearances:

   Mr. John N. H. Britton, Dean‚s Designate, for the University of Toronto
   Mr. Robert A. Centa, Assistant Discipline Counsel, for the University
   of Toronto
   Mr. Khalid Janmohamed, assisting Mr. Robert A. Centa
   Mr. F. C., the Student
   Mr. Nick Shkordoff, Law Student for the Student
   Ms. Charlotte Macdonald, assisting Mr. Nick Shkordoff
   Mr. Daniel Saposnik, assisting Mr. Nick Shkordoff

   Student charged under the Code. The charges related to two courses in
   which the Student was alleged to have submitted two plagiarised essays,
   submitted an examination booklet under a false name in one examination,
   and had another person sit in for him while giving a false name on
   another examination. The Student pleaded guilty to the charges. The
   parties filed a Joint Book of Documents and an Agreed Statement of
   Facts. On the basis of the Agreed Statement of Facts and Joint Document
   Brief, the Panel accepted the Student‚s plea on the charges. The Panel
   considered the Student‚s evidence on sanction and found that depression
   coupled with the pressure exerted upon him by his parents accounted for
   his decision to pursue the route that resulted in the charges. The
   Student could have dropped the course when he had an opportunity and
   desire to do so but was pressured by his mother to continue. The Panel
   found that it was possible that the Student‚s cultural background made
   it difficult for him to seek help from University services. The Panel
   considered Appendix ‚C‚ to the Code, and found that each case must
   depend on its own facts. The Panel considered case authorities
   presented by both parties and found that the facts of the case of Mr.
   P.M. most closely resembled the case. The Panel found that while the
   Student‚s conduct was egregious and deserved a serious sanction, the
   circumstances mitigated against recommending expulsion. The Panel
   imposed a grade of zero in the two courses; a five-year suspension; a
   ten-year notation on the Student‚s academic record and transcript; and
   that a reported be issued to the Provost. The Panel stated that it
   would have imposed a ten-year suspension had it the authority to do so.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12736
