Case 531

THE UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
IN THE MATTER OF charges of academic dishonesty made on September 2, 2008,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic
Matters, 1995.
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Act, 1971, S.O. 1971, c. 56 as
amended S.O. 1978, c. 88

BETWEEN:
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
- and Mr. F.C.

Members of the Panel:
•
•
•

Ms. Rodica David Q.C., Chair
Professor Bruno Magliocchetti, Faculty Member
Mr. Sam Liu, Student Member

Appearances:
•
•
•

Mr. John N. H. Britton, Dean's Designate, for the University of Toronto
Mr. Robert A. Centa, Assistant Discipline Counsel, for the University of Toronto
Mr. Khalid Janmohamed, assisting Mr. Robert A. Genta

•
•
•
•

Mr. F. C., the Student
Mr. Nick Shkordoff, Law Student for the Student
Ms. Charlotte Macdonald, assisting Mr. Nick Shkordoff
Mr. Daniel Saposnik, assisting Mr. Nick Shkordoff

THE CHARGES
[1] The Student was charged with various offences under the University of
Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters ("Code") which may be
summarized as follows:
a) Plagiarism relating to two separate essays;

b) Submitting an examination paper under a false name;
c) Having another person sit in for him while giving a false name on a final
examination.
[2]

The Student pleaded guilty to all charges.

[3]

Although the Student also pleaded guilty to alternative general charges laid
under Section B.1.3.(b) of the Code, the University withdrew these charges
and these charges were not proceeded with.

[4]

The University of Toronto and the Student filed a Joint Book of Documents as
well as an Agreed Stiltement of Facts.

BACKGROUND
[5]

In June 2006, the Student graduated as an Ontario scholar from Thornlea
Secondary School. In his last year of high school he had high marks.
According to his mother, who gave testimony, he not only did well in high
school, being an Ontario scholar, but he also participated in sports and did
volunteer work in an old age home.

[6]

He was admitted into a first year Commerce Programme at the Faculty of Arts
and Science at the University of Toronto in the fall of 2006. After one year in
this programme, his marks were not sufficient to enable him to continue
studies towards a Bachelor of Commerce degree. Accordingly, in the fall of
2007, he switched to Philosophy. During the 2007-2008 academic year, he
worked full-time with the Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce while enrolled
in a full time Arts programme in Philosophy.

[7]

In the winter of 2008, the Student was enrolled in the following two
Philosophy courses: PHL240H - Persons, Minds and Bodies, taught by
Professor James John; and PHL271 H - Law and Morality, taught by Professor
Wayne Sumner. The charges to which the Student pleaded guilty related to
events that occurred in connection with these two courses between May 6,
2008 and May 23, 2008.

[8]

In the Fall of 2008, the Student ceased attending the University of Toronto
and was enrolled in Computer and Marketing courses at Seneca College. He
obtained good marks in these courses. However, he did submit an essay
that, while quoting from and giving credit to various online websites, did not
actually place quotation marks around the quotes. He did not attribute any
significance to the absence of quotation marks since it is clear from his essay
that he clearly identified the sources of the excerpts he had taken from the
websites.

2

EVENTS RELATING TO THE CHARGES

[9]

On January 14, 2008, the Student received a lengthy memorandum entitled
"Honesty in Scholarship" which outlined in detail the nature and
consequences of plagiarism.

Persons, Minds and Bodies PHL240H
[1 O] The course outline indicated that there were four elements lo this course as
follows in respect of which the Student's performance was dismal:
a) Tutorial participation - 5% - The Student did not attend any tutorials.
b) Essay # 1 - 20% - The Student handed in an essay entitled "A Study of
Moral Responsibility and Alternative Possibilities" significantly later than its
due date, having given various excuses why ii was late. This essay listed
verbatim and nearly verbatim excerpts from sources that he did not
identify nor did he attribute these excerpts to any source by using
quotation marks or otherwise.
c) Essay# 2 - 30% - The Student again handed in, much past the deadline,
a document entitled "Personal Identities Essay" which likewise contained
extensive excerpts from unacknowledged sources without attributing them
to these sources.
d) Final examination - 45% - The Student attended at the examination,
provided his student identification, and then handed in an examination
booklet under the fictitious name of Alex Li. Subsequently, the Student
falsely alleged that he had completed the examination and then had the
audacity to complain that he had received a mark of zero when his
examination paper could not be found. We assume that the University
staff was put to unnecessary effort to try to locate this fictitious
examination paper.
Law and Morality PHL271 H
[11] Two days after the Student attended the examination in the course entitled
Persons, Minds and Bodies, the Student attended to write the examination in
Law and Morality. He presented his student card, and signed an examination
list. He submitted an examination booklet in a fictitious name (the details of
which were not revealed in the evidence) and, in addition, arranged for a
friend (who he refused to identify) to attend the examination and submit the
examination booklet in his name.
Disposition on the Substantial Charges
[12] Section C.ll.(a)9 makes it clear the onus is on the University to show on "clear
and convincing evidence" that the accused committed the alleged offence.
[13] Given the Agreed Statement of Facts and Joint Document Brief, the Tribunal
3

had no hesitation in accepting the Student's plea of guilty on these charges.

SANCTION - POSITION OF THE PARTIES

[14] The University took the position that the Tribunal should recommend to the
President, expulsion under section C.I1.(b)(i). The student put forth the
position that he should be suspended for a period of five years.

THE EVIDENCE ON SANCTION
[15] The University offered no evidence on sanction; it relied on the Joint Book of
Documents and the Agreed Statement of Facts.
[16] The Student testified on his own behalf. In addition he called his mother as a
witness.
(17] We found that the evidence submitted by the Student and his mother to be
credible. This evidence revealed that the Student had a rather tortuous family
history. His mother throughout this period had serious health issues including
hypertension, diabetes, high cholesterol, and heart disease.
These
conditions became so serious that she was hospitalized in September of
2008. She apparently followed in the footsteps of her own mother who, with
similar ailments, died in a supermarket in front of the Student and his sister
while they were grocery shopping. Presumably this had a life long effect on
the Student.
[18] The Student's mother had held a senior position at the Royal Bank of
Canada, an obviously very responsible position. When the Student was in
grade 10, she quit this position to become a marketing consultant. However,
she had a very fervent desire to see the Student pursue higher education and
achieve success. It appears that it is for this reason that the Student
originally enrolled in the Commerce Programme. When his marks were so
poor that he did not satisfy the requirements to continue in the Commerce
Programme, he apparently arbitrarily chose to enrol in Philosophy in the
Faculty of Arts. At approximately the same time, he became employed fulltime with the Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce. He testified that he was
torn between pursuing a career through continuing to work or pursuing higher
education. He worked so much that he did not have time to devote to his
Philosophy courses in which, one could reasonably conclude, he had very
little interest. He enrolled in this course because of the significant pressure
placed upon him by his parents, and presumably, in particular, by his mother.
[19] The Student testified that he wasn't aware that he was actually plagiarizing at
the time that he submitted the essays. However, it would appear more likely
that he simply paid little attention to these essays and felt so pressured to
4

submit them, that he simply fired them off without much thought. It was
obvious that he was not ready to write any exams given that he did not attend
classes, did not attend tutorials and had presumably done very little study in
the courses. He then began to try to devise ways of passing the exams,
firstly by creating a fictitious exam so that he would be given another
opportunity to write it, and secondly by having a friend impersonate him on
the next exam.
[20] Following the events giving rise to the charges, he wrote a letter to his
professor in PHL240H - Persons, Minds and Bodies trying to urge the
professor to consider his essays and insisting that he had written the exam.
This letter was apparently primarily composed by his mother.
[21] The Student attended a meeting with the Dean along with his mother. He
testified that he could not find the courage to admit everything, although he
did admit the plagiarism at that first meeting. He expressed remorse and
advised that he knew what he had done was wrong.
[22] In the second meeting with the Dean, which his mother did not attend, he
admitted guilt again on the plagiarism and also on the personation offences
relating to the two examinations.
[23] During his testimony, the Student repeatedly expressed remorse about his
conduct. He acknowledged that he had plagiarized the essays. He refers to
himself as being stupid and that he should have known better. The Student
described his behaviour in relation to the personation offences as being
"ridiculous, completely unacceptable"
[24] The Student expressed the hope that he could complete his courses at
Seneca which he estimated would take three years, and thereafter enrol in
University again for a period of four years. If he successfully completed every
year of his programs, he would be age 27 when he graduated University. He
now understands the importance of higher education and appeared to be
sincere in wishing to pursue this goal. He expressed sincere regret to
everyone for the consequences of his conduct.
[25] The Student advised that he was extremely depressed during this time
period. However, he failed to provide any expert medical evidence in this
regard. Notwithstanding the absence of expert evidence, it does appear that
his depression coupled with the pressure that was being exerted upon him by
his parents accounts for his decision to pursue the disastrous course that
resulted in the charges. Although he could have simply dropped out of the
course when he had an opportunity to do so and wished to do so, he was
persuaded and pressured by his mother to continue. Moreover it is entirely
possible that his cultural background made it difficult for him to seek help
such as counselling among numerous services available at the University of
Toronto.
[26] It is clear that the Student has been thoroughly humiliated and discredited
5

within his own family and possibly within his ethnic community.

RANGE OF SANCTIONS AVAILABLE

[27] Pursuant to the Code, the Tribunal's authority to impose sanctions is clearly
set out (and indeed limited) by section C.ll.(b)1. The range of sanctions
within the jurisdiction of the Tribunal to impose, are from a minimum of an oral
reprimand to a suspension of up to five years. Unfortunately there is no
jurisdiction in the Tribunal to recommend a suspension exceeding five years.
[28] Pursuant to subsection (i), the Tribunal does however have jurisdiction to
recommend expulsion, but, in that event, the recommendation is made to the
President for a recommendation by him or her to the Governing Council. The
Tribunal does not have the jurisdiction to impose a sanction of expulsion.
[29] Regardless of the sanction imposed, the Tribunal has the power to order that
any sanction be recorded on the student's academic record and transcript,
without limitation as to the length of time; the length of time is entirely in the
discretion of the panel.
[30] Finally the Tribunal may report any case to the Provost who may publish a
notice of the Tribunal's decision and the sanction imposed in the University
newspapers with the name of the student withheld.

SANCTION CONSIDERATIONS

[31] In the well known case of Mr. C, (November 5, 1976), a decision of the
University Tribunal sitting on Appeal from the then local branch of the Trial
Division of the Tribunal, Mr. John Sopinka, as he then was, enunciated the
principles relevant to sanction namely:
"The classical components of enlightened punishment are
reformation, deterrence and protection of the public. In applying
these criteria, a tribunal should consider all of the following:
a) the character of the person charged;
b) the likelihood of a repetition of the offence;
c) the nature of the offence committed;
d) any extenuating circumstances
commission of the offence;

surrounding

the

e) the detriment to the University occasioned by the offence;
f)

the need to deter others from committing a similar
offence."
6

THE AUTHORITIES AND CASE LAW

[32] Appendix "C" to the Code, the Provost's Guidelines on Sanctions, Offences
and Suggested Penalties For Students, states, inter alia, as follows:
"The particular circumstances of each case will, of course, have
to be taken into account, but the following are suggested
guidelines:
2. For submitting work, where ii forms a major fraction of the
course, in whole from another person, the sanction
recommended shall be suspension from the University for at
least two years.

6. For personating, or having an individual personate on a test or
examination, the recommended sanction shall be expulsion
from the University."
[33] It is clear, therefore, that each case must depend on it's own facts.
[34] Counsel for both parties presented extensive case authorities, which they
urged the panel supported their position. Unfortunately, none of these cases
on their facts mirror the case of this Student.
[35] With respect to the case authorities submitted to us by counsel for the
University, the cases differ significantly and can be distinguished as follows:
1. In the case of Mr. S.B. (November 14, 2007), the student had pleaded not
guilty and accordingly a Trial was necessitated on the merits. The student
had two prior offences. However, only one count of plagiarism was
involved. A three year suspension was imposed for a third offence which,
according to paragraph 35 of the decision, "strikes a balance of
punishment, compassion, rehabilitation and deterrence".
2. In the case of Mr. K.N. April 18, 2008) there was one count of personation,
the student did not appear, but there was a Joint Submission for a five
year suspension.
3. In the case of Mr. V.A. and Mr. A.H. (May 17, 2002), also cited by the
Student, the two students charged were the impersonator and the
registered student who was being impersonated. An Agreed Statement of
Facts was submitted with a Joint Submission on sanction recommending
five year suspension for each student. The student requesting the
impersonation, being the initiator, pleaded guilty and was given a five year
suspension. There were mitigating circumstances in that he had medical
difficulties and had expressed remorse.
The impersonator was given only a four year suspension as the panel felt
that the initiator should be more severely sanctioned than the
7

impersonator. In both instances, a comparable period of time was set for
the notation of the suspension on each student's academic record.
4. In the case of Mr. C., (November 17, 2000), also cited by the Student, the
student, who had impersonated another student at an examination was
expelled. However, the student did not attend the hearing, and there were
absolutely no extenuating circumstances.
5. In the case of Mr. P., (November 17, 2000), being the student for whom
Mr. C. in the above matter had acted as impersonator, also cited by the
Student, a suspension of five years was imposed and a five year notation
was placed on his academic record.
Mr. P. pleaded guilty to four different charges relating to the personation
on the exam as well as falsifying doctor's notes and a medical certificate.
However, there are some similarities with the case before the panel,
specifically:
a) He made an
performance.

effort to substantially improve

his academic

b) All four charges occurred within a very short period of lime.
c) There were no previous convictions nor any further misconducts
subject to the one series of events that led to the four charges.
6. In the case of Mr. A.P., (July 5, 2005), the student was expelled on a
second offence of forging an academic record. However, the student did
not appear and there were no mitigating factors. There was, on the
contrary, the aggravating factor that he had made it extremely difficult to
be served.
7. In the case of Ms. E., (March 15, 1994) after a Trial, the student was found
guilty of separate offences relating to plagiarism and forgery. As she did
not appear, the Trial had to proceed in her absence. Although the student
had admitted the offences in a letter that she wrote to the Provost, and
apologized, there were no other extenuating circumstances and no
redeeming factor made known to the Tribunal. Accordingly, the sanction
was expulsion.
8. Finally in the case of Ms. S.L., (April 6, 2006) the student submitted two
essays that she had purchased. The student pleaded guilty based on an
Agreed Statement of Facts. Expulsion was recommended, however in
that case, the Tribunal was of the view that the student's evidence of
adverse circumstances could not be "clearly causally connected to the
offence". In paragraph 31 the Tribunal stated "The Tribunal is not satisfied
that personal adversity encountered by Ms. L. was sufficiently connected
to the occurrence of the offence, and nor was that personal adversity
sufficient in kind to reasonably give rise to the suspension of otherwise
8

sound judgment."

(36) Counsel for the Student cited three additional cases, all of which involved
multiple offences and none of which resulted in an expulsion. Two of these
cases involved Joint Submissions.
(37) Finally the Student referred to four expulsion cases all of which involved
aggravating factors.
(38) In our view, the cases involving a Joint Submission on Sanction are of little
assistance in this case, as the test for the Tribunal to refuse to accept a Joint
Submission is a stringent one. It was enunciated in the decision of the
Tribunal in the case of Mr. K.N. at paragraph 12 as follows:
"In its submissions on penalty, the University reminded the
panel of the courts' directives on joint submissions, namely that
adjudicators should be loathe not to accept the joint submission
and should do so only if the administration of justice would
become in disrepute following acceptance of a joint submission.
In that context, the University strongly encouraged the panel to
accept the joint submission on penally".

(39) The facts of the case of Mr. P.M., (April 9, 2002) cited by both parties most
closely resembles this case. The student pleaded guilty, based on an Agreed
Statement of Facts, to one count of personation. On a Joint Submission he
was given five years suspension and five years notation on his academic
record. The factors that were most similar to this case provided in the Joint
Submission in litigation were as follows:
''The Joint submission set out the following mitigating factors in
this case:
1) The student acknowledged his guilt when first confronted
with the allegations;
2) The student expressed remorse to the Dean when first
confronted with the a/legations;
3) The student is a transplanted individual who has not
been able to adjust fully to Canadian society in general,
and to the university culture in particular;
4) The student comes from a culture that is dominated in
family control, in which personal decisions and
educational decisions are made only with permission of
the parents or elders. In this case, the student felt
intense pressure to complete his studies, and believed
that the consequences of failure would be severe;
5) Al the time of the offence, the student had a limited
support network of friends. He did not have the benefit of
9

close peers to assist him in dealing with his academic
problems when they first arose; and
6) The student understands the need for a significant
sanction.
The student has shown respect for the
discipline process throughout, and accepts that the
sanction submitted is appropriate."

DISPOSITION ON SANCTION

[40] We are of the view that the conduct of the Student is extremely egregious and
deserves a very serious sanction.
However, as there are mitigating
circumstances, we are not persuaded that he should be given the "life
sentence" of expulsion.
[41] We have therefore concluded that the most appropriate sanction within the
limitations of the Code is as follows:
(1) Suspension for five years
(2) That the sanction be recorded on the Student's academic record for ten
years.
(3) Report to the Provost to publish a notice of the decision of the Tribunal
and the sanction imposed in the University newspapers with the name of
the Student withheld.
[42] We would have imposed a suspension for ten years, if we had been given the
authority to do so under the Code.

Rodica David, Co-Chair

10

[43]

Amendment to the Reasons for Decision

Through oversight, one of the sanctions which discipline counsel and counsel
for the Student recommended to the panel was not included in the original

Reasons. For the sake of clarity, the parties have requested that the panel
list all sanctions to be imposed. Therefore, we order the following sanction:

1. Grade of zero in PHL240H and PHL271 H
2. Suspension for five years
3. That the sanction be recorded on the Student's academic record for ten
years
4. Report to the Provost to publish a notice of the decision of the Tribunal
and the sanction imposed in the University newspapers with the name of
the Student withheld.

April 20, 2009
Rodica David, Co-Chair

11

