<;asc 479

THE UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO

IN THE MATTER OF charges of academic dishonesty made on July 10, 2008;
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Act, 1971, S.O. 1971, c. 56 as amended
S.0. 1978, c. 88
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic
Matters, 1995;

BETWEEN:
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
- andL. Y.

Members of the Panel:

•
•
•

Ms. Lisa Brownstone, Chair
Professor Magdy Hassouna, Faculty Panel Member
Mr. Jeffrey Clayman, Student Panel Member

Appearances:
• Mr. Robert Centa, Assistant Discipline Counsel
• Ms. Tina Lee, Assistant to Mr. Centa
• Professor Scott Graham, Dean's Designate, University of Toronto at Mississauga
Preliminary Issue
[!)

The trial division of the University Tribunal was convened on December I, 2008 to
consider charges under the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic
Matters 1995 (the "Code"), set out in a Notice of Hearing dated October 29, 2008.

[2)

Neither the student nor a representative for the student appeared at the hearing. The
University proposed to proceed in the student's absence. To this end, the university
called evidence and made submissions about the reasonableness of notice provided to the
student.

2

Case 479

[3)

The University commenced by introducing the following exhibits: the Notice of Hearing;
a letter dated May 15, 2007 outlining the charges against the student arising out of her
alleged behaviour on or about August 22, 2006 ("the first set of charges") with a covering
letter dated May 15, 2007; and a letter dated February 8, 2008 advising the student of the
offences alleged to have been committed on or about April 18, 2007 ("the second set of
charges").

[4)

The University advised that it had had no contact with the student for an extensive period
of time and proceeded to lead evidence about the historical contact and the subsequent
attempts it had made to effect futther contact with the student.

[5)

The Panel heard from Lucy Gaspini, Academic Affairs Officer in the Dean's Office at the
University of Toronto, Mississauga. She testified that on May 28, 2007 she sent a letter
to Ms Yao at the address Ms Yao had provided to the University as the address at which
she could be reached. That letter advised that a rep01t had been received that the student
had used unauthorized assistance during the writing of an examination, and provided the
student with an opportunity to meet with the Assistant Dean or her representative in
respect of the alleged incident. The letter advised the student to contact Ms Gaspini
before Friday, June 15, 2007 to arrange a meeting time. Ms Gaspini testified that this
kind of letter is always sent by registered mail, and that she received no indication that
the letter was not received. Ms Gaspini testified that since no response had been received,
she began a quest to get a hold of the student. She made several telephone calls to
different numbers that had been provided by the student to the University, and, in midAugust, emailed the email address that the student had provided to the University. No
response to the email was received. One of the telephone numbers that the student had
provided to the University was not in service.

[6)

During the week of August 20, 2007, the student was expected to attend to write an
examination in a different course, which had been deferred at the student's request. Ms
Gaspini intended to reach the student at that examination. However, the student did not
attend for the examination.

[7)

On August 22, 2007, August 24, 2007 and September 18, 2007, Ms Gaspini tried
different numbers to get a hold of the student and left voicemail messages asking for Ms
Yao to contact her about an urgent matter. Ms Gaspini also asked that, if the telephone
number was incorrect and the student was not reachable at that telephone number,
whoever got the message telephone Ms Gaspini to advise her that the number was
incorrect. No response of any kind was received to these messages.

[8)

Further telephone calls were made on September 20, 2007 and September 30, 2007. On
September 20, 2007, Ms Gaspini tried to call all of the numbers listed in Canada 411
under the same surname as the student, but did not receive any response.

[9)

On September 27, 2007, Ms Gaspini obtained an internal email providing a second
possible email address for the student.

3

Case 479

[JO]

On October I, 2007, Ms Gaspini couriered a letter and sent the letter by regular mail to
the student's most current address as listed on the University records. Both were returned
to the University on October 22, 2007.

[I I]

The Panel next heard from Betty Ann Campbell, a law clerk at Paliare Roland, the firm
that is counsel for the University. Ms Campbell testified that the first set of charges was
delivered by the University to the firm in April, 2007. Disclosure materials were
assembled and sent to the student's address that was provided on the University Record
as the student's most recent address. No reply was received. At that point, Paliare Roland
received information that there were additional investigations into what would become
the second set of charges. Therefore, no further steps were taken at that time to schedule
the first set of charges. The second set of charges was received by the firm in February
2008. Ms Campbell prepared disclosure materials for those charges and sent them by
courier. That documentation was returned to her office. She ordered an updated Record
of Student Information from the University, which listed the same address and email
address as those previously provided to the firm by the University. Therefore, Ms
Campbell emailed the student, advising that there had been no responses to
correspondence, that she had been unable to reach her by telephone, and had not received
any response to voicemails. Ms Campbell advised the student in the email that she would
be proceeding to schedule the case for a hearing before the Tribunal in relation to both
sets of charges in April or May, 2008, and proceeded to suggest various dates. The
student was asked to advise Ms Campbell within the next few days whether any of the
dates posed a conflict for her, and was advised that if the student did not contact Ms
Campbell, Ms Campbell would assume that the student would be available to attend. Ms
Campbell received no response to the email, and no indication that the email address was
not active.

[12]

Ms Campbell testified that she then hired Don Colbourn, a private investigator, who
located the student in Ottawa. The following day, Ms Campbell wrote a letter and sent it
by courier to the Ottawa address. She sent everything that had been delivered previously
in respect of both sets of charges, including the letters and the disclosure briefs. Delivery
confirmation was received on May 1, 2008. No response was received from the student.

[13]

In October, 2008, Ms Campbell again emailed the student suggesting several dates for the
hearing and asked for confirmation of her availability to attend. Ms Campbell received
no response to that email, including no indication that the email was not delivered.

[14]

The Notice of Hearing was sent by email to the two email addresses that the University
had for the student. The week before the hearing, Ms Campbell again retained Mr.
Colbourn, who reported that he could not find the student, who had moved from the
Ottawa address.

[15]

The Panel was fu1iher advised that the student attended a meeting with Scott Graham,
Dean's Designate at the University of Toronto, Mississauga, with respect to the incident
that led to the first set of charges on February 27, 2007.

4

Case 479

[16]

Counsel for the University submitted that the notice given to the student was reasonable,
and in accordance with the requirements of the Statutory Powers Procedure Act. Counsel
submitted that the evidence shows that the student had no interest in taking part in the
proceedings, and had made a conscious choice not to pmiicipate. Counsel relied in pmi
on a University policy which became effective September I, 2006 indicating that students
are responsible for maintaining and advising the University on the University's student
information system (currently ROSI), of a current and valid postal address as well as the
address for a University issued electronic mail account. The policy indicates that
students are expected to monitor and retrieve their mail, including electronic messaging
accounts issued to them by the University, on a frequent and consistent basis, and are
responsible to recognize that certain communications may be time critical.

[17]

After consideration, the Panel concluded that the University had provided reasonable
notice to the student. While the Panel was of the view that as of May I, 2008 it likely
would have been preferable to use the mailing address in Ottawa received through the
private investigator for all future correspondence with the student, in addition to the email
addresses, the Panel noted that as of the date shortly before the hearing, the private
investigator rep01ied that the student was no longer at that address and that her
whereabouts were unknown. The private investigator rep01ied that an extensive
investigation was conducted in attempts to locate contact information for the student,
who commonly uses an alias, resulting in two names being searched for. The private
investigator advised that the student does not maintain typical records which generally
indicate information as to a person's whereabouts nor does she maintain a stable lifestyle
or remain in one location for extended periods of time. He describes her as nomadic and
transient in her behaviour. Therefore, the private investigator was unsuccessful in finding
her the second time.

[18]

The Panel was satisfied that the University, both before and after counsel had been
retained, had taken many steps to try to locate the student, and that the student had failed
to make herself available to the University or to acknowledge communications from the
University repeatedly, even going so far as not to attend for an examination that had been
deferred at her request in August, 2007. There were no "bounced-back" email messages
indicating that any of the email accounts were no longer active; and the package of
disclosure documents and notice of the charges were signed for and received on May I,
2008. By that time, the student would know that she was facing two sets of charges and
that a hearing into these charges was likely to be scheduled in the near future. She
would also know the details of those charges. She was again invited to contact the
University directly or through its counsel. Nonetheless, she made no effort to contact the
University directly or through counsel. This pattern of behaviour continued until the date
of the hearing. The Panel therefore concluded that reasonable notice had been provided,
and that it would be improper to permit a student to avoid facing charges by a complete
failure to respond to the University's many attempts to reach her. Fmiher, the Panel
considered that adjourning to permit fu11her attempts at service would not assist, given
that the student appeared to have moved again without providing any further contact
information.

5
[19]

Case 479

Therefore, the Panel concluded that reasonable notice had been provided and was
prepared to have the hearing proceed in the student's absence, in accordance with the
provisions of the Statuto,y Powers Procedure Act.

Notice of Hearing and Charges

[20]

The charges are as follows:
MAY 15, 2007

i.

On or about August 22, 2006, you knowingly used or possessed an unauthorized
aid or aids or obtained unauthorized assistance in an academic examination or
term test, namely the final examination in ECO336Y5Y - Public Economics,
contrary to Section B.I. l .(b) of the University's Code of Behaviour 011 Academic
A1atters, 1995 (Code).

ii. In the alternative, on or about August 22, 2006, you knowingly engaged in a form
of cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or misrepresentation not
otherwise described in the Code in order to obtain academic credit or other
academic advantage of any kind during the final examination in ECO336Y5Y Public Economics, contrary to Section B.1.3.(b) of the Code.

FEBRUARY 8, 2008

i.

On or about April 18, 2007, you knowingly used or possessed an unauthorized aid
or aids or obtained unauthorized assistance in an academic examination or term
test, namely the final examination in PHL290H5 - "Psychoanalysis", contrary to
Section B.l.l(b) of the University's Code of Behaviour 011 Academic lvfatters,
1995 (Code).

ii. In the alternative, on or about April 18, 2007, you knowingly engaged in a form
of cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or misrepresentation not
othe1wise described in the Code in order to obtain academic credit or other
academic advantage of any kind during the final examination in PI-IL290H5 "Psychoanalysis", contrary to Section B.1.3.(b) of the Code.
[21]

Particulars of the Charges are as follows:
MAY 15, 2007
1.

At all material times you were enrolled in ECO336Y5Y. This course was taught
by Professor McMillan

11.

You wrote a deferred final examination in this course on August 22, 2006. The
only aid permitted in the examination room was a calculator.

6

Case 479

iii. During the examination, you were found to be in possession of a piece of paper
containing text related to the examination.

FEBRUARY 8, 2008

i.

At all material times you were enrolled in PHL290H5. This course was taught by
Professor Andre Gombay. In advance of the PHL290H5 final examination,
Professor Gombay provided the class with the final examination questions for use
as a study aid.

ii. You were instructed that the only aid permitted in the final examination room was
the Sigmund Freud text, Introductory Lectures on Psychoanalysis. You were
instructed not to write anything in the Freud text.
iii. You wrote a final examination in this course on April 18, 2007. During the
examination, you were found to be in possession of a copy of the Freud text in
which full answers to the final examination had been written. You used those
answers as an unauthorized aid.
(22]

In suppmi of the charges, the University called four witnesses.

The First Set a/Charges
(23]

The first witness was Wendy Norman, the Examinations Officer employed in the Office
of the Registrar since 2004. Ms Norman testified that she was supervising a special
deferred examination in Economics 336 in August, 2006. Ms Norman testified that she
recalled Ms Yao's arrival at 9:25 am, twenty-five minutes after the start of the
examination and only five minutes before she would not have been permitted to write the
examination. Ms Norman was invigilating the examination with two other people. After
a moment or two, during which the student had commenced writing the examination, Ms
Norman checked her identification and the aids allowed. The only aid allowed was a
calculator. Ms Norman testified that it is her habit to check every aid at every
examination. This is her routine practice because there have been occasions where there
are known to be notes hidden in calculator covers or other aids. In this case, Ms Norman
picked up the student's calculator, saw that it had a cover and saw that there were notes
under the cover. Ms Norman identified the calculator for the Panel as the one that was
taken from the desk of the student. She testified that inside the calculator, folded carefully
into three parts, was a double-sided piece of paper that contained notes written in small
print. These notes were entered into as an exhibit at the hearing. When Ms Norman
discovered the note, she asked the student whether it was her calculator. The student
initially replied that it was, and Ms Norman asked whether the notes were hers.
According to Ms Norman, the student said that she didn't know what that was, that the
calculator belonged to a friend of hers. At this point, Ms Norman took the calculator and
provided the spare calculator to the student. After the examination, the student asked for
the calculator back but Ms Norman advised her that it was her practice to confiscate the
aid and to make a repmi and sent it to the department. That rep01i was also entered into

7

Case 479

evidence. Ms Norman could not recall whether she saw the student use the calculator. A
copy of the report was sent to Ms Gaspini and Ms Norman had no fmiher contact with
the student.
[24]

Next, the Panel heard from Professor McMillan who testified by videoconference from
North Carolina. He testified that he had taught Economics 336 every year since he
arrived at the University except 2006-2007 when he was on sabbatical, and that there are
about 75 students in the course each year. The course is graded by one term test each
semester and a comprehensive final examination. He remembered the student as she had
missed a term test. He had had occasion to review the handwritten note that was found
folded up in the calculator cover and described its relevance to the examination as very
high. Indeed, two po1iions of the note related directly to questions that were found on the
examination. The remainder of the note covered material that was covered in the course
and was generally relevant to the examination.

[25]

The University then called Scott Graham, an Associate Professor of Computer Science
and Forensic Science, and Dean's Designate at the University of Toronto, Mississauga.
Professor Graham advised that he met with the student on February 27, 2007 about the
incident described by Ms Norman. According to Professor Graham, the student agreed
that she had an unauthorized aid, and agreed that that was not good, but indicated that she
did not believe that she was guilty. She told him that a friend had given her the calculator
after graduation, that it had been used for a term test, that the handwritten notes which
were in her writing, had been prepared as a help sheet, to study for a make-up term test.
In leaving the term test, she had checked the help sheet to see if her answers on the test
had matched up with her study notes, and folded it up on the bus on the way home and
inserted it into the cover of the calculator. By the time of the August examination, she
had forgotten that they were there. Professor Graham testified that he was not satisfied
with that explanation and that he recommended the case move to the Tribunal.

The Second Set of Charges

[26]

The Tribunal then heard from Professor Gombay, who came to the University in 1973
and was a Professor of Philosophy, specializing in I ih Century Rationalism. He also
teaches a course of Philosophy and Psychoanalysis (PHL290). Professor Gombay
identified his course description for the Panel, which set out that grades would be based
on a test, an essay and a final examination. The final examination was to be worth 40% of
the course mark. Professor Gombay testified that it was his practice on the last day of
classes to give to the students a list of questions, and to advise the students that the final
examination would be a sub-set of that list. Professor Gombay identified the examination
for the Panel. The examination indicated that the text used in the course was allowed, but
that no other text or aid was allowed. He advised that he had told them they were not
allowed to write the answers in a book, but that they could have markers for page
numbers on the pages that the felt would be relevant to their examination. He, along with
a teaching assistant, supervised the examination. He testified that the teaching assistant
told him that two students were cheating and showed him where the students were. He
went to the desk and asked to see the book that they were using. He took the student's
book, which was the assigned course textbook and opened the front cover, inside of

8

Case 479

which was the student's name, which was marked as an exhibit at the hearing. Inside the
book Professor Gombay also saw a lot of handwriting. He therefore took the book from
the student and the examination booklets in which she had written thus far. In the book
were handwritten answers to the questions he had provided to the students in advance.
The answers in her examination booklet were identical to those that were in the book;
that is, the student had copied out, word for word, her handwritten answers in the
textbook into the examination booklets. Professor Gombay testified that he told the
students at the beginning of the course that they would be allowed to bring the book into
the examination, and no other aids. He also testified that he let the student continue to
write the examination after he confiscated the book. The examination itself indicates:
"Text allowed: Freud's Introductory Lectures; no other text or aid allowed."
(27]

After the examination, the student came running after him and the teaching assistant and
asked him not to report the incident. He advised the student that it was too late, and that
he had already rep01ied it. She pleaded for a few minutes with him and he repeated that
it was too late.

111e University's Submissions

(28)

The University, in its closing submissions, submitted that the acts were similar in that
aids were allowed in each examination, and yet extra, unauthorized aids were used in
each. The differences were in the timing of when the student was caught. In the
Economics course, she had not yet used the aid, while in the Philosophy course, she had.
In the University's submission this difference was immaterial in that it is possession of
the unauthorized aid that is the offence. The onus of proof, the University reminded the
Panel, is on the University and the standard is on the balance of probabilities. In the
words of the Supreme Court of Canada, "there is only one standard of proof' in civil
cases and that is proof on the balance of probabilities. That is, is it more likely that not
that an alleged event occurred? (fr! v. McDougall, (2008) S.C.C. 53, para. 49).

Decision of the Tribunal
First Set of Charges

[29]

The Panel, having reviewed and considered the evidence, including the note written in
very small writing and carefully folded into three to fit precisely within the covers of the
calculator, concluded that the note did not have the appearance of a study note, but rather
that of a "cheat sheet". It had a very high degree of relevance to the final examination.
The student knew or ought to have known that the aid was there, as she bears the
responsibility for ensuring that she does not bring in any unauthorized aid into the
examination.

(30)

The Panel concluded that the University had discharged its onus and proven the offence
on the balance of probabilities.

9

Case 479

Second Set of Charges
(31]

With respect to the second set of charges, the Panel found that, contrary to explicit
instructions, the student had attempted to "sneak in" full answers to questions that she
had pre-prepared, and then copied these out word for word into the examination booklets.
The Panel noted that the answers carefully handwritten into wherever blank pages could
be found in the textbook bore the same headings as those from the practice questions
provided in advance of the examination, and were clearly meant to be, and were, directly
copied into the examination booklet. The Panel was satisfied that the student knew or
ought to have known that she was in possession of an unauthorized aid, (these prefabricated answers), during the examination. The Panel also noted that the student had
written herself notes of where to find the answers to various questions at the front of the
book. Again, the Panel found that the University had proven its case on the balance of
probabilities on the second set of charges.

[32]

Accordingly, the Panel found, on both sets of charges, that the University had proven the
offences as alleged under B.i.l(b) of the Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters. The
University withdrew the counts on both sets of alternative charges under B.i.3(b) of the
Code.

Penalty Phase of the Hearing
Evidence
(33]

The University called Scott Graham at the penalty phase of the hearing. Professor
Graham advised the Panel that he had met with the student on July 27, 2006, and that she
had made an admission to him in another course that she had been guilty of plagiarism.
The University entered as an exhibit a document bearing the student's signature in which
the student admitted that she was guilty of plagiarism on July 27, 2006. It also entered as
an exhibit a letter from the Assistant Dean to the student dated August 10, 2006 advising
of her the sanction imposed, which was a reduction of 10% in her final mark in that
course.

The University's Submission
(34]

The University advised that it was seeking the following sanction to be imposed by the
Panel:
(a)

final grades of zero in both ECO336 and PHL290; ·

(b)

that the Panel recommend that the student be expelled; and

(c)

that a report be made to the Provost to be reported in the press with the student's
name withheld.

The University counsel noted that an expulsion carries with it an automatic transcript
notation.

10

Case 479

[35]

The University took the Panel to the case of 1\Ir. C., in which John Sopinka, then a
member of the University Tribunal of the University of Toronto, provided an outline of
the principles to be followed in dealing with an appeal from sentence, which must also be
principles to be applied in deciding on sentence in the first instance. He noted that
punishment is not intended to be retribution to get even with the student, but must serve a
useful function. The classical components of punishment are reformation, deterrence and
protection of the public, and in applying these criteria, a tribunal should consider all of
the following:
(a)
the character of the person charged;
(b)
the likelihood of a repetition of the offence;
(c)
the nature of the offence committed;
(d)
any extenuating circumstances surrounding the commission of the offence;
(e)
the detriment to the University occasioned by the offence;
(f)
the need to deter others from committing a similar offence.

[36]

In the University's submission, the evidence clearly showed that the acts were carefully
and deliberately planned by the student, which would put the acts at the more serious end
of the spectrum. These were not acts that were done inadvertently or carelessly. Fmther,
the acts occasioned significant detriment to the University. The fundamental form of
evaluation of an in-class examination with a level playing field for all students was
undermined by the student. The University submitted there is a strong need to deter
others. The University referred to the case of SB in which a panel recently indicated in
discussing a plagiarism case that a strong message had to be sent that academic offences
will not be tolerated, and will be dealt with strongly.

[3 7]

University counsel submitted that a further aggravating factor was the timing of the
offence. That is, on July 27, 2006 there was a meeting in respect of a plagiarism charge,
which the student admitted, in another course. On August 10, 2006, a letter was sent
(although there was no evidence available to the Panel about the date on which it was
received) indicating that the sanction for that plagiarism would be a 10% reduction in the
course mark. Nonetheless, on August 22, 2006, the student engaged in a fu11her
academic offence by possessing an unauthorized aid in an economics examination. On
February 27, 2007, the student met with Professor Graham about that use of unauthorized
aid. Yet, on April 18, 2007, about six weeks later, the student engaged in a fmther
academic offence in the philosophy examination. University counsel asked rhetorically,
what more could the University have done to bring to the student's attention the
importance of academic integrity? This was a rapid series of events.

[38]

Fmther, in the University's submission, the onus was on the student to show evidence
supporting a reduced penalty or mitigating factors. The student did not plead guilty,
which would be the best evidence of some insight or remorse, and indeed, by her failure
to attend, presented no evidence of any other mitigating factors. The likelihood of
repetition, in the University's submission, was overwhelming given the timing and the
evidence. The only character evidence that was available to the Panel was that related to
the offences.

11
[39]

Case 479

In the University's submission, the offences were not concurrent but should be treated as
second and third offences. Given that the student met with Professor Graham before she
committed the third offence and that the economics offence had been brought to her
attention by the time the philosophy offence occurred, the third offence would merit the
recommendation of expulsion taking the approach outlined in the SB case. In the
University's submission, a five year suspension in this case was inappropriate. The
chances of rehabilitation, in the University's submission, are none given that the student
has been "ducking" the University for 18 months, and has completely refused to engage
in the process. There is no reason for the Panel to believe, in the University's
submission, that the academic relationship can be rehabilitated. The student's very
failure to pmiicipate in the process was evidence that there was no prospect of
rehabilitation.

Decision on Penalty

[40]

The Panel considered the University's submissions as well as the evidence provided to
the Panel by University counsel.

[41]

The Panel notes that the first paragraph of the Code states the following:
The concern of the Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters is with the responsibilities
of all parties to the integrity of the teaching and learning relationship. Honesty and
fairness must inform this relationship, whose basis remains one of mutual respect for the
aims of education and for those ethical principles which must characterize the pursuit and
transmission of knowledge in the University.

[42]

The Code further states the following, under the heading "Offences":
The University and its members have a responsibility to ensure that a climate which
might encourage, or conditions which might enable, cheating, misrepresentation or
unfairness not be tolerated. To this end, all must acknowledge that seeking credit or
other advantages by fraud or misrepresentation, or seeking to disadvantage others by
disruptive behaviour is unacceptable, as is any dishonesty or unfairness in dealing with
the work or record of a student.

[43]

The Panel agrees with the Panel in DL that it is a responsibility on the pmi of students to
act with honesty as they pursue their academic studies, and that students who do not act
with honesty undermine the reputation of the University and the hard work of other
students who do act honestly.

[44]

The Panel considered the case of SB, in which the student had previously committed two
plagiarism offences, which he had admitted to. In that case, there was evidence of
significant extenuating circumstances and the University had submitted that it would
have asked for a longer suspension if not for some of the extenuating circumstances. The
Panel there noted that first time offenders in cases of plagiarism had been met with
suspensions of two, three and four years; while repeat offenders had resulted in

Case 479

12

suspensions of four months, sixteen months, 3 years, 5 years and expulsion. That Panel
expressed its view that a serious breach of trust such as plagiarism and/or concoction
should evoke a response of at least a 2 year suspension for a first offence and a
suspension of 3 years or longer on a subsequent finding. In that case, the Panel
concluded that a 3 year suspension for a third offence, having regard to the range of other
circumstances, struck an appropriate balance of punishment, compassion, rehabilitation
and deterrence.
[45]

In this case, the Panel was very concerned about the following:
(i)
the elements of pre-meditation and deceit in both offences;
(ii)
the timing of the offences (each offence occurred after a previous offence had
been brought to the attention of the student); and
(iii)
the complete failure of the student to engage in the process or even respond to the
University with respect to either sets of charges.

[46]

Further, given the student's failure to participate in the process, the Panel had no
evidence of any mitigating factors. There was no acknowledgement, no explanation, no
remorse, no extenuating circumstances, and no evidence of any prospect of rehabilitation
brought to the attention of the Panel. Given all of the above, the Panel is of the view that
the University should not be forced to continue in the relationship with the student, and
that the student should not have the benefit of the University's resources.

[4 7]

The Panel therefore imposes the following sanctions:
i. that the student receive a grade of zero in ECO336 and PHL290;
ii. that the Panel recommend to the President and the Governing Council that the student
be expelled from the University; and
iii. that the facts and sanctions associated with the penalty be provided to the Provost to
be published with the student's name withheld.
,,

1;~d

Dated this

?7 day of June 2009
Lisa Bro, nstone, Co-Chair

