Case 479

DATE:

   June 22, 2009

PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v. L. Y.

Hearing Date(s):

   December 1, 2008

Panel Members:

   Ms. Lisa Brownstone, Chair
   Professor Magdy Hassouna, Faculty Panel Member
   Mr. Jeffrey Clayman, Student Panel Member

Appearances:

   Mr. Robert Centa, Assistant Discipline Counsel
   Ms. Tina Lee, Assistant to Mr. Centa
   Professor Scott Graham, Dean's Designate, UTM

   Student charged with two offences under s. B.i.1(b), and alternatively,
   two offences under ss. B.i.3(b) of the Code. The charges related to a
   deferred final examination during which the Student was alleged to have
   been in possession of text relevant to the subject matter of the exam,
   and to a final examination in which the Student was alleged to have
   been in possession of, and copying from, text relevant to the subject
   matter of the exam.Â  The Student did not appear at the Hearing.Â  The
   Panel considered the reasonableness of notice provided to the Student
   and found the University had taken repeated steps to try and locate the
   Student, and that the Student had failed to make herself available or
   to acknowledge the Universityâs communications. The Panel found that
   reasonable notice had been provided and that it would be improper to
   permit a student to avoid facing charges by a failure to respond to the
   Universityâs attempts to reach her. The Panel found that adjourning to
   permit further attempts at service would not be appropriate as the
   Student had appeared to have moved. The Hearing proceeded without the
   Student, in accordance with the Statutory Powers Procedure Act. The
   Panel heard evidence that with regard to the deferred examination,
   students were permitted to bring a calculator into the examination
   room. The exam invigilator testified that inside the Studentâs
   calculator she discovered a piece of paper containing notes. According
   to the University, the Student agreed that she had had an unauthorized
   aid but claimed that the note was prepared as a study aid for a
   previous term test and that by the time of the examination she had
   forgotten that she had left it in the calculator. With regard to the
   second examination, students were permitted to bring the course text
   into the examination room. The course professor testified that he
   discovered text relevant to the examination in the Studentâs course
   text during the examination. The Panel considered the Universityâs
   submissions and evidence and found that on both sets of charges, the
   University had proven its case on the balance of probabilities and that
   Student was guilty as alleged under s. B.i.1(b). With respect to the
   deferred examination, the Panel found that the note appeared to be a
   cheat sheet as it was written in small writing and folded to fit within
   the covers of the calculator. The Panel found that the note had a very
   high degree of relevance to the final examination and that the Student
   knew or ought to have known that the aid was there. The Panel observed
   that the Student bore the responsibility for ensuring that she did not
   bring the unauthorized aid into the examination. With respect to the
   second examination, the Panel found that contrary to explicit
   instructions, pre-prepared exam answers were handwritten into the
   Studentâs text book and bore the same headings as the practice
   questions provided in advance of the examinations and that the same
   answers where copied word for word into the Studentâs examination
   booklet. The Panel found that the Student knew or ought to have known
   that she was in possession of an unauthorized aid during the
   examination. The Student had a prior academic offence for plagiarism.
   The University claimed that the offences were not concurrent but should
   be treated as a second and third offence because each offence occurred
   after a previous offence had been brought to the Studentâs attention.
   In its decision on penalty, the Panel considered the Universityâs
   submissions and evidence, as well as the Code and past Tribunal
   decisions. The Panel agreed with the decision in The University of
   Toronto v. D.L. and found that students who do not act with honesty
   undermine the reputation of the University. The Panel considered the
   decision in The University of Toronto v. Mr. S.B. which found that a
   breach of trust such a plagiarism and/or concoction should evoke at
   least a two year suspension for the first offence and a suspension of
   three years or longer on a subsequent finding. The Panel expressed
   concern regarding the elements of pre-meditation and deceit in both
   offences; the timing of the offences; and the failure of the Student to
   engage in the process or respond to the Universityâs charges. The Panel
   found that due to the Studentâs failure to participate in the process,
   it had no evidence of any mitigating factors or prospect of
   rehabilitation. The Panel accepted the Universityâs submission on
   penalty and imposed a grade of zero in the two courses; a
   recommendation to the President, further to s. C.ii.(b)(i) of the Code,
   that the Student be expelled from the University; and that a report be
   issued to the Provost.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12733
