Report 412

   DATE : January 8, 2021

   PARTIES : I.A. (the âStudentâ) v. The School of Graduate Studies
   ("SGS")

   HEARING DATE : November 13, 2020, via Zoom

   Senior Chair:
   Professor Hamish Stewart

   Appearances:
   For the Student Appellant:
   Ms. I.A. (the âStudentâ)

   For the School of Graduate Studies
   Mr. Robert Centa, Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg Rothstein LLP
   Ms. Jodi Martin, Co-Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg Rothstein LLP

   The Student was enrolled in the Ph.D. program in the Division of Social
   and Behavioural Sciences. She was required to pass a Qualifying
   ExaminationÂ (âQEâ) to achieve Ph.D. candidacy. On her initial attempt
   in January 2018, the Student failed the QE. She retook it in September
   2018 and failed again.Â The Student appealed the failure to the
   Divisionâs Graduate Department Academic Appeals Committee
   (âGDAACâ).Â TheÂ GDAAC dismissed her appeal.Â The StudentÂ then
   appealed to the Graduate Academic Appeals Board (âGAABâ)Â where the
   GAAB also dismissed her appeal. The StudentÂ appealedÂ to the Academic
   Appeals CommitteeÂ (âCommitteeâ).

   The question before the Committee was whether the QE was administered
   fairly.Â At the hearing,Â theÂ CommitteeÂ determined, through the
   assistance ofÂ Counsel for SGS and the Student, threeÂ specific grounds
   of appeal that were relevant to the matter.Â The three grounds were as
   follows:Â one,Â the Student was inadequately supervisedÂ leading up to
   the retake of her QE; second,Â the examiningÂ committeeÂ applied
   theÂ wrong Guidelines to the Studentâs QE;Â andÂ third,Â the result
   might have been different if the absent member of the examining
   committeeÂ hadÂ participated in the later stages of her assessment.

   The Student submitted that she was inadequately supervised because she
   met only once with her supervisory committee, rather than at least
   twice as recommended by the 2017 Guidelines.Â The Committee rejected
   thisÂ submissionÂ because the 2017 GuidelinesÂ indicate that once an
   outline for the QE paper is approved, the supervisory committee is not
   allowed to provideÂ students with feedback or review
   drafts.Â Therefore, once the Studentâs outline was approved, it would
   have been inappropriate for the Student or the committee to arrange
   toÂ meetÂ toÂ discuss the QE paper.Â Further, the StudentÂ asked the
   Committee to infer that the examining committee applied the incorrect
   GuidelinesÂ when assessing her QEÂ becauseÂ of the particular language
   used in the evaluationÂ reflects the 2018 GuidelinesÂ and not the 2017
   Guidelines.Â There was noÂ direct evidence of this in the recordÂ other
   than the Studentâs oral statements. The Committee found thatÂ both
   guidelinesÂ reflect the fundamental task of the student to engage
   critically with the relevant literatureÂ in order toÂ identify a
   specific research questionÂ which would makeÂ itÂ difficult for the
   Committee to accept an inference that the examining committee applied
   the incorrectÂ guidelines.Â Furthermore,Â based on the findings of the
   examining committeeÂ of the QE paper, the Committee determined that the
   flaws in the Studentâs paper would have been considered serious
   flawsÂ in either sets of guidelines.Â The Student further submitted
   thatÂ the absence of one member of the examining committeeÂ in the
   later stages of her assessmentÂ might have changed the outcome of the
   examinationÂ because thisÂ particularÂ memberâs research interests
   closely matched the topic of the QE paper.Â The Committee found that
   theÂ only wayÂ the non-participating memberÂ would have been able
   toÂ change the result of the QE paper was if the member would have been
   impressed by the StudentâsÂ written responsesÂ that the member would
   have revised her initial assessment of the QE paper and convinced at
   least one other member to change their assessment as well.Â The
   Committee was not persuaded that the absence of the one member from the
   later stages of the Studentâs assessment would have made a difference
   since all seven members of the large examining committee were of the
   view that the QE paper was a failure.

   The CommitteeÂ found that there is no merit to the Studentâs grounds of
   appeal.Â AppealÂ dismissed.
   [1]View Report

References

   1. file:///media/29573
