UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
GOVERNING COUNCIL
Report # 412 of the Academic Appeals Committee
January 8, 2021

To the Academic Board
University of Toronto.
Your Committee reports that it held an electronic hearing, conducted by Zoom on Friday,
November 13, 2020, at which the following members were present:
Academic Appeal Committee Members:
Professor Hamish Stewart, Senior Chair
Professor Sonu Gaind, Faculty Governor
Mr. Amin Kamaleddin, Student Governor
Hearing Secretary:
Mr. Christopher Lang, Director, Office of Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances
For the Student Appellant:
I.A. (the “Student”)
For the School of Graduate Studies:
Mr. Robert A. Centa, Counsel Paliare Roland Rosenberg Rothstein LLP
Ms. Jodi Martin, Co-Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg Rothstein LLP

Overview
The Student was enrolled in the Ph.D. program in the Division of Social and Behavioural Sciences (Division)
of the Dalla Lana School of Public Health (School). She successfully completed her course work. She was
then required to pass a Qualifying Examination (QE) to achieve Ph.D. candidacy. On her initial attempt in
January 2018, the Student failed the QE. She retook the QE in September 2018 and failed again. The Student
appealed that failure to the Division’s Graduate Department Academic Appeals Committee (GDAAC). On
the 2nd of February 2019, the GDAAC dismissed her appeal. She then appealed to the Graduate Academic
Appeals Board (GAAB). On the 16th of December 2019, the GAAB dismissed her appeal.
The Student now appeals to your Committee. She argues that there were a number of procedural flaws in
the administration of the second QE and she seeks various remedies. The School of Graduate Studies (SGS)
argues that the appeal should be dismissed.
Your Committee finds that there is no merit in the Student’s grounds of appeal and therefore dismisses the
appeal.

1

Chronology
The Student registered in the School’s Ph.D. program in the Fall 2014 term and over the next few terms
successfully completed her course work. In order to proceed in her program and achieve Ph.D. candidacy,
she was required to pass a Qualifying Examination.

The Qualifying Examination
The SGS describes the QE, as it was constituted at the time, as follows (SGS Submissions, para. 21):
“The qualifying examination … normally consists of an 8,000 word paper and an oral presentation
of that paper. A student should demonstrate a capacity for independent scholarly work and
creativity, the ability to theorize a topic using a variety of approaches, the ability to assess
critically related empirical literature and from these propose a theoretically and methodologically
sophisticated and consistent research question that would advance the topic area. Through the
qualifying examination a student will demonstrate the capacity to understand, apply, and compare
theoretical perspectives that are taught in the program’s core theory courses.”
The guidelines for the QE that were applicable to the Student had most recently been revised in 2017 and
we therefore refer to them as the 2017 Guidelines (SGS Book of Documents, pp. 012-013). The 2017
Guidelines provided, among other things, that:
•

“The qualifying exam … should demonstrate the student’s capacity for independent scholarly work
and creativity, ability to theorize a topic using a variety of approaches, ability to critically assess
related empirical literature, and from these propose theoretically and methodologically consistent
research questions that would advance the topic area and may be used for the dissertation. Through
this process, the student will demonstrate capacity to identify, synthesize, and critique the literature
within their chosen topic area.”

•

“The student is expected to meet with their supervisor once every quarter before the start of the QE
process and at least 2-3 times … during the preparation of the outline of the QE to discuss the scope,
direction and content. The thesis committee members should meet at least twice with the student
during this period. … Once the outline is approved, the student is expected to write the paper
independent of the supervisor and thesis committee. …”

Under these guidelines, not sooner than two weeks following the submission of the QE paper, the Student
was orally examined on the paper. At the oral examination, the Student presented the paper and was then
questioned by the examining committee. Following the oral examination, the examining committee
deliberated and determined whether the Student passed by a majority vote. The examining committee had
three elements:
(1) the student’s Ph.D. supervisory committee;
(2) the Program Director or their designate; and
(3) an Examiner.
Each element of the committee had one vote. The first element of the committee would typically consist of
three persons (the student’s supervisor and two other faculty members), like other Ph.D. supervisory
committees in the University.

2

The Division’s guidelines for the QE were revised in 2018 and currently provide, among other things
(emphasis in the original):
•

“The purpose of the qualifying exam (QE) is to assess the student’s capacity to understand, apply,
and compare theoretical perspectives that are taught in the [Division’s core theory courses].
Specifically, the QE process will assess the student’s ability to theorize a topic using two different
theoretical approaches and to propose theoretically sophisticated research questions that would
advance the student’s topic area of interest and may be used for the dissertation. The process of
writing the QE and producing a final product should ideally contribute to the theory section of the
student’s thesis proposal.”

•

“The paper will identify and describe two theoretical perspectives from which the topic can be
considered. …”

•

“The QE paper will explain why these theories are relevant to the topic area, situate them in relation
to other systems of thought or traditions, briefly describe the evolution or lineage of the theories,
describe the key tenets/constructs of each theory, apply then to the chosen substantive or empirical
area of interest, and discuss how the two theories compare to/contrast with/complement one another
in relation to the substantive area.”

•

“The paper will then propose theoretically-informed research questions … which might be
undertaken in future study, and that arise from the application of the selected theoretical
approaches.”

•

“The student’s supervisor and committee … can provide advice and support to the student in
identifying the substantive area of focus for the paper and in selecting appropriate theoretical
perspectives. … The supervisor, committee and other faculty members will not provide feedback
to the student through the process of writing the QE paper … and are not permitted to review drafts
of the paper prior to its submission.”

The 2018 Guidelines do not contemplate an oral examination.

The Student’s Qualifying Examination
The Student first attempted the QE on the 15th of January 2018, and was unsuccessful. The examining
committee provided her with extensive comments, with specific suggestions for improvement, on the QE
paper (SGS Book of Documents, pp. 018-021). The Student did not appeal from the examining committee’s
decision. In accordance with the QE guidelines then in force, the Student was given the opportunity to
retake the QE.
The 2017 Guidelines contemplate that, when a student retakes the QE, “[t]he composition of the examining
committee should remain the same if at all possible.” In the Student’s case, this was not possible. In the
spring of 2018, her supervisor went on medical leave. Dr. Blake Poland agreed to serve as the Student’s
supervisor during the process of repeating the QE. The Student requested that certain members of the
examining committee be replaced by others, and the Division agreed to this request. Consequently, the
examining committee that evaluated her second QE was quite different from the original committee.

3

Between mid-April and mid-May, the Student discussed the revisions to her QE paper with Dr. Poland. On
the 25th of May, the Student met with her supervisory committee, which provided her with substantive
feedback on the revisions to her QE paper. Following that meeting, in accordance with the guidelines, she
worked independently and did not discuss the paper with her supervisory committee.
As an accommodation for the Student’s mental health challenges, the Division proposed that as a substitute
for the oral component of the QE, the examining committee would draft questions for the Student to answer
in writing. At the hearing before your Committee, the Student appeared to suggest that she had not agreed
to this accommodation (see also her Notice of Appeal, p. 17), but it is clear from the record that she did
(SGS Book of Documents, pp. 022 and 027-036). For various reasons that do not need to be spelled out in
detail, the timeline for the Student’s retaking of the QE was extended by several weeks.
The Student submitted her revised QE paper on the 17th of August 2018. Her examining committee was
constituted as follows:
(1) the student’s Ph.D. supervisory committee: Dr. Blake Poland, supervisor; Dr. Branka Agic; Dr.
Lisa Andermann; Ms. Wendy Chow; and Dr. Samuel Law (the final three members were referred
to at the hearing as “the Mount Sinai Team”);
(2) the Program Director: Dr. Carol Strike; and
(3) the Examiner: Dr. Ross Upshur.
All members of the examining committee read the Student’s QE paper. The examining committee met by
teleconference on the 5th of September 2018, to discuss the paper and to draft four written questions that
were to be posed to the Student. Dr. Agic was on vacation and did not participate in this meeting; however,
Dr. Agic had provided a written assessment of the QE paper, and the other members of the committee
considered that assessment. On the 6th of September, as a substitute for the oral component of the
examination, the Student received the questions and provided her answers. That afternoon, the examining
committee, except for Dr. Agic, met again by teleconference, discussed the Student’s answers, and
unanimously concluded that she had failed the QE. The examination committee’s written assessment of the
QE includes the following comments, among others:
•

“The QE paper falls well short of expected skill level of a doctoral student to identify, synthesize,
and apply literature to a substantive topic.”

•

“Little to no evidence of capacity to critically appraise the literature.”

•

“Key terms … are not defined.”

•

“The account of the various philosophical and epistemological perspectives is very simplistic.”

•

“The literature review is descriptive and does not seem to lead to the research question.”

The Student’s answers to two of the written questions were deemed to be “minimally sufficient” and the
answers to the other two “insufficient”. The same day, at a prearranged time, the Student was informed of
her failure.

4

The Student was suddenly hospitalized on the 7th of September. The precise reasons for this hospitalization
and the length of the Student’s stay in hospital are not clear from the material before your Committee, but
for the purposes of this appeal further information about this unfortunate incident was not needed.
The Division scheduled a meeting with the Student for the 6th of November. The meeting was attended by
the Student, her mother, Dr. Strike, Dr. Nancy Baxter, who was then serving as the School’s Associate
Dean, Academic Affairs, and Ms. Candice Stoliker, Coordinator, Student Progress and Support. The
Student was provided with the examining committee’s feedback. Dr. Baxter provided the Student with three
options: (1) a retroactive leave of absence predating her retaking of the QE; (2) an appeal of the failure; and
(3) withdrawal or termination from her program. The Student had a number of concerns about the
retroactive leave of absence and ultimately chose to appeal the failure.

The GDAAC Decision
The Student appealed to the GDAAC. The GDAAC considered a number of remedies sought by the Student
but concluded that most of them were outside its jurisdiction. It therefore focussed on her request to have
the QE grade changed from Fail to Pass. The GDAAC rejected the Student’s claim that the examining
committee was confused about which set of guidelines (2017 or 2018) to apply. The GDAAC found that
the accommodations provided to the Student throughout the process were appropriate and designed to meet
her “specific needs.” The GDAAC noted that the Student had “listed a delay in receiving the written
feedback” as a ground of appeal, but found that the delay had been caused by the Student’s sudden
hospitalization and that the arrangements for the November 6th meeting had been agreed to by all the parties
to it. Finally, the GDAAC found no bias or unfairness in the assessment of the QE.

The GAAB Decision
The Student appealed to the GAAB. The GAAB commented that while it was difficult to identify the
Student’s grounds of appeal it could identify “three issues which might be causes for valid concern.” First,
Professor Agic did not participate in the teleconferences on the 5th and 6th September. The GAAB
commented that Professor Agic “was one member of a large (seven person) committee and all seven were
firmly of the view that the [QE paper] was a failure” and concluded that “[t]here is nothing in the record to
indicate that Professor Agic’s participation in the later stages would have made the slightest difference to
the final result.” Second, the Student had questioned “whether the assessment given to her was indeed the
consensus view of the examining committee,” and alleged that the Division had lied to her about the
committee’s unanimity. The basis for this allegation appeared to be that she had not received separate
written assessments from each of the seven committee members. The GAAB noted that there was no
requirement that individual members of the committee provide separate assessments, found that the
examining committee had indeed been unanimous, and found “no evidence whatsoever” for the allegation
that the Student had been lied to. Third, the Student had made a comparison between her QE paper and the
model QE paper that she had used in her preparation, arguing that the model paper had misled her as to
what was required. The GAAB found this comparison to be of little assistance and, with respect to the
Student’s claim about the guidelines, noted that “Guidelines are guidelines, not strict ‘formulas’ to be
rigidly adhered to.” Thus, the GAAB found no merit in the appeal and dismissed it.

5

Decision
The Grounds of Appeal
As was the case before the GAAB, before your Committee the Student “submitted voluminous material to
support her appeal” and accordingly “it was not easy to distill what the specific grounds of appeal were.”
At the hearing before your Committee, counsel for SGS and the Student herself were able to assist the panel
in identifying grounds of appeal that were relevant to the matter before us, namely, whether the QE was
administered fairly. Your Committee understood the Student to have raised essentially three grounds of
appeal on this matter: first, that she was inadequately supervised in the period leading up to the retaken QE
because she had only one meeting with her committee; second, that the examining committee had
mistakenly applied the 2018 rather than the 2017 Guidelines to the Student’s QE, although the Division had
rejected her request to be evaluated under the 2018 Guidelines; and third, that the result might have been
different had Professor Agic fully participated in the meetings of the 5th and 6th of September. Your
Committee finds no merit in any of these arguments.

The first ground of appeal: Alleged inadequate supervision
On the 15th of January 2018, the Student failed her QE. She received detailed feedback from the examining
committee (SGS Book of Documents, pp. 017-021). At her request, the membership of her supervisory
committee was changed significantly. In particular, Dr. Poland agreed to serve as her supervisor. The
Student was permitted to discuss her revisions with Dr. Poland, until her topic was approved (SGS Book of
Documents, pp. 040-041). On the 25th of May 2018, the Student met with her supervisory committee and
her topic was approved (SGS Book of Documents, pp. 043-045). She did not meet with her committee again
until the QE itself. However, in July she did get some feedback from members of her committee on an
unrelated piece of work (Notice of Appeal, pp. 72-77).
The Student submitted that she was inadequately supervised between January and May 2018 because she
met only once with her supervisory committee, rather than at least twice as recommended by the 2017
Guidelines. Your Committee rejects this submission. The usual practice in SGS is for a doctoral student to
arrange meetings of their supervisory committee. There is nothing in the record to indicate that the Student
attempted to arrange any meetings with her supervisory committee as a whole during this period; instead,
she was content to discuss her work with Dr. Poland. There is nothing in the record to indicate that there
was any inadequacy in Dr. Poland’s supervision.
Following the approval of an outline, students are meant to work independently on the QE paper, and to
that end the 2017 Guidelines provided that supervisory committees were not to provide students with
feedback or review drafts during this period. Thus, once the committee had approved her new outline on
the 25th of May, it would have been inappropriate for the Student to continue to meet with Dr. Poland or
with her supervisory committee to discuss her QE paper.

The second ground of appeal: Alleged confusion as to the applicable guidelines
There is no direct evidence in the record that the examining committee confusedly applied the 2018
Guidelines rather than the 2017 Guidelines. The Student asks your Committee to infer this confusion from
the examining committee’s use of language in its evaluation. The examining committee stated that the
Student did not show the ability “to identify, synthesize and apply literature to a substantive topic”—

6

language which, the Student says, reflects the 2018 Guidelines’ phrase “to understand, apply and compare
theoretical perspectives” rather than the 2017 Guidelines’ phrase “to identify, synthesize, and critique the
literature.” The Student argues that the 2018 Guidelines are concerned with “application” while the 2017
Guidelines are concerned with “criticism”; that she had written the QE paper with attention to “criticism”
rather than “application”; that the examining committee must have had “application” rather than “criticism”
in mind while assessing her; and that its evaluation of the QE was therefore unfair.
The fundamental task of a student under both sets of guidelines is to engage critically with the relevant
literature in order to identify a specific research question. Therefore, your Committee declines to draw the
inference that the examining committee was confused about which set of guidelines to apply. Moreover,
your Committee is not persuaded even if the examining committee had mistakenly applied the 2018 rather
than 2017 Guidelines, the outcome would have been any different. Your Committee agrees with Ms.
Martin’s submission that there is no material difference between the type and quality of analysis that is
expected of students under the 2017 and 2018 guidelines. There are of course differences between the two
sets of guidelines; in particular, the 2018 Guidelines provide more specific direction as to the format of the
QE paper and they change the manner in which the QE is administered (an 8,000-word paper followed by
an oral examination in the 2017 Guidelines; a 6,000-word paper without an oral examination in the 2018
Guidelines). But it appears to your Committee that these differences do not change the academic abilities
that the QE is supposed to test. The examining committee concluded that the Student had demonstrated
“[l]ittle to no capacity to critically appraise the literature”, had “fail[ed] to note how … critiques [of the
literature] relate to the proposed topic area”, had provided a “simplistic” account of “the various
philosophical and epistemological perspectives”, and had provided a literature review that was “descriptive
and [did] not seem to lead to the research question” (SGS Book of Documents, p. 115). These would be
serious flaws in the QE paper under either set of guidelines.
In support of the second ground of appeal, the Student also argued that she was misled by the Division in
that in preparing her QE paper, she had followed the example of a model paper which, she says, was not
consistent with the 2017 Guidelines. Your Committee was not persuaded by this submission. The Student
was unable to identify any significant inconsistencies between the model paper and the Guidelines.
Moreover, as the GAAB put it, “[t]he actual exam questions and answers for particular students will always
depending on the focus of their own qualifying exam.”
The third ground of appeal: Professor Agic’s non-participation in the meetings of the 5th and 6th of
September 2018
As noted above, Professor Agic was a member of the Student’s supervisory committee. In late August 2018,
she read the Student’s QE paper and provided a written assessment to the rest of the examining committee.
However, she did not participate in the meeting of the 5th of September or in the assessment of the Student’s
written responses to the examining committee’s written questions on 6 September. Professor Agic was on
vacation at the relevant time. The Student submits that Professor Agic’s full participation in the meetings
of the 5th and 6th September might have changed the outcome of the examination, in that of all the members
of the examining committee, Professor Agic’s research interests were closest to the topic of the QE paper.
The 6th of September meeting was a substitute for the oral examination. In the normal course, the entire
supervisory committee would participate in an oral examination (2017 Guidelines, p. 4), which suggests
that the QE should have been scheduled at a time when Professor Agic could participate fully. On the other
hand, your Committee heard from Professor Gesink, who now serves as the School’s Associate Dean,
Academic Affairs, that quorum for a supervisory committee is two persons; assuming this quorum rule

7

applies to the supervisory committee’s participation in examining committee meetings, it was met, so that
Professor Agic was not required to participate.
It would have been better if Professor Agic had participated in the meetings of the 5th and 6th of September.
Some members of your Committee are inclined to characterize Professor Agic’s non-participation as a
procedural flaw in the administration of the Student’s QE; other members of your Committee are not certain
whether that is the appropriate characterization. But, if it was a procedural flaw, your Committee considers
it a minor one in the context of a large supervisory committee (five members rather than the usual three)
and a large examining committee meeting (seven members rather than the usual five), which would have
created significant challenges in scheduling the examining committee’s deliberations and the substitute for
the oral examination in accordance with the 2017 Guidelines. More fundamentally, your Committee is not
persuaded that Professor Agic’s absence from these meetings made any difference. Professor Agic’s
participation in the meeting of the 6th of September would have changed the result only if she had been so
impressed by the Student’s written answers that she would not only have revised her initial assessment of
the QE paper but also persuaded a majority of the supervisory committee and at least one other member of
the examination committee to change their assessments as well. As the GAAB put it, Professor Agic “was
one member of a large (seven person) [examining] committee, and all seven were firmly of the view that
the principal examination [the QE paper] was a failure. There is nothing in the record to indicate that
Professor Agic’s participation in the later stages would have made the slightest difference to the final result.”

Other Issues
The Student raised many issues in addition to those discussed above. Although it is not necessary to resolve
those issues in order to decide the appeal, your Committee would like to comment briefly on some of them.
Remedies
Since the appeal is dismissed, it is not necessary to decide on the remedy. At various stages of this appeal,
the Student has asked the GDAAC, the GAAB, and the AAC for a great variety of remedies, including
ordering someone to conduct an investigation of the Division, changing the QE mark from fail to pass,
exempting the Student from the QE requirement, requiring an external assessment of the QE paper, and
proving the Student another opportunity to take the QE.
Neither your Committee, the GAAB, nor the GDAAC has jurisdiction to order an investigation.
It is doubtful whether your Committee has jurisdiction to exempt a student from an academic requirement;
if it does, such a remedy would only be appropriate in a truly exceptional case. Your Committee does not
assess the academic merit of students’ work and therefore would not normally change a mark from fail to
pass. It might be possible for your Committee to order an external assessment, but there was nothing in the
record here to justify such an order. If the Student had succeeded in demonstrating any unfairness in the
way the QE was administered, the only remedy your Committee would seriously have considered would
have been an opportunity to retake the QE.

The First QE
In her appeal materials, the Student complains about some aspects of her first attempt to take the QE in
January 2018 (Notice of Appeal, pp. 24-28). As GDAAC and GAAB pointed out, the Student did not appeal

8

her failure on that occasion, and so those issues were not properly before them. They were not properly
before your Committee either.

The Meeting of the 6th of November 2018 and Related Issues
In her written submissions, and to a lesser extent in her oral submissions, the Student complained about the
timing and the manner in which the feedback on the QE was communicated to her on the 6th of November
2018. As the GAAB pointed out, these complaints “are irrelevant to the question at issue.” Moreover, your
Committee had some difficulty understanding the basis for these complaints. The meeting was delayed
because of the Student’s health issues and because the Division received a request from the Student’s
mother not to communicate with the Student until her health had improved (SGS Book of Documents, pp.
117-121). Your Committee agrees with the SGS’s submission that “[t]he meeting was carefully scripted to
ensure that it was sensitive to the Student’s health issues, clear, and provided detailed, but respectful
feedback on her performance on the second qualifying examination” (SGS Submissions, p. 021). It is
unfortunate that the Student’s experience of this meeting did not reflect the Division’s intention, but it is
not clear to your Committee how the Division could have done better.
As noted above, at this meeting, the Division offered the Student three options: (1) a retroactive leave of
absence, to begin at some time before she retook the QE; (2) an appeal of the failure; and (3) withdrawal or
termination from her program. The Student had a number of questions about the first possibility, not all of
which the Division was able to answer immediately, and she ultimately chose the second. In her written
materials and at the hearing, the Student stated that if she had chosen the retroactive leave of absence, she
would had been required to give up her right of appeal. It is true that, had the Student taken a retroactive
leave of absence, her retaking of the QE would have been deemed never to have occurred, and there would
be nothing to appeal. In your Committee’s view, the Division’s suggestion of a retroactive leave of absence
was generous in the circumstances.

Other allegations
Throughout these proceedings, at all levels of appeal, the Student has made allegations to the effect that
various University decision-makers were biased against her, had lied to her, had improperly concealed
information from her, and had misused her confidential medical information. In particular, the Student
made serious allegations about the GAAB Chair’s conduct of her appeal hearing. Some of these allegations
are connected with points mentioned above. For example, the Student appears to interpret the GAAB’s
failure to order an investigation as some evidence that the GAAB Chair was biased against her (Notice of
Appeal, p. 37); but, as noted above, the GAAB simply lacked jurisdiction to make such an order and so its
failure to do so is not evidence of any bias. These allegations were not supported by anything beyond the
Student’s statements in her Notice of Appeal and did not play a major role in the Student’s oral submissions
before your Committee. Your Committee wholly rejects them.

9

