Case 609

DATE:

   March 11, 2012

PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v. S.O.

Hearing Date(s):

   February 21, 2012

Panel Members:

   Mr. Clifford Lax, Chair
   Prof. Dionne Aleman, Faculty Member
   Mr. Jake Brockman, Student Member

Appearances:

   Ms. Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel for the University
   Prof. Marc Cadotte, Instructor
   Mr. Nicholas Mirotchnick, TA
   Prof. Mary Olaveson, Dept of Life Sciences
   Dr. John Harper, Systems and Networking, Information and Instructional
   Technology Services, UTSC
   Mr. Ali Choudhry, Student at UTSC

In Attendance:

   Dr. Eleanor Irwin, Deans' Designate
   Ms.Â Natalie Ramtahal, Coordinator, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty
   Grievances

   Student charged under s. B.i.1(b) and s. B.i.1(c) of the Code . The
   charges related to allegations that the Student impersonated a
   professor to obtain a copy of an upcoming midterm and the answer key.
   The Student did not attend the hearing. The University informed the
   Student of the allegations at the Deanâs meeting, provided notice
   through his UToronto email account as well as his other email account.
   The University also spoke with his mother who acknowledged that she
   would convey him the message. The Panel concluded that reasonable
   notice had been provided. The Panel found the evidence overwhelming
   that the Student personated a professor and obtained the midterm test
   and the answer key. The manager of computer systems at the University
   provided evidence that the Student personated a faculty member as well
   as used his computer to hack into the Universityâs system. Having
   obtained the answer key, the Student received a perfect score on the
   midterm, a significant improvement from his previous midterm mark of
   44%. The Student denied the charges, and the Panel stated that the
   Studentâs conduct as well as his protestations had wide ranging and
   serious damaging repercussions to the University community, including
   the professors involved and his classmates. Within a month of being
   confronted with the allegations, the Student committed plagiarism by
   submitting his classmateâs assignment as his own, causing suspicion to
   fall on the innocent classmate. On the basis of the evidence, the Panel
   found the Student guilty under s. B . i.1(b) and s. B.i.1(c) . The
   Panel stressed the need for general deterrence by stating that the
   brazen nature of both offences requires a penalty which leaves no doubt
   that the Studentâs behaviour is wholly unacceptable. The Panel imposed
   a grade-assignment of zero in the two courses; a five-year suspension;
   a recommendation that the Student be expelled; a permanent notation on
   the Studentâs transcript; and a report be issued to the Provost.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12785
