Report #285

   DATE: November 17, 2003
   PARTIES: Ms. L. v. UTSC
   Hearing Date(s): October 14, 2003
   Committee Members:
   Professor Emeritus R. Scane (Chair)
   Mr. M. Ahmad
   Professor B. Corman
   Professor R. Elliot
   Mrs. S. Scace
   Secretary:
   Ms. S. Girard
   Appearances:
   For the Student:
   Mr. L.
   For UTSC:
   Associate Dean I. McDonald
   UTSC â request to re-write final examination and defer three year
   suspension â difficulty adjusting to university and family problems â
   problems not sufficiently compelling to interfere with threeâyear
   suspension â illness â deficient medical documentation â exam
   performance not substantially weaker than term average â oral evidence
   accepted â probable that failure on examination would not have happened
   but for medical condition â minority opinion that illness was
   insufficient basis to explain failure â appeal allowed in part â
   Student to be permitted to re-write examination â appeal to defer
   threeâyear suspension dismissed
   Request to re-write the final examination in one course and to defer a
   three year suspension. The Student failed the course. With respect to
   the threeâyear suspension, the Student claimed that she had difficulty
   adjusting to university life and that she had been distressed and
   distracted by serious family problems. The Committee considered the
   inability of the Student to improve her academic performance despite
   the extended time she had to adjust to her problems and found that the
   problems were not sufficiently compelling to interfere with the
   threeâyear suspension. With respect to the examination, the Student
   claimed that she had a history of stomach pain and was suffering from a
   cold on the date of the exam which affected her performance. Before the
   examination a nurse at the UTSC Health Centre assessed her condition as
   having âminimal impactâ on her academic functioning. Before the exam
   the Student claimed that she experienced severe stomach pain in
   addition to the existing cold symptoms. The Student claimed that she
   did not return to the UTSC Health Centre for medical assessment because
   she believed from previous experience that the stomach condition would
   clear itself. The Committee found that the medical documentation
   submitted was deficient and that the Studentâs performance on the exam
   was not substantially weaker than her term average in the course.Â
   However, the Committee accepted the Studentâs oral evidence and found
   that it was probable that the failure on the final examination would
   not have happened but for the Studentâs medical condition. A minority
   of the Committee found that there was insufficient basis to conclude
   that the illness was a satisfactory explanation for the failure.Â
   Appeal allowed in part. The Committee ordered that the Student be
   allowed to re-write the final examination in the course. The appeal to
   defer the threeâyear suspension was dismissed. If the Studentâs final
   mark received in the course after the rewritten final examination was
   sufficiently high, the Committee observed that the suspension would be
   removed retroactively.
   [1]View Report

References

   1. file:///media/12654
