Report 265

DATE:

   April 25, 2002

PARTIES:

   Mr. Z.B. (via teleâconference) v. Faculty of Law

Hearing Date(s):

   April 1, 2002

Committee Members:

   Professor Richard Powers, Interim Chair
   Professor Clare Beghtol
   Professor Sherwin Desser
   Professor David Jenkins
   Mr. Kashif Pirzada

Acting Secretary:

   Ms. Susan Girard

In Attendance:

For the Appellant:

   Mr. Z.B. (via telephone conference)

For the Faculty of Law:

   Professor Mayo Moran, Associate Dean, Faculty of Law

   Appeal of a grade received on an essay submitted in one course. An
   Interim Chair was appointed, pursuant to section 1 and section
   3(a)(iii) of the Terms of Reference, to preside at the appeal. The
   Student had received a grade of âCâ on a course paper. The Student
   appealed the grade and an independent review of the paper was
   completed. The independent reviewer received the paper, the reasons for
   the appeal and the original comments made by the course instructor
   relating to the grading of the paper. The independent reviewer
   concluded that the course instructorâs grade was reasonable. The
   Committee considered the Facultyâs appeals procedures and found that
   the rereading process was not an âimpartialâ and âindependentâ process
   because the inclusion of the instructorâs original grade and reasons
   potentially biased the proceedings.Â  The Committee observed that
   fairness in the process and the appearance of fairness in the process
   is of equal consideration. The Committee found that in reviewing the
   Studentâs paper, the independent reviewer was judging the efforts of
   one of his colleagues. The Committee stated that it was not determining
   that the independent reviewer was biased in favour of his colleague but
   it found that the process was not at armâs length and therefore failed
   to provide a level of fairness consistent with the Facultyâs claim that
   it was âin accord with fairnessâ. Appeal allowed. The Committee ordered
   that an independent review of the Studentâs paper be conducted by a
   minimum of two reviewers, selected from outside the Faculty, and that
   the reviewers should receive only the paper, the course description and
   an explanation of the requirements for the paper. The average of the
   grades received from the two independent reviewers was to determine the
   Studentâs final grade for the paper.
   [1]View Report

References

   1. file:///media/12644
