Case #895

   DATE: August 21, 2017
   PARTIES: University of Toronto v. A.S. ("the Student")
   Hearing Date(s): July 24, 2017

   Panel Members:
   Mr. F. Paul Morrison, Chair
   Dr. Joel Kirsh, Faculty Panel Member
   Mr. Daniel Lazzam, Student Panel Member

   Appearances:
   Mr. Robert Centa, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland
   Barristers
   Mr. Robert Sniderman, Law Student for the Student, Downtown Legal
   Services

   In Attendance:
   Professor Luc De Nil, Vice-Dean, Students, School of Graduate Studies
   Ms. Krista Osbourne, Administrative Clerk and Hearing Secretary, Office
   of Appeals, Discipline, Faculty Grievances
   Mr. Douglas Harrison, New Co-Chair (Observer)
   Mr. Suraj Sharma, Media Production Technician, Information Commons,
   University of Toronto
   The Student

   Trial Division - s. B.i.1(d) of Code - plagiarism - student copied
   unattributed text verbatim for Master's thesis - guilty plea - agreed
   statement of facts - joint submission on penalty accepted - zero on
   thesis, four year suspension, five year notation, publication of the
   decision with the name of the Student withheld

   The Student was charged with plagiarism under s. B.i.1(d) of the Code,
   and alternatively, academic dishonesty under s. B.i.3(b) of the Code.
   The charges related to a Master's thesis that featured verbatim and
   near-verbatim text from various sources, without any attribution.

   The Student and University submitted an agreed statement of facts in
   which the Student admitted to the offences. The University withdrew the
   academic dishonesty charge. The Student and University also submitted a
   joint submission on penalty. The Tribunal found that a joint submission
   on penalty should only be rejected in circumstances where it would be
   contrary to the public interest or where the administration of justice
   would be brought into disrepute, and only where the joint submission is
   truly unreasonable or unconscionable .

   In accepting the joint submission on penalty the Tribunal had regard to
   the gravity of the offence, the Student's co-operation at all stages of
   the disciplinary process, and that the Student had no prior record of
   academic offences. The Tribunal therefore ordered that the Student
   receive a grade of zero on the thesis, a four year suspension, a five
   year notation, and publication of the decision with the name of the
   Student withheld.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/13041
