Case No.: 895

THE UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
IN THE MATTER OF charges of academic dishonesty filed on November 1, 2016,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters,
1995,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Act, 1971, S.O. 1971, c. 56 as am. S.O.
1978, c. 88

BETWEEN
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO

-AND-

A

S

(

)

REASONS FOR DECISION

Date of Hearing: July 24, 2017
Tribunal Members:
Mr. F. Paul Morrison, Chair
Dr. Joel Kirsh, Faculty Panel Member
Mr. Daniel Lazzam, Student Panel Member
Appearances:
Mr. Robert Centa, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Barristers
Mr. Robert Sniderman, Law Student for the Student, Downtown Legal Services
Mr. A
S
, the Student
In Attendance:
Professor Luc De Nil, Vice-Dean, Students, School of Graduate Studies
Ms. Krista Osbourne, Administrative Clerk and Hearing Secretary, Office of Appeals, Discipline,
Faculty Grievances
Mr. Douglas Harrison, New Co-Chair (Observer)
Mr. Suraj Sharma, Media Production Technician, Information Commons, University of Toronto

-2Charges:

The Trial Division of the Tribunal held a hearing on July 24, 2017 to consider the
following charges brought by the University of Toronto (the “University”) against A
S
(the “Student”) under the Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters (the “Code”):
1) In July 2016, you knowingly represented as your own an idea or expression of an
idea, and/or the work of another in your draft thesis titled “Epigenetic regulation of
hepatic gluconeogenesis”, which you submitted in accordance with the requirements
for the degree of Master of Science in the Graduate Department of Laboratory
Medicine & Pathobiology (the ‘Thesis”) contrary to section B.l.1 (d) of the Code.
2) In the alternative, you knowingly engaged in a form of cheating, academic dishonesty
or misconduct, fraud or misrepresentation not otherwise described in the Code in
order to obtain academic credit or other academic advantage of any kind in
connection with the Thesis, contrary to section B.I.3(b) of the Code.
2.

The Student was represented by legal counsel. He pleaded guilty to Charges 1 and 2
above. The University undertook that if a conviction were entered on Charge 1, Charge 2
would be withdrawn.

The Hearing

3.

The Hearing proceeded by way of an Agreed Statement of Facts (the “Agreed
Statement”). On consent, it was entered as an Exhibit at the Hearing. On consent, a
Joint Book of Documents was also marked as an Exhibit and the Student agreed that
each document could be admitted into evidence before the Tribunal for all purposes,
including for the truth of each document’s contents.

4.

As reflected in the Agreed Statement, the following facts were established.
(a)

was admitted to the University of Toronto in a Master of
In Fall 2013, Mc. S
Science (“M.Sc”) degree in the Department of Laboratory Medicine and
remained a student in the School
Pathobiology. At all material times, Mr. S
of Graduate Studies at the University.

(b)

One of the requirements for completion of the M.Sc program is writing and
defending an original academic thesis.

(c)

performed his thesis research in Dr. Maria
Throughout his M.Sc, Mr. S
’s thesis
Rozakis’ lab, under her supervision. Dr. Rozakis was Mr. S
supervisor and therefore responsible for chairing the committee to evaluate
Mr. S
’s thesis.

(d)

submitted
In July 2016, after almost three years in the M.Sc program, Mr. S
took verbatim or nearly
his thesis to Dr. Rozakis. In his thesis, Mr. S
verbatim text from multiple published and unpublished sources and used that text
without quotation marks or any other appropriate citation.

(e)

Mr. S
’s thesis contained passages that were taken verbatim or nearly
verbatim without appropriate attribution from the following sources (“the
Sources”):

-3-

(f)

5.

(i)

Obesity and the Regulation of Energy Balance” by Bruce M. Spiegelman
and Jeffrey S. Flier;

(ii)

“DNA Methylation, Insulin Resistance, and Blood Pressure in Offspring
Determined by Maternal Periconceptional B Vitamin and Methionine
Status” by Kevin D. Sinclair et al;

(iii)

‘The Role of Human Bromodomains in Chromatin Biology and Gene
Transcriptioin” by Roberto Sanchez and Ming-Ming Zhou;

(iv)

Unpublished abstract by M. Rozakis;

(v)

“Investigating the Role of PHIP1 in hepatic Gluconeogenesis’ by Steve
Balgobin;

(vi)

The Bromodomain Interaction Module” by Panagis Filippakopoulos and
Stefan Knapp;

(vii)

“Sex Bias in Neuroscience and Biomedical Research” by Annaliese K.
Beery and Irving Zucker;

(viii)

“The Deacetylase Sirt6 Activates the Acetyltransferase GCN5 and
Suppresses Hepatic Gluconeogenesis” by John E. Dominy et al; and

(ix)

Unpublished text by Rebecca Ford.

With respect to his thesis, Mr. S

admits that he knowingly:

(i)

included verbatim and nearly verbatim excerpts from the Sources;

(ii)

failed to attribute those verbatim and nearly verbatim excerpts
appropriately using quotation marks;

(iii)

represented ideas and work found in the Sources as his own;

(iv)

committed plagiarism contrary to section B.i.1(d) of the Code; and

(v)

engaged in a form of cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud
or misrepresentation in order to obtain academic credit, contrary to
section B.i.3(b) of the Code.

After reviewing the Agreed Statement and the Joint of Book of Documents, the Panel
concluded that Charges 1) and 2) were proven and accepted the guilty pleas of the
Student. A conviction was entered on Charge 1). In accordance with its undertaking, the
University withdrew Charge 2).

Penalty
6.

The University and the Student submitted a Joint Submission on Penalty (the “Joint
Submission”). The Joint Submission submitted that the Panel should impose the
following sanctions on the Student:
(a)

a final grade of zero in RST9999Y;

-4-

(b)

a suspension ftom the University for four yeats commencing from the date of the
order;

(c)

a notation of the sanction on his academic record and transcript for five years
from the day the Tribunal makes its order; and

(d)

that this case shall be reported to the Provost for publication of a notice of the
decision of the Tribunal and the sanction imposed with the name of the Student
withheld.

7.

The Panel was referred to case authority by counsel for the University and for the
Student. The Panel accepts, as emphasized by the case authority, that the Tribunal is
not obliged to accept a joint submission and that the Panel retains the obligation and
responsibility to impose a fit sentence in accordance with the circumstances of the case.
However, the Panel also accepts that a joint submission may be rejected by the Panel
only in circumstances where to give effect to it would be contrary to the public interest or
would bring the administration of justice into disrepute. Case authority has held that only
truly unreasonable or “unconscionable” joint submissions should be rejected. Joint
submissions promote early resolution of disputes and provide a level of certainty for the
parties. They foster trust and cooperation, which are valued goals in the University
setting.

8.

The Panel recognizes that the Student was fully cooperative with the University in this
case, It also recognizes that the Student has no prior record of academic offences.
However, plagiarism in a graduate-level thesis is a serious offense and threatens the
integrity of the University as an academic institution. The need to protect the academic
values of the University and to send a message of deterrence is paramount.

9.

Accordingly, the Panel accepted the Joint Submission and the penalty agreed upon
therein.

Decision

10.

The Tribunal issued the following Order:
(a)

is guilty of one count of the academic offence of plagiarism,
THAT Mr. S
contrary to section Bl.1(d) of the Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters;

(b)

THAT the following sanctions shall be imposed on Mr. S

(c)

:

(i)

a final grade of zero in RST9999Y;

(ii)

a suspension from the University for four years commencing from the
date of the order; and

(iii)

a notation of the sanction on his academic record and transcript for five
years from the day the Tribunal makes its order.

THAT this case shall be reported to the Provost for publication of a notice of the
decision of the Tribunal and the sanctions imposed, with the name of the student
withheld.

The Order was made in Toronto, on July 24, 2017

-5-

Dated at Toronto, Ontario, this2.,tday of

F. Paul Morrison, Chair

2017

