Case 1107 - Appeal

   [1]Case 1107 - Tribunal

DATE:

   August 18, 2021

PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v. D.B. ("the Student")

HEARING DATE:

   July 21, 2021, via Zoom

Panel Members:

   Ms. Roslyn M. Tsao, Chair
   Professor Allan Kaplan, Faculty Panel Member
   Ms. Samantha Chang, Student Panel Member

Appearances:

   Mr. Robert Centa, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland
   Rosenberg Rothstein LLP
   The Student

Hearing Secretary:

   Mr. Christopher Lang, Director, Office of Appeals, Discipline and
   Faculty Grievances

   NOTE: See the [2]Tribunal caseÂ summary for detailed facts.

   TheÂ StudentÂ appeals the findingÂ ofÂ guilt
   andÂ theÂ sanctionÂ imposed byÂ the Tribunalâs Trial DivisionÂ on the
   basis that (1) it was improper to proceed with the original hearing in
   theÂ StudentâsÂ absence; (2) the University is required to establish
   that theÂ StudentÂ received notice of the hearing âbeyond a reasonable
   doubtâ; (3) theÂ sanctionÂ imposed is unreasonable; and (4)Â the
   appropriate remedy on appeal is to set aside the Panelâs Order and
   order a new hearing.

   In dismissing theÂ StudentâsÂ appeal,Â the Board
   discussedÂ theÂ StudentâsÂ grounds for appealÂ in three main issues.
   First,Â it wasÂ theÂ StudentâsÂ position that it was improper to
   proceed with the original hearing in theÂ StudentâsÂ absenceÂ and
   thatÂ theÂ University is required to establish that he received notice
   of the hearingÂ âbeyond a reasonable doubt.âÂ In examining Rule 9(c) of
   the TribunalâsÂ Rules of Practice and Procedure, the
   UniversityâsÂ Policy on OfficialÂ CorrespondenceÂ with StudentsÂ and
   theÂ affidavits regarding service, the Board found that
   theÂ StudentÂ had reasonable notice of the charges and the
   hearing.Â The Board found that theÂ TribunalÂ did not make any error in
   concluding that the University had discharged its onus to demonstrate
   that theÂ StudentÂ had reasonable notice of the hearingÂ and that they
   could proceed with the hearing in
   theÂ StudentâsÂ absence.Â TheÂ StudentÂ arguedÂ that although he should
   have checked hisÂ UniversityÂ email more frequently, the onus is still
   on the University to prove, beyond a reasonable doubt, that he accessed
   or read the emails that were sent to him regarding the hearing. The
   Board rejected this argument. As correctly noted by the Panel,
   theÂ onusÂ is on the University to demonstrate that theÂ StudentÂ had
   reasonable noticeÂ of the hearingÂ on a balance of probabilities.Â Once
   the Panel wasÂ satisfied that reasonable noticeÂ had been given to the
   Student, the PanelÂ had jurisdiction to proceed in the absence of
   theÂ Student. The Board does not find any error in that finding.Â At
   the hearing, theÂ StudentÂ referred toÂ it being âunfairâ that he was
   not present at the original hearing.Â The Board noted
   thatÂ âunfairnessâ is not theÂ test for procedural fairness. The
   fairness standardÂ relatesÂ to having reasonable notice of the
   adjudication and, thereby, having the opportunity to attend and be
   heard.

   The secondÂ issue was whether the sanction imposed on theÂ Student,Â if
   the finding of guiltÂ wasÂ upheld, was unreasonable.Â Upon review of
   the Tribunalâs reasonsÂ and the authorities provided to the Panel, the
   Board found that the sanction ordered was consistent with penalties
   imposed in similar cases. The Board noted that consistency and
   predictability are valid goals in encouraging general
   deterrence.Â Relying onÂ University of Toronto v.
   M.M.Â (CaseÂ No.Â 543, April 14, 2011(Appeal)) at paras. 61-64, the
   BoardÂ did not feel that thisÂ wasÂ a situation of âspecial
   circumstancesâ to grant theÂ StudentÂ an opportunity to adduce fresh
   evidence whenÂ theÂ StudentÂ hadÂ reasonable notice of the hearing and
   failed to attend.Â TheÂ StudentÂ advised the Board that he had
   withdrawn from his courses in Winter 2021Â even though he filed an
   appeal which stayed the orderÂ pendingÂ the appeal decision. Seeing as
   the StudentÂ acted as ifÂ he wasÂ suspendedÂ from the University since
   the date of the Tribunalâs Order, the Board felt it was appropriate to
   affirm the Order,Â including the commencement date of the suspension.

   Lastly, theÂ Student argued that the appropriate remedy on appeal is to
   set aside the Tribunalâs Order and order a new hearing. The Board noted
   that givenÂ itsÂ finding that theÂ Tribunal did not errÂ in their
   decision,Â they dismissed theÂ StudentâsÂ request for a new hearing.

   AppealÂ dismissed. Order of the Tribunal affirmed in its entirety.
   [3]View Case

References

   1. https://governingcouncil.utoronto.ca/system/files/university-tribunal-decisions/Case%201107_0.pdf
   2. https://governingcouncil.utoronto.ca/case-summary/case-1107
   3. file:///media/29956
