UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
GOVERNING COUNCIL
REPORT #328 OF THE ACADEMIC APPEALS COMMITTEE
January 21, 2009
Your Committee reports that it held a hearing on Friday, December 19, 2008, at which the
following were present:
Assistant Dean Renu Mandhane, Chair
Professor Elizabeth Cowper
Mr. Ken Davy
Professor William Gough
Professor Louise Lemieux-Charles
Ms. Nancy Smart, Judicial Affairs Officer
Ms. Mette Mai, Assistant Judicial Affairs Officer
Ms. Bonnie Goldberg, Representative of the Judicial Affairs Office
In Attendance:
Ms. S. A., the Student
Professor Gordon Anderson, University of Toronto Mississauga, the Respondent
I.

The Appeal

The Student is appealing the July 18, 2007 decision of the University of Toronto Mississauga
(“UTM”) Academic Appeals Board, denying the Student’s petition for late withdrawal without
academic penalty from four courses completed during the 2002-2003 academic year: BIO152H5
(Fall Term), PSY100YF (Full Year), CHM140Y5 (Full Year), and ERS120H5 (Winter Term).
II.

Facts

The Student enrolled in the Faculty of Arts and Science at UTM in the Fall of 2002. In her first
year of studies, she completed BIO152H5, PSY100YF, CHM140Y5, ERS120H5, and
ANT102H5 and received final grades as follows:
•
•
•
•
•

BIO152H5 - 47% (F);
PSY100YF - 58% (D+);
CHM140Y5 - 42% (F);
ERS120H5 - 51% (D-); and
ANT102H5 - 67% (C+).

1

Between October and November 2002, the Student’s father, who lived in Iran, was hospitalized
due to a car accident. As a result of her father’s accident and his prolonged recovery, the Student
had difficulty concentrating on her studies and experienced stress about the financial
implications for her family. During this period, the Student continued to attend class and submit
assignments. The Student did not seek academic or other counselling from UTM during this
period.
The Student’s grades improved over the remaining three years of her program, and she graduated
from the University of Toronto in June 2007 with a Bachelor of Science degree. The Student is
currently enrolled in her second year of medical school in the Caribbean.
III.

Previous Decisions

On May 17, 2007, approximately four years after completing her first year courses, the Student
filed petitions for late withdrawal without academic penalty from BIO152H5 and CHM140Y5.
Your Committee did not have before it a copy of the Student’s petition for late withdrawal in
BIO152H5.
In support of her petition in relation to CHM140Y5, the Student wrote as follows:
I realize that the deadline for applying to petition has passed for CMH140 but I
have strong reasons for doing so now. First,…the year I took CHM140 was my
first year in university, and hence I was not familiar with the university system of
rules and regulations including petitions. I did not apply for the petition in later
years because I thought I would not stand a chance. Now, that I have almost
finished my degree and I have decided to go to graduate school, I realize that I
may not be able to do so, because the CHM140 failed grade dramatically lowers
my GPA….My failure in CHM140 is not without its reasons. In addition to the
fact that I was a first year student and adjustment to university life did not come
easy for me, another unforeseen situation interfered with my capacity to do well
academically on the first year; my father was hospitalized for one month during
the Fall of 2002 as a result of a major car accident…My father’s recovery took
almost two years. Given that I was far away from my father, I was deeply
distressed and agonized by his accident and his consequent medical problems.
Hence, it became difficult for me to concentrate on my studies…
On June 8, 2007, the Student filed a petition for late withdrawal without academic penalty from
ERS120H5. Your Committee did not have before it a copy of the Student’s petition for this
course.
On June 19, 2007, the Committee on Standing at UTM at first granted and then subsequently
denied the Student’s requests relating to CHM140Y5 and ERS120H5. The Student was advised
via email that the Committee on Standing had granted her requests in relation to both
CHM140Y5 and ERS120H5 on the basis of “extenuating circumstances.” However, within
approximately 15 minutes, she received a second set of emails denying her requests. The
Committee on Standing stated that it “does not accept the circumstances that you have presented

2

as justification for granting late withdrawal from a completed course.” Moreover, in relation to
CHM140Y5, the Committee on Standing noted that, since the Student had written a deferred
exam in August 2003, they were unable to grant her late withdrawal.
On June 20, 2007, after receiving the denial of the petitions in relation to CMH140Y5 and
ERS120H5, the Student submitted another petition requesting late withdrawal without academic
penalty from PSY100Y5. In her petition, the Student stated:
As a first year student who was new to Canada, it became difficult for me to cope
with pressure caused by my father’s accident. Given that I was far away from my
father, I was deeply distressed by his injuries. Therefore, most of my first year
courses including PSY100 suffered and my grades did not reflect my true
educational capacity.
Your Committee did not have before it a copy of the UTM Committee on Standing’s decision in
relation to this course.
The Student eventually appealed to the UTM Academic Appeals Board. Again, your Committee
did not have before it a copy of the Student’s appeal to the UTM Board.
The Student’s appeal was denied by the UTM Academic Appeals Board. In a letter dated July
18, 2007, the Board wrote as follows:
1.

On the basis of your presentation at the meeting, and that the case stems from
courses taken during the 2002/03 academic year, the members of the Board
decided that you did not have a compelling case for an exemption from the
University regulations that apply to all students.

2.

The circumstances you presented for late withdrawal from the above courses as
having little or no knowledge of university regulations and having to stand in line
for approximately one hour to see an academic counselor in the Office of the
Registrar were not deemed as exceptional circumstances. At the same time, you
acknowledge being aware of drop dates and rules for deferred exams, having
petitioned to write a special deferred exam for CMH140Y5 during the winter of
2003. The Board found it difficult to accept that you were not able to obtain
advice from any of your professors or the Office of the Registrar staff during the
entire academic year in question.

3.

In addition, since you failed BIO152H5 during the first semester, the Board found
that you should have realized that you were unable to successfully complete the
academic year, and considered dropping the rest of your courses.

The Student now appeals to the Academic Appeals Committee of Governing Council.

3

IV.

Decision
a.

Submissions

In her written submissions to your Committee, the Student noted that her father’s accident in the
Fall 2002 and recovery through to July 2003 negatively affected her performance in BIO152H5,
PSY100YF, CHM140YF, and ERS120H5. In relation to missing the deadline to petition, she
wrote as follows:
When I first started my university life at UTM, I was new to Canada and I had
little knowledge of university rules and regulations. I did not know that there was
such thing as petition and that there was a deadline for it. A few years later, when
I discovered about petitions, I did not decide to petition for late withdrawal of my
first year courses because I though [sic] I would not stand a chance because of
passing the deadline. Then I heard of students who were granted petitions even
after passing the deadline and it was here that I decided to apply for these
positions.
At the hearing, the Student also expressed frustration with the conflicting emails that were sent to
her in June 2007 by the UTM Committee on Standing, which first allowed and then denied her
petitions. She explained that she had believed that she been granted the petitions and was deeply
disappointed as a result of the conflicting messages in the emails.
UTM explained that the conflicting email messages were the result of an administrative error
within the Registrar’s Office and also acknowledged that the error was unfortunate. Your
Committee is of the opinion that, while this administrative error was regrettable, there is no
evidence to suggest that the Student suffered significant hardship as a result of the conflicting
emails sent no more than 15 minutes apart. Therefore, your Committee did not consider the
administrative error as determinative of the merits of this appeal.
b.

Reasons

The Student is seeking late withdrawal without academic penalty from four courses that she took
more than five years ago: BIO152H5, PSY100YF, CHM140Y5, and ERS120H5. The Student
claims that she performed poorly in the courses as a result of personal circumstances that
occurred during her first term at the University. The issue before the Committee is whether
UTM should have allowed the Student’s appeal, some four years after completion of the courses,
based on extenuating circumstances.
Your Committee notes that UTM allowed the Student to petition for late withdrawal, years after
completion of the courses and the events that gave rise to her difficulties. This demonstrates that
UTM was attune to and willing to consider the Student’s circumstances despite the highly
unusual time frame in which the Student launched her petitions. Your Committee agrees that
UTM appropriately allowed the Student to petition for late withdrawal without academic penalty
despite the lengthy passage of time.

4

With respect to whether UTM should have allowed the Student’s appeal based on extenuating
circumstances, your Committee considered the reasons behind the ability of students to withdraw
late without academic penalty. The remedy of late withdrawal without academic penalty is an
extraordinary remedy, reserved for unusual and unique situations. The idea of “drop dates” is
predicated upon the University’s legitimate expectation that a student will make a decision
whether to continue in a course a few weeks into the term. By the drop date, the student is
expected to have assessed his or her situation and made a decision. Once the drop date passes,
the implication is that the student has decided to continue in the course. Exceptions to this policy
are rare, but could include situations where unexpected circumstances occur after the drop date,
where already-existing circumstances worsen, or where already-existing circumstances do not
resolve.
In reaching its decision, the UTM Appeals Board rejected the Student’s submission that she was
unaware of University regulations, in part, based on the fact that, in the Winter of 2003, she had
petitioned and was granted the opportunity to write a special deferred exam in CHM140Y5. The
UTM Appeals Board also found that, since the Student had failed BIO152HF in the Fall of 2002,
she should have realized that she would be unable to successfully complete the academic year
and considered dropping the rest of her courses. Your Committee agrees with this analysis.
Further, the Student presented no information to the UTM Academic Appeals Board to
demonstrate that she was unable to attend classes, missed assignments, or sought counselling for
the stress she was facing as a result of her father’s accident. The Student did not present any new
information to your Committee that the Academic Appeals Board did not also have before it
While your Committee is sympathetic to the hardship the Student was experiencing during the
2002-2003 academic year, the University offers ample opportunity for students who experience
unforeseen or worsening problems to withdraw from courses or seek other remedies, both prior
to and after its stated deadlines. Indeed, in this case, the Student had availed herself of one of
these remedies in the Winter of 2003 when she petitioned to and was granted the opportunity to
write a special deferred exam in CHM140YF.
Although we recognize that students who are experiencing emotional difficulty may not always
be able to deal with problems concurrent with their onset, your Committee finds that this Student
had sufficient information about her progress and the possible impact of her father’s accident on
her academic performance to have launched the petitions during the 2002-2003 academic year,
or shortly thereafter.
Indeed, even if the panel were to accept that the Student was unaware of the University’s policies
on late withdrawal without academic penalty until after the 2002-2003 academic year, the
Student states in her appeal that she did not petition for late withdrawal upon learning of the
policy since she thought she “would not stand a chance because of passing the deadline.” The
Student submitted to your Committee that it was only upon hearing of other students, at this
University and other institutions, who were granted similar remedies that she believed she should
petition. Your Committee does not view the Student’s independent assessment of the merits of
her case as sufficient cause to delay the launch of a petition until some four years after
completion of the courses at issue.

5

Your Committee does not believe that this case merits allowing an appeal in circumstances
where a student, who was or should have made herself aware of the relevant policies, decides to
wait until she is nearing the completion of her degree and assessing her chances of obtaining
entry to graduate school to launch her petition. If your Committee granted this appeal, it would
set a precedent of removing grades from transcripts, well past established deadlines.
Your Committee acknowledges and is sympathetic to the hardship faced by the Student during
her first year of university due to her father’s accident. However, based on the information
presented by the Student in the petition and the appeal, we find that UTM appropriately applied
its discretion in not granting late withdrawal without academic penalty.
During the hearing, it came to your Committee’s attention that one of the panel members on the
UTM Academic Appeals Board who had been involved in determining the Student’s appeal, had
also been one of the her instructors in PSY100YF, albeit some five years earlier. While there
was no suggestion of impropriety by this panel member, your Committee recommends that UTM
clarify its policy on potential conflicts of interest in relation to the students and faculty members
selected to hear academic appeals in their division so as to prevent possible future appearances of
bias.
Your Committee congratulates the Student on her success in obtaining entry into graduate
studies, especially in light of the difficulties she experienced in her first year at UTM. However,
your Committee is of the view that UTM’s decision was appropriate in the circumstances and
unanimously denies the Student’s appeal.
The appeal is dismissed.

6

