Report 328

DATE:

   January 21, 2009

PARTIES:

   Ms. S. A. (the Student) v. UTM

Hearing Date(s):

   December 19, 2008

Committee Members:

   Assistant Dean Renu Mandhane, Chair
   Professor Elizabeth Cowper
   Mr. Ken Davy
   Professor William Gough
   Professor Louise Lemieux-Charles

In Attendance:

   Ms. Nancy Smart, Judicial Affairs Officer
   Ms. Mette Mai, Assistant Judicial Affairs Officer
   Ms. Bonnie Goldberg, Representative of the Judicial Affairs Office
   Ms. S. A., the Student
   Professor Gordon Anderson, UTM

   Request to withdrawal late without academic penalty from four courses
   due to personal circumstances. The Student claimed she performed poorly
   due to emotional difficulty related to her fatherâs hospitalization in
   Iran following a car accident. Three petitions were filed, all
   approximately four years after the Student completed the courses. The
   Committee agreed that UTM appropriately allowed the Student to petition
   for late withdrawal without academic penalty despite the unusual and
   lengthy passage of time. The Committee agreed with the Divisional
   Appeal Boardâs decision to reject the Studentâs submission that she was
   unaware of University regulations because she had petitioned and was
   granted the opportunity to write a special deferred exam in a different
   course during the relevant time period. The Committee agreed with the
   Divisional Appeal Boardâs decision that because the Student had failed
   another course in the fall of the relevant time period, she should have
   realized that she would be unable to successfully complete the academic
   year and considered dropping the rest of her courses. One of the panel
   members on the Divisional Appeals Board had also been an instructor in
   one of the Studentâs courses at issue in the appeal. The Committee
   recommended that UTM clarify its policy on potential conflicts of
   interest in relation to the students and faculty members selected to
   hear academic appeals so as to prevent possible future appearances of
   bias. Appeal dismissed.
   [1]View Report

References

   1. file:///media/12579
