UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
GOVERNING COUNCIL
REPORT NUMBER 286 OF THE ACADEMIC APPEALS COMMITTEE
December 1, 2003
Your Committee reports that it held a hearing on Thursday November 20, 2003, at which
the following were present:
Assistant Dean Bonnie Goldberg, Chair
Professor Pamela Catton
Professor Gretchen Kerr
Mr Adam Watson
Professor John Wedge
Mr Paul Holmes, Judicial Affairs Officer
In Attendance:
Ms S. (the “Appellant”)
Professor Gordon Anderson, University of Toronto at Mississauga
This is an appeal from the decision of the Academic Appeals Board of the University of
Toronto at Mississauga (“UTM”), dated April 24, 2003. The Academic Appeals Board
(“the Board”) refused to grant late withdrawal without academic penalty from PSY210H5
(“PSY201” or “the course”). The Appellant was unable to write a scheduled third deferral
of an examination in this course in February 2003 due to medical reasons. The
Committee on Standing had refused to entertain any further petitions for this course in its
decision dated January 20, 2003, granting the third deferral. Hence the Committee did not
hear the issue of late withdrawal without academic penalty and the Academic Appeals
Board refused to grant late withdrawal without academic penalty from the course. The
Appellant appeals to this Committee for late withdrawal without academic penalty from
PSY210.
The Appellant was given three deferrals of the final examination in PSY210, in addition
to an opportunity to write the regularly scheduled examination. Each time, a medical
condition rendered the Appellant unable to write the examination. The Appellant was
awarded a final grade of “F”, although she completed the coursework (including a term
test and essay) with very high grades.
For nearly thirty years, the Appellant has suffered from migraine headaches, the severity
of which causes her to lose vision, experience pain, nausea and vomiting, and necessitates
the cessation of all activity. The Appellant continues to experience residual effects for
days or weeks after the initial onset. The Appellant is registered with the AccessAbility

Report Number 286 of the Academic Appeals Committee
Resource Office at UTM, to which she has provided medical documentation verifying the
chronic nature of her condition. Her condition has been classified as a disability, and she
has been provided with numerous accommodations, including the provision of a task
lamp, extensions of time, and opportunities to write make-up tests and deferred
examinations.
In the ten years since the Appellant has been pursuing her degree, she has obtained 10
credits with 5 more to go. When healthy, the Appellant is a conscientious and bright
student, as evidenced by the high grades she has obtained. When she gets sick, she has
availed herself of the University’s generous policy toward make-up tests and deferred
examinations, and has sought and received late withdrawal without academic penalty in
several courses.
The Academic Appeals Board, in its April 24th decision, wrote that this specific request
was turned down because the Appellant did not present a compelling case for an
exemption. The Board believed that the Appellant was given sufficient opportunity to
complete the course and reasonable accommodation was made by the University. In its
written submissions, UTM noted that so much time had passed since the student had
taken the course as to render the remedy of late withdrawal unreasonable and unfair.
During oral submissions to your Committee, the University volunteered that the
Appellant would have been given a fourth deferred examination had she so requested.
The Appellant indicated that this was not known to her.
The University acknowledged that its position had become “enough was enough” where
this Appellant was concerned, and asked this Committee to answer such questions as to
whether the University could reasonably take the position that it had granted enough
accommodations to a particular student. However, your Committee does not have the
jurisdiction or inclination to set policy limits for an individual department. It is up to that
department to decide whether there should be a limit on the number of deferred
examinations afforded a student, or on the number of requests it will entertain to
accommodate a student with a valid medical condition. Questions of this nature should be
resolved internally.
Regarding the specific issue before your Committee, we heard that the Appellant sought
late withdrawal without academic penalty because she believed she had already been
reasonably accommodated by the university in PSY210 and did not expect continued
indefinite deferrals. Contributing to the Appellant’s belief that this was the most
appropriate path to pursue was the Committee on Standing’s January 20, 2003 decision
that “no further petitions for this course will be considered.” She expected to obtain this
remedy, based on her well-documented medical condition, valid medical notes, and the
past practice of UTM in allowing her this remedy, having obtained it for seven courses.
The Appellant was concerned that because her condition is chronic, she cannot predict
her performance in future courses, leading to the worry that she will obtain other failed
grades and ultimately be unable to graduate. Given that there was nothing different about
this situation from past situations, she was surprised that her request was turned down.

- Page 2 of 4 -

Report Number 286 of the Academic Appeals Committee
Upon learning at the hearing that the University would have permitted her to schedule a
fourth deferred examination, the Appellant indicated that she would have gladly
attempted to write another examination, but also noted her concern that if she once again
got sick, was it feasible that she would be able to apply for a fifth or sixth deferral. Being
unable to predict the course of her illness and having already waited a long time to
complete this course, she wished to remove the course from her transcript entirely.
We accept that the Appellant applied for late withdrawal for this course with the
reasonably held belief that this was the only option available to her in order to remove a
failing grade that was a result of her chronic condition. This belief was based on past
practice as well as the Committee on Standing’s stated unwillingness to consider other
petitions. Further, we agree with the Appellant that there was nothing different about this
particular accommodation request than similar requests she had made in the past.
Accordingly, your Committee is prepared to grant late withdrawal without academic
penalty to this student from PSY210. The Appellant has made enormous effort despite
many challenges to obtain her degree and she is encouraged to complete it to the best of
her ability. However, recognizing the extraordinary nature of this remedy, and given the
evidence tendered at the hearing that the Appellant would have been permitted to
schedule another examination, the Committee is prepared to grant the appeal but offer the
Appellant a choice as to remedy.
Within ten working days of the date of release of this decision, the Appellant shall notify
Professor Gordon Anderson, or if he is not available, the UTM officer empowered to act
in his place, as to whether she wishes to withdraw from PSY210 without academic
penalty, or write a final examination to complete the remaining requirements of the
course. In default of timely notification, the Student shall be deemed to have elected late
withdrawal. If the examination is chosen, it should be written during the next feasible
period for the writing of deferred examinations at UTM, which your Committee assumes
will be Reading Week 2004. If reasonably feasible, the examination should be set and
marked by the instructor who offered the course in the fall of 2002, based on the course
content as it then existed. The decision of Professor Anderson, or if he is unable to act, of
the UTM official carrying out his duties, as to the feasibility of carrying out these
instructions in whole or in part is final. If Professor Anderson or his substitute decides
that it is not feasible to carry out these instructions, the Student shall be notified as to
what form of examination is feasible. The Student may within five business days from
such notification advise Professor Anderson or his substitute whether she wishes to
proceed with such examination as can be arranged, or to withdraw from the course
without academic penalty. In default of timely notification, the Student shall be deemed
to have elected late withdrawal. Finally, if the student elects the remedy of deferred
examination, and is unable due to valid medical reasons to write the examinations, she
may continue to petition for deferred examinations in PSY210.
The appeal is allowed.

- Page 3 of 4 -

Report Number 286 of the Academic Appeals Committee
Respectfully submitted,

Paul J. Holmes
Secretary

Bonnie Goldberg
Chair

Release Date: December 1, 2003

#28798 v2 - Public

- Page 4 of 4 -

