Report #286

   DATE: December 1, 2003
   PARTIES: Ms. S. (the Appellant) v UTM
   Hearing Date(s): November 20, 2003
   Committee Members:
   Assistant Dean Bonnie Goldberg, Chair
   Professor Pamela Catton
   Professor Gretchen Kerr
   Mr. Adam Watson
   Professor John Wedge
   Judicial Affairs Officer:
   Mr. Paul Holmes
   In Attendance:
   Ms S. (the ‚Appellant‚)
   Professor Gordon Anderson, UTM
   UTM ‚ late withdrawal without academic penalty ‚ unable to write third
   deferral of examination due to chronic migraine headache ‚ disability ‚
   Faculty refused to entertain further petitions ‚ no jurisdiction to set
   policy limits regarding whether Faculty could reasonably take the
   position that it had granted enough accommodations to a particular
   student ‚ late withdrawal request reasonably believed to be only remedy
   available ‚ no difference between request and similar previous requests
   ‚ appeal allowed ‚ choice of remedy offered ‚ Student to elect whether
   to withdraw late without academic penalty or write the deferred
   examination
   Request for late withdrawal without academic penalty from the course.
   The Student was unable to write a scheduled third deferral of the final
   examination due to chronic migraine headaches. The Student was
   registered with the AccessAbility Resource Office and her illness was
   classified as a disability. As a result of missing the deferred
   examination she failed the course, despite completing the coursework
   with high grades. The Faculty had refused to entertain any further
   petitions for the course. The Faculty claimed that the time which had
   passed since the Student had taken the course rendered the remedy of
   late withdrawal unreasonable and unfair, and that the Student would
   have been given a fourth deferred examination had she so requested. The
   Student claimed that she was unaware of the offer of a forth deferred
   examination. The Faculty had allowed the Student the remedy of late
   withdrawal in seven previous courses. The Faculty asked the Committee
   whether the University could reasonably take the position that it had
   granted enough accommodations to a particular student. The Committee
   observed that it does not have the jurisdiction to set policy limits
   for an individual department and that such issues should be resolved
   internally. The Committee found that the Student requested late
   withdrawal for the course with the reasonably held belief that it was
   the only remedy available to her, based on past practice and the
   Faculty‚s stated unwillingness to consider other petitions. The
   Committee found that there was nothing different about the
   accommodation requested and similar requests made in the past. The
   Committee considered the nature of late withdrawal without academic
   penalty and the fact that the Faculty would have permitted the Student
   to schedule another examination and found that the Student should be
   offered a choice as to remedy. Appeal allowed. The Committee ordered
   that the Student could elect to withdraw from the course without
   academic penalty or write a deferred examination. If the Student
   elected the remedy of deferred examination, and was unable due to valid
   medical reasons to write the examinations, she could continue to
   petition for deferred examinations in the course.
   [1]View Report

References

   1. file:///media/12655
