Case 948 - Finding

   [1]Case 948 - Interim Decision
   [2]Case 948 - Sanction

DATE:

   August 23, 2019

PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v. S.W

HEARING DATE:

   July 17, 2018; August 30, 2018; February 25, 2019; February 28, 2019;
   March 21, 2019; April 23, 2019

Panel Members:

   Mr. Nader Hasan, Chair
   Dr. Pascal van Lieshout, Faculty Panel Member
   Ms. Yusra Qazi, Student Panel Member

Appearances:

   Ms. Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg
   Rothstein LLP
   Ms. Lauren Pearce, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland
   Rosenberg Rothstein LLP
   Mr.Â Lorne Sabsay, Representative for the Student, Sabsay Lawyers

In Attendance:

   Mr. Christopher Lang, Director, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty
   GrievancesÂ (July 17, 2018; August 30, 2018; February 25, 2019;
   February 28, 2019; March 21, 2019; April 23, 2019)
   Ms. Jennifer Dent, Associate Director, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty
   Grievances (February 25, 2019; FebruaryÂ 28, 2019; March 21, 2019)

Interpreter:

   Mr. Kau Kiang Woo, Mandarin Interpreter for the Student, accredited by
   the Ontario Ministry of Attorney General

   The Student was charged with academicÂ misconduct under theÂ Code of
   Behaviour on Academic Matters, 1995Â (the âCodeâ) on the basis
   thatÂ she knowingly forged or knowingly made use of two sets of forged
   documents, namely a Simon Fraser University (âSFUâ) transcript and
   various SFU course outlines. Specifically, the Student was charged
   withÂ forgeryÂ under s. B.i.3(a)Â of theÂ Code,Â and in the
   alternative, academic dishonesty under s. B.i.3(b) of theÂ Code.

   In April or May of 2015, the StudentÂ submitted an applicationÂ to the
   University for admission as a transfer undergraduate student. In
   support of her application, the Student submitted an official
   transcript of an academicÂ record from SFU bearing the Studentâs name.
   The Student was admitted to the UniversityÂ on the basis ofÂ her
   application and the supporting transcript. Following her admission to
   the University, the Student sought to obtain transfer credits forÂ a
   number ofÂ courses reflected in the SFU transcript and submitted to the
   University five course outlines bearing course codes and information
   associated with courses offered by SFU. The Student conceded that she
   did not attend SFU and that the SFU transcript andÂ course outlines
   were falsifiedÂ (while the course outlines themselves were genuine, the
   Student was never enrolled in the courses described in the
   outlines).Â The Student argued in her defence that while it was never
   disputed that a fake transcript and fake course outlines were submitted
   in her name, she should not bearÂ anyÂ responsibility because both
   submissions were made without her knowledge. The University submitted
   that the Student was not a credible witness and that she had knowingly
   hired a third party to create a falsified SFU transcript and submit it
   to the University in support of her application for admission and her
   application for transfer credits.

   TheÂ PanelÂ noted that the Studentâs position depended in large part on
   a legal argument regarding the Universityâs evidentiary onus in the
   proceedings. The Student asserted that the University was required to
   establishÂ eachÂ and every fact as alleged in the particulars, and that
   if the University fell short on that onus, the Student would be
   entitled to an acquittal.

   TheÂ PanelÂ noted that under theÂ Code,Â the University bears the onus
   of establishing on a balance of probabilities, relying on clear and
   convincing evidence, that the Student committed the academic offences
   as alleged. TheÂ PanelÂ further noted that pursuant to theÂ Code,
   wherever an offence is described on âknowingâ,Â the offence shall
   likewise be deemed to have been committed if the person ought
   reasonably to have known (Code, section B). Knowledge,
   theÂ PanelÂ stated, is therefore an objective standard and the
   University need not prove actual or subjective knowledge. The
   University was required to demonstrate that it was more likely than not
   that the Student knowingly âforged, altered or falsifiedâ and/or âdid
   utter, circulate or make use ofâ the two falsified records in this
   case. TheÂ CodeÂ makes it an offence to merely âmake use ofâ a forged
   or falsified record; accordingly, theÂ PanelÂ stated, to establish
   guilt the University had to prove that the Student knew or ought to
   have known thatÂ the documents used in support of her applications for
   admission and transfer credits were forged or falsified, andÂ thatÂ she
   knowingly made use of them.Â TheÂ PanelÂ rejected the Studentâs
   submission that the University was required to proveÂ eachÂ and every
   fact particularized, as it is not legally tenable. The University
   provides the particulars to discharge its duty of fairness to inform
   the Student of the case to meet and because theÂ CodeÂ requires that
   the Student be provided with particulars. The University must prove
   sufficient facts to substantiate the elements of the offence, but often
   the particulars go further than the bare elements of the offence. If
   theÂ PanelÂ were to accede to the Studentâs argument, it stated, it
   would create a perverse incentive for the University to disclose no
   more thanÂ absolutely necessaryÂ to discharge its onus under theÂ Code.

   TheÂ PanelÂ noted that while much of the evidence in the case was
   undisputed, some witnesses told different versions of the same events
   (in particular, the Student and her former boyfriend, YL, who had
   anonymously reported the Student to the University). While it noted
   that there is no magic formula to assessing
   credibility,Â theÂ PanelÂ noted the guidance of the courts in this
   regard and stated that in assessing credibility,Â itÂ shouldÂ carefully
   scrutinizeÂ the witnessâ evidence beforeÂ itÂ in light of what they
   have said on prior occasions (R. v. M.G., [1994] O.J. No. 2086 (C.A.),
   at para. 23).Â Therefore, in assessing credibility of the Student and
   YL, the Panel was aided by their prior testimony in a criminal
   proceeding, which overlapped factually with the issues in
   thisÂ particular matter.Â Portions of the criminal trial transcript
   were admitted for the truth of their contents in this proceeding and
   for the purpose of assessing witnessesâ credibility.Â The transcripts
   relevance and their use were the subjectÂ to a prior ruling of the
   PanelÂ (SeeÂ University of Toronto and S.W, CaseÂ 948Â â Interim
   Decision, December 21, 2018).Â The factual issues in this case turned
   on when the Student became aware of the forgeries. The Student
   testified that when requested to provide course outlines in respect of
   her SFU courses, she obtained a copy of the falsified SFU transcript
   and that she knew she had been admitted to the University and obtained
   transfer creditsÂ on the basis ofÂ a falsified transcript. The Student
   also knew that the University was seeking course outlines in respect of
   SFU courses that she had never taken in support of her application for
   transfer credits.Â The Student admittedÂ toÂ knowingly continuing to
   make use of the SFU transcript and acceptingÂ YLâs offer to submit
   course outlines for classes she did not take from a university she
   never attended.Â TheÂ PanelÂ was satisfied that these admissions alone
   were enough to find the Student guilty of the misconduct
   alleged.Â While the University relied on the direct evidence of YL in
   arguing that the Student knew of the forged documents and was a willing
   participant in submitting them, theÂ PanelÂ noted that YL was an
   imperfect witness forÂ a number ofÂ reasons (he was complicit in the
   Studentâs misconduct and he had a motive to fabricate, due to the fact
   that the Student had made a formal complaint to the police that YL had
   sexually assaulted her). TheÂ PanelÂ in this case, while acknowledging
   that YL had been acquitted at trial, noted that YL could be compared to
   aÂ VetrovecÂ witness in this context, namely a witness whose
   credibility is compromised (VetrovecÂ v The QueenÂ [1982] 1 S.C.R.
   811).Â While noting that criminal law decisions such asÂ VetrovecÂ are
   not binding on it, theÂ PanelÂ acceptedÂ that the principles
   articulated in it are instructive and that the trier of fact should be
   cautious in accepting testimony where a witnessâ credibility is
   compromised, unless that evidence is corroborated by independent
   evidence.

   TheÂ PanelÂ notedÂ that YLâs evidence was corroborated by significant
   circumstantial evidence which showed that, on a balance of
   probabilities, the Student knew or ought to have known that the records
   were falsified from the outset of her application to the University.
   This included the Studentâs poor academic performance at the university
   sheÂ hadÂ actually attended, University of British Columbia; the
   Studentâs contract with the agent hired to assist withÂ herÂ transfer
   application under which a significant fee was payable to the agent to
   prepare an application that hundreds of students complete on their own
   every year; and the Studentâs inconsistencies in her evidence regarding
   the actual amount paid to this agent. While the Studentâs evidence was
   supported by her mother, theÂ PanelÂ stated that it was difficult to
   rely on the motherâs evidence forÂ a number ofÂ reasons including that
   the mother stated she was there as an advocate for her daughter, not as
   a witness, and that the mother denied there was anything wrong with
   making used of the forged documents. TheÂ PanelÂ also heard evidence of
   meetings between the StudentÂ and the Registrarâs office in which the
   Student admitted that she was referred to as a transfer student from
   SFU. TheÂ PanelÂ was satisfied that cumulatively, the weight of the
   circumstantial evidence of the Studentâs knowledge of the forged
   documents from the time of her application to the University was
   significant, and corroborated YLâs evidence. On a balance of
   probabilities, theÂ PanelÂ found that the Student did in fact know that
   the SFU transcript was a forgery at or around the time her transfer
   application was submitted to the University.

   TheÂ PanelÂ foundÂ the StudentÂ guilty ofÂ two counts of knowingly
   falsifying or making use of a forged record, contrary to section
   B.i.3(a) of theÂ Code.Â TheÂ PanelÂ decided to re-convene to consider
   the appropriate sanctionÂ at a later date.
   [3]View Case

References

   1. https://governingcouncil.utoronto.ca/sites/default/files/university-tribunal-decisions/Case%20948%20-%20Interim%20Decision.pdf
   2. https://governingcouncil.utoronto.ca/sites/default/files/university-tribunal-decisions/Case%20948%20-%20Sanction.pdf
   3. file:///media/29294
