Case #01-02-08

   DATE: May 17, 2002
   PARTIES: University of Toronto v. V.A. and University of Toronto v.
   A.H.
   Hearing Date(s): March 19, 2002
   Panel Members:
   Julie K. Hannaford, Co-Chair
   Justin Simonelis, Student, Faculty of Arts and Science, St. Michaelâs
   College
   Donna E. Stewart, Faculty member, Faculty of Medicine, Department of
   Psychiatry
   Appearances:
   V. A., in person
   Julie Ralhan, for A.H.
   Linda R. Rothstein, for the University
   Trial Division - s. B.i.1(c) and s. B.i.1(b) of Code â impersonation
   and unauthorized aid â final exam - co-accused tried jointly â separate
   Agreed Statements of Facts â commercial element to impersonation -
   guilty plea from co-accused â separate Joint Submissions with Respect
   to Sanction â differentiation between penalty imposed due to
   aggravating facts and the promotion of rehabilitation â sentence no
   more serious then recommended jointly - Joint Submission on Penalty
   with respect to first Student accepted -Â  Joint Submission on Penalty
   with respect to second Student not accept - five-year suspension for
   first Student; five-year notation on the Studentâs transcript; and
   report to Provost - four-year suspension for second Student; four-year
   notation on the Studentâs transcript; and report to Provost
   Two Students charged under s. B.i.1(c) and s. B.i.1(b) of the Code. The
   charges related to allegations that Student H. impersonated Student A.
   at a final examination. The two co-accused were tried in a combined
   hearing. The parties submitted separate Agreed Statements of Facts
   pertaining to each student. Student A. paid Student H. to write the
   examination in his place. Student A. and Student H. pleaded guilty to
   the charges under s. B.i.1(c) and s. B.i.1(b) of the Code. The parties
   submitted separate Joint Submissions with Respect to Sanction
   pertaining to each student. The University and Student A. agreed that
   the mitigating facts were the Studentâs acknowledgment of guilt and
   expression of remorse when confronted with the allegations; his
   co-operation with the process; and his chronic medical problems. The
   University and Student H. agreed that the mitigating facts were the
   Studentâs acknowledgment of guilt and expression of remorse when
   confronted with the allegations; his co-operation with the process; and
   his concerns about his familyâs financial situation. The Panel found
   that there should be a differentiation between the penalty imposed upon
   the two Students because Student A. was the initiator and had greater
   experience and maturity, and because it would promote rehabilitation
   and an understanding of the seriousness of the offense. The Panel found
   that it did not want to differentiate by imposing a more serious
   sentence than that which was recommended jointly, and stated its
   difficulty in regard to the assurances that there would be sufficient
   deterrence by the reduction in the expected sentences. The Panel
   accepted the Joint Submission on Penalty with Respect to Sanction
   pertaining to Student A. The Panel did not accept the Joint Submission
   on Penalty with Respect to Sanction pertaining to Student H., and
   elected to substitute the sentence. With respect to Student A., the
   Panel imposed a five-year suspension; a five-year notation on the
   Studentâs academic record and transcript; and that a report be issued
   to the Provost. With respect to Student H., the Panel imposed a
   four-year suspension; a four-year notation on the Studentâs academic
   record and transcript; and that a report be issued to the Provost.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/28428
