Case 810

   [1]Case 810 - Motion

DATE:

   August 5, 2016

PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v B.S.

Hearing Date(s):

   January 27, 2016
   June 28, 2016

Panel Members:

   Sana Halwani, Chair
   Maria Rozakis-Adcock, Faculty Member
   Raylesha Parker, Student Member

Appearances:

   Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel
   Ms. B.S., the Student
   Yelena Goren, Counsel for the Student

Witnesses:

   Laura Bisaillon, Instructor of the Course, UTS
   Maryam Saatian, the Studentâs dentist
   Eleanor Irwin, Deanâs Designate, UTS
   Ms. B.S., the Student
   Ms. A.G.K., the Studentâs mother

In Attendance:

   Christopher Lang, Director, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances
   Krista Osbourne, Administrative Assistant, Appeals, Discipline and
   Faculty Grievances
   Tracey Gameiro, Associate Director, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty
   Grievances
   Student charged under s. B.i.1(a), s. B.i.1(d), s. B.i.1(f) and, in the
   alternative, two offences under s. B.i.3(b) . The charges related to
   allegations that the Student submitted a forged Verification of Student
   Illness or Injury form in support of her request for academic
   accommodations for the Course, and that the Student committed
   plagiarism and concocted sources in connection with a paper submitted
   for the Course. The Student did not submit the Paper on time, and in
   her request for extra time and she provided a three medical
   certificates ostensibly from her dentist. The dentist attended the
   hearing and confirmed that she completed the first and third medical
   certificates, but that she had not completed the second certificate and
   had not seen the student on the alleged date.
   At the conclusion of the Course Instructorâs testimony (after she had
   been cross-examined by the Student and the Panel had been given an
   opportunity to ask questions, and she had been excused from the
   hearing), the Student requested to bring the Instructor back for
   further questioning. The Student claimed that she believed she would
   have another opportunity to cross-examine. The Panel ruled that the
   Student had had ample opportunity to question the Instructor, and
   emphasized that the Tribunal process was clearly explained on the
   Tribunal website.
   The Studentâs complaints that she was dealt with unfairly by the Course
   Instructor with respect to the calculation of the late penalty applied
   to the paper was not within the jurisdiction of the Panel. The Panel
   also emphasized that any belief that the Student may have had about
   unfair treatment would not justify either a forged medical note or a
   plagiarized document.
   With respect to the Studentâs allegations of racism or harassment on
   the part of the Course Instructor and the Deanâs Designate, the Panel
   concluded that the discovery of the alleged academic dishonesty was a
   result of the usual investigative process and not a targeting of the
   Student in any way. Moreover, the studentâs allegations were irrelevant
   to the charges or the reason they were laid. The Panel noted that there
   are other avenues for the Student to pursue such allegations.
   With respect to the Studentâs submissions in her argument at the end of
   the hearing that she had been treated unfairly at the decanal level,
   the Panel decided that any such objections should have been raised at
   the outset of the hearing and cannot be dealt with in closing argument
   (pursuant to s. C.i.(a)11 of the Code ) and that, in any case, there
   was no merit to those submissions.
   The Studentâs mother provided evidence of the great stress the Student
   and her family suffered through the process. The Panel emphasized,
   however, that the Student did not address the Panel. As such, she did
   not take responsibility, express remorse for her actions, or provide
   any evidence of circumstances that would mitigate her sanction.
   Majority:
   With respect to the forgery charge, the Panel took into account the
   multiple discrepancies between the second medical certificate and the
   verified first and third certificates, the credible and consistent
   testimony of the dentist who allegedly completed the second
   certificate, and the Studentâs implausible testimony. The Panel
   concluded that the Student was guilty of forgery contrary to s.
   B.i.1(a) of the Code .
   With respect to the plagiarism and concoction charges, the Panel took
   into account the evidence of verbatim or nearly verbatim plagiarism
   gathered by the Deanâs Designate and the Studentâs testimony that she
   was fully aware of the Universityâs policies on plagiarism and proper
   citation procedures. Though the Student claimed that she did not
   knowingly plagiarize or concoct sources, she provided no evidence to
   refute the Universityâs evidence. The Panel concluded that the Student
   was guilty of knowingly representing othersâ ideas as her own and
   failing to properly cite sources in the paper contrary to s. B.i.1(d)
   of the Code and that she knowingly concocted sources contrary to s.
   B.i.1(f) of the Code.
   The University then withdrew the alternative charges.
   At the hearing for sanction, the Student was represented by new
   counsel. Her counsel sought leave to allow the Student to bring a
   motion for an order directing the University to provide the Student
   with a transcript of the first day of the hearing, and asked that the
   sanction hearing be stayed pending resolution of that motion. The Panel
   denied the Studentâs request for leave to bring the motion because the
   hearing date was peremptory on the Student and because she had been
   given numerous opportunities to obtain the transcript well in advance
   of the sanction hearing.
   The Panel took into account the serious nature of the offences in
   determining the appropriate sanction, noting that the offences called
   into question the Studentâs character and that the forged medical
   certificate goes beyond the walls of the University and implicated a
   member of the medical professions. The Panel also noted that the fact
   that the Paper was only worth 15% of the Studentâs grade does not
   detract from the fact that it involved plagiarism and concocted
   sources; on the contrary, that the Student would commit this level of
   dishonest conduct at this stage of her career for a paper worth 15% of
   a final mark is troubling. Similarly, the fact that the Student
   obtained two other authentic medical notes does not detract from the
   fact that she forged a third. Further, the Student refused to
   acknowledge any wrongdoing and showed no remorse, instead blaming
   others for her behaviour. The Panel concluded that the multiple
   offences and the Studentâs behaviour warranted an increase from a
   2-year suspension (currently recommended by the Provost as the
   appropriate sanction where a student has not committed any prior
   offence), to a 3-year suspension. The Panel imposed a grade assignment
   of zero; a 3-year suspension; a 4-year notation on the Studentâs
   academic record and transcript; and that the case be reported to the
   Provost for publication.
   Dissent:
   Prof. Rozakis-Adcock dissented as to the forgery charge, noting that
   the failure of the dentist to keep records of the Studentâs visits, her
   willingness to make false claims as to the Studentâs medical condition,
   and her backdating of the third certificate displayed dishonest
   conduct, which allows for little weight to be placed on her testimony.
   As such, Prof. Rozakis-Adcock did not believe that the University had
   met its burden of proving on a balance of probabilities that the
   Student forged the second medical certificate, and would not find her
   guilty of this charge.
   [2]View Case

References

   1. https://live-the-office-of-the-governing-council.pantheonsite.io/media/13074
   2. file:///media/12916
