Case 1276

   DATE:

   May 16, 2022

   PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v. S.P. ("the Student")

   HEARING DATE:

   April 13, 2022, via Zoom

   PANEL MEMBERS:

   Ms. Sana Halwani, Chair
   Dr. Wendy Rotenberg, Faculty Panel Member
   Ms. Samantha Chang, Student Panel Member

   APPEARANCES:

   Ms. Tina Lie, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg
   Rothstein LLP
   Mr. William Webb, Co-Counsel, Paliare Roland Rothstein Rosenberg LLP

   NOT IN ATTENDANCE:

   The Student

   HEARING SECRETARY:

   Mr. Christopher Lang, Director, Office of Appeals, Discipline and
   Faculty Grievances

   The‚ØStudent‚Øwas charged under s. B.i.1(b) of the‚ØCode of Behaviour
   on Academic Matters, 1995‚Ø(the ‚Code‚) on the basis that she knowingly
   used or possessed an unauthorized aid, or obtained unauthorized
   assistance in a connection with a test. In the alternative, the Student
   was charged under s. B.i.1(d) of the Code on the basis that she
   knowingly represented as her own an idea or expression of an idea or
   work of another in a test. In the further alternative, the Student was
   charged under s. B.i.3(b) of the Code on the basis that he knowingly
   engaged in a form of cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud
   or misrepresentation in order to‚Øobtain academic credit or other
   academic advantage‚Øin connection with a test.

   The Student nor a representative of the Student appeared at the
   hearing. Assistant Discipline Counsel (‚Counsel‚) requested that the
   Panel proceed with the hearing in the absence of the Student. The Panel
   received affidavit evidence that the Student was served with the Notice
   of Electronic Hearing to the Student‚s email address contained in the
   University of Toronto Repository of Student Information (‚ROSI‚). The
   Panel also received affidavit evidence that the Student was contacted
   via their utoronto and gmail accounts, by telephone to the Student‚s
   number listed in ROSI, and by courier to the Student‚s mailing and
   permanent addresses contained in ROSI. The Panel noted that the
   evidence provided did not go so far as to confirm that the Student
   received the latest Notice of Hearing, but it was clear from the
   evidence that the Student was given reasonable notice under the Rules
   of Practice and Procedure (‚Rules‚). As set out in Rule 17 of the
   Rules, where a notice of hearing was given in accordance with this
   rule, and the person does not attend, the panel may proceed in the
   absence of the person. On this basis, the Panel proceeded with the
   hearing in the absence of the Student.

   Regarding the charge under s. B.i.1(b) of the Code, the Panel received
   affidavit evidence of the course coordinator for the course in which
   the test in question was submitted, and the former Director, Faculty
   Governance in the Faculty of Arts and Science (‚Faculty‚) who oversaw
   the Academic Integrity team (‚SAI‚). The course coordinator‚s affidavit
   outlined that she and the instructors of the course found that several
   questions and answers from the test were posted on Chegg.com. The
   course coordinator reported this to SAI. As part of SAI‚s
   investigation, the Faculty obtained data from Chegg.com that showed
   that a subscriber with an email address that, as confirmed by the
   Student Web Services Activity Log (‚Activity Log‚), was the email
   address the Student had on record with the University until January 15,
   2021 posted three questions to Chegg.com during the test window. The
   data from Chegg.com also showed that answers to the posted questions
   were uploaded on the day of the test but only one of the questions was
   answered during the test period. The Activity Log also showed that the
   IP address the Student used to log into the Web Services was the same
   as the IP address of the subscriber who posted the questions to
   Chegg.com. The course coordinator reached out to the Student to book a
   meeting via the Student‚s gmail account, the same addressed used by the
   subscriber, and the Student responded from the same email address. The
   Panel noted that the burden is on the University to prove the charges
   on a balance of probabilities. Based on the evidence presented at the
   hearing, the Panel found that it was more likely than not that the
   Student posted questions and viewed answers on Chegg.com. The Student
   was found guilt on the first charge. The University withdrew the two
   alternative charges.

   In determining sanction, the Panel was asked to consider the Provost‚s
   Guidance on Sanctions, similar cases, and the factors and principles
   relevant to sanctions set out by the Tribunal in University of Toronto
   and Mr. C (Case No. 1976/77-3, November 5, 1976). The Panel noted that
   the Provost‚s Guidance on Sanctions outlines that the Provost will
   request that the Tribunal suspend a student for two years for any
   offence involving academic dishonesty where the student has not
   committee a prior offence, as it was in the case. However, it also
   outlines that the Provost will request that the Tribunal recommend that
   a student be expelled where the student has submitted academic work
   that was purchased. Counsel argued that this case has a significant
   aggravating factor due to the use of a commercial service. The Panel
   noted that the similar cases presented by Counsel varied; however,
   penalties ranged from two to three years for student without prior
   offences, penalties where the commercial aspect was not proven tended
   to be on the lower two-year end, and where a student had prior
   offences, the penalty tended to be on the higher three-year end of the
   range. The Panel noted that the commercial aspect was proven, and this
   is an important consideration for penalty. Regarding the factors
   relevant to sanction, the Panel noted that the Student had not
   participated at any stage of the process, and therefore, had not shown
   any remorse, nor presented any character evidence and did not raised
   any mitigating or extenuating factors to warrant a more lenient
   sanction. There was some correspondence from the Student that she was
   experiencing family issues, mental health issues and hardships related
   to Covid-19. However, because the Panel did not have any details of the
   situation, and the University was not able to test those statements
   because the Student did not attend, the Panel afforded the mitigating
   factors identified in the email limited weight. However, the Panel did
   take into consideration the stress caused by the Covid-19 pandemic.
   With respect to the nature of the offence, the Panel noted that this
   offence is very serious because there is an element of deliberation and
   purposeful dishonesty in carrying it out. Regarding the need to deter
   others, the Panel echoed the sentiments of the Panel in University of
   T.J. (Case No. 1102, November 5, 2021) ‚cheating on exams must always
   be denounced and deterred in order to protect the academic integrity of
   the University. In today‚s online world, it is all too easy for
   students to find new outlets for unauthorized assistance. Students must
   understand that this kind of misconduct will have serious
   repercussions, so that they will be dissuaded from the temptation to
   cheat when under pressure.‚ The Panel imposed the following sanctions:
   a final grade of zero in the course, a three-year suspension, a four
   year notation on the transcript, and a report to the Provost for
   publication.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/30502
