Case 1337

FILE:

   Case # 1337 (2022-2023)

DATE:

   November 9, 2022

PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v. B.H. (‚the Student‚)

HEARING DATE(S):

   July 27, 2022, via Zoom

PANEL MEMBERS:

   Nader Hasan, Chair

   Professor Ernest Lam, Faculty Panel Member

   David Allens, Student Panel Member

APPEARANCES:

   Tina Lie, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg
   Rothstein LLP

   Joseph Berger, Co-Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg Rothstein LLP

   Justin Nathens, Student Representative, Downtown Legal Services

   The Student

HEARING SECRETARY:

   Nadia Bruno, Special Projects Officer, Office of Appeals, Discipline
   and Faculty Grievances

   The Student was charged with one count under section B.i.1(d) of the
   Code for knowingly representing as their own idea or expression of an
   idea or work of another in a term test.¬  Alternatively, they were
   charged with one count of knowingly obtaining unauthorized assistance
   in connection with the term test, contrary to section B.i.1(b) of the
   Code, and with one count for knowingly engaging in a form of cheating,
   academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or misrepresentation not
   otherwise described in the Code in order to obtain academic credit or
   other academic advantage of any kind in connection with the term test,
   contrary to section B.i.3(b) of the Code.

   The parties submitted an Agreed Statement of Facts (‚ASF‚), which
   included the Student‚s admission that they had obtained unauthorized
   assistance in connection with the term test. Based on the ASF, the
   University‚s Student Web Service (‚SWS‚) Activity Log showed that on
   the day of the term test, the Student had logged into SWS from an IP
   address that was the same IP address logged by Chegg.com and associated
   with the Student‚s email address. This email address posted the
   questions from the term test. The Student was a Chegg.com subscriber.
   During their meeting with the Dean‚s Designate, the Student denied
   submitting the questions to Chegg.com. But they subsequently admitted
   to having posted the questions to Chegg.com and having requested,
   obtained, and used Chegg.com‚s answers to the questions for use on the
   test. The Panel accepted the Student‚s guilty plea and found them
   guilty of one count of knowingly using or possessing an unauthorized
   aid or obtaining unauthorized assistance, contrary to section B.i.1(b)
   of the Code. The University withdrew the other charges.

   Additionally, the parties submitted a Joint Submission on Penalty
   (‚JSP‚), which the Panel found reasonable. It also found the
   recommended sanctions appropriate in the circumstances. In determining
   sanction, the Panel considered the seriousness of the offence and the
   mitigating factors. According to the Panel, despite the initial denial,
   the Student eventually cooperated in the process and entered into the
   ASF and JSP, thereby showing insight and remorse.

   The Panel imposed the following sanctions: a grade of zero in the
   course; a suspension of two years and four months; a notation on the
   Student's transcript until their graduation; and a report to the
   Provost for publication with the Student‚s name withheld .
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/30784
