Report 411

DATE:

   November 26, 2020

PARTIES:

   J.H. (the âStudentâ) v. University of Toronto Faculty of Applied
   Science and Engineering

HEARING DATE:

   November 2, 2020, via Zoom

Chair:

   Ms. Sara Faherty

Appearances:

For the Student Appellant:

   Mr. J.H. (the âStudentâ)

For the Faculty of Applied Science and Engineering:

   Professor Thomas Coyle, Vice-Dean, Undergraduate Studies, Faculty of
   Applied Science and Engineering

   This appealÂ stems fromÂ theÂ Academic Appeals Board of the Faculty of
   Applied ScienceÂ andÂ EngineeringÂ (âAABâ)Â decision toÂ denyÂ the
   Studentâs request for an expungement of his transcript. The Student is
   seeking complete expungementÂ of his transcript, removal of any
   evidence thatÂ heÂ was ever enrolled at the University, and removal
   ofÂ sevenÂ previously grantedÂ Student Retroactive Withdrawals (âWDRâ).

   TheÂ AABÂ determined that althoughÂ it wasÂ sympathetic to the
   StudentâsÂ circumstances,Â it wasÂ unable to expunge a student record
   and alternatively, granted theÂ WDRsÂ for all remaining courses on his
   transcriptÂ so that no gradesÂ or credits remain. Furthermore, the
   Division offered to provide a letter to the Student to include with
   hisÂ applicationsÂ to otherÂ institutionsÂ explaining that the Faculty
   granted him a late withdrawal from all courses and that he retains no
   credits from the University.

   TheÂ motivation for the request to expunge his transcript isÂ the
   Studentâs desire to start his post-secondary academic career over again
   at a film school.Â He has been in touch with variousÂ schoolsÂ and he
   would like to apply as a freshman, rather than a transfer student. His
   eligibility as a freshman will determine how manyÂ yearsÂ he can
   spendÂ at the institution he wishes to attend; two vs fourÂ years.Â The
   Student prefers to attend for a full four yearsÂ and feels his
   admission chances are better if he is considered a freshman.Â The
   Student relied onÂ persuasiveÂ evidence thatÂ he was pressured to
   enrollÂ in the Faculty of Applied Science and EngineeringÂ and treated
   harshly resultingÂ in the Student being mentally unwell.Â The Student
   reports thatÂ he was subject to physical and emotional abuseÂ which
   eventually led to an incident where police and emergency services were
   involved. This incident ended the StudentâsÂ term,Â and his transcript
   showsÂ WDR for seven coursesÂ for the Winter term of that
   year.Â TheÂ Student states that the policies of the institutions he
   wishes to attend will treat him as aÂ transfer studentÂ if he has any
   University level courses completed at another institution, however, the
   CommitteeÂ notedÂ that theÂ submissionsÂ of the StudentÂ wereÂ not
   supported by his communications with thoseÂ institutions. Ultimately,
   those institutionsÂ indicated that they would not treat the Student
   like a transfer student if he did not earn a credit at another
   University.

   The CommitteeÂ found thatÂ the Student is asking for a remedy
   thatÂ cannot be reasonably granted even if the Committee is able to
   protect the Student from academic consequences of his
   pastÂ enrollments, the Committee cannotÂ require the Division
   toÂ remove all traces from the Studentâs record.Â TheÂ Governing
   Councilâs Transcript PolicyÂ requires that an academic transcript âmust
   includeâ¦an enrollment history, which traces chronologically the
   studentâsÂ participation at the University.âÂ The Committee found that
   the removal of evidence that a course was attempted would be to falsify
   the academic record. The University can remove record of a studentâs
   academicÂ performance,Â butÂ it cannotÂ undoÂ the fact that the Student
   was enrolled in courses at the University. Further, in theÂ Statement
   Concerning Change of Student Personal Information in Official Academic
   RecordsÂ outlines that âthe accuracy of studentsâÂ academic records is
   fundamental to the integrity of the Universityâs academic
   mission.âÂ The Student is requesting that the CommitteeÂ direct
   theÂ DivisionÂ toÂ remove any record of the Student at the
   UniversityÂ however,Â the Committee found that the University cannot
   erase and replaceÂ its records depending on the benefit it mayÂ provide
   the former student.Â The integrity of the academic record must
   beÂ maintained and cannot beÂ falsified;Â therefore,Â expungement is
   not an appropriateÂ remedy.Â It would be inappropriate for
   theÂ Committee to directÂ the Division to grant a remedy that violates
   the integrity of its records.Â TheÂ Division has providedÂ a
   remedyÂ that has virtually the same impact as expunging the
   recordsÂ which was a very generousÂ application ofÂ its policies.Â The
   Committee affirms the decision of the AAB. Appeal dismissed.
   [1]View Report

References

   1. file:///media/29531
