Report #352

   DATE: December 8, 2010
   PARTIES: Z.M.Â  (the Student) v. UTSC
   Hearing Date(s): November 16, 2010
   Committee Members:
   Professor Markus Dubber, Chair
   Professor Christina Kramer
   Natalie Melton
   Professor Andrea Sass-Kortsak
   Gregory West
   Appearances:
   For the Student Appellant:
   Z.M. (the Student)
   The Student Appellantâs Father
   For the UTSC:
   Professor Mark Schmuckler
   UTSC â extension of time to write an examination â late withdrawal
   without academic penalty â medical illness â UTSC Student Medical
   Certificate â morning examÂ  â afternoon exam â significant medical
   emergency â UTSC provisions governing special consideration, petitions,
   and appeals (s. B.7.) â OSAP eligibility â medical certificate accepted
   by UTSC â face value of the medical certificate â fair application of
   policies regarding late withdrawal without academic penalty â
   unanticipated circumstances ââ impossibility of original remedyÂ  â
   compelling evidence of a significant medical emergency â grade vacated
   â retroactive withdrawal without academic penalty â appeal allowed
   Appeal of a decision to deny the Student his petition for an extension
   of time to write a final exam. The Student requested to the Committee
   in the appeal the remedy of a late withdrawal without academic penalty
   from the course where the petition for an extension of time to write
   the final exam was denied. The Student fell seriously ill on the
   morning of the exam for the course. The Student retrieved a UTSC
   Student Medical Certificate at noon indicating that he was unable to
   fulfil academic obligations. The Student then took an afternoon exam,
   doing well enough to earn a grade of A in the course. The Committee
   unanimously found that the Student provided compelling evidence of a
   significant medical or other emergency in support of his request to
   defer the morning examination as required by the UTSC provisions
   governing âspecial consideration, petitions, and appealsâ or s. B.7.
   The Committee rejected the UTSC Subcommitteeâs submissions regarding
   the fact that the Student had taken an exam later in the day and done
   well on it. The Committee found that the Student could not be
   reasonably penalized for his decision to take the afternoon exam
   against a doctorâs advice. The Committee held that UTSC medical
   certificates are taken by the University at face value and are not
   challenged. The Committee did not consider the submissions of the
   Student that the possible effect of taking his exams on his OSAP
   eligibility relevant to the appeal. The Committee found the remedy of
   late withdrawal without academic penalty appropriate in this case. The
   Committee noted that UTSC and the University of Toronto are predisposed
   against granting late withdrawals without academic penalties. The
   Committee found, though, that fair application of the UTSC policy
   required that a late withdrawal without academic penalty be given to
   the Student as UTSC did not dispute anything in the medical
   certificate. The Committee noted the exceptional nature of the
   Studentâs case in that the Student sought a late withdrawal without
   penalty only because the original remedy of taking an exam at a later
   date had become impossible because the Student had already retaken the
   course successfully. The Committee found that the impossibility of the
   original remedy was not due to failure on the Studentâs part. The
   Committee concluded that the Studentâs circumstances were not something
   that should have been anticipated. The Committee vacated the grade in
   the course and was retroactively allowed to withdraw from the course.
   Appeal allowed.
   [1]View Report

References

   1. file:///media/12673
