THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
THE GOVERNING COUNCIL

Report# 352 or the Academic Appeals Committee
December 8,2010
To the Academic noard
University or Toronto
Your Committee reports that it held a hearing on Tuesday, November 16, 2010, at which
the following members were present:
Professor Jvlarkus Dubber, Chair
Prnfessor Christina Kramer
Ms Natalie Melton
Professor Andrea Sass-Kortsak
lv!r. Gregory West
Secretary: Ms. Natalie Ramtahal, Coordinator, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty
Grievances
Appearances:
For the Student Appellant:

the Student Appellant
the Student Appellant's Father
For the University of Toronto at Scarborough (UTSC):

Professor Mark Schmuckler

I.

Appeal

The Student appeals a decision ofUTSC's Subcommittee on Academic Appeals, dated
March 21, 2010, denying his petition for an extension of time to write the final exam in
the 2009 Summer Session course BGYC I 3H3. Before your Committee, the Student
requests the remedy of late withdrawal without academic penalty from this course.

II.

Fncts

The Student asked for, and was granted, a deferral of the final exmn in this course, along
with another Summer Tenn course (GGRAOJHJ). Both deferred exams were scheduled

for December 4, 2009, the exam for BGYC l 3H3 at 9:30am, and that for GGRA03H3 al 2
p.rn.
According to the Student, he could not take the exam in 11GYCI JHJ on December 4,
2009, because he fell seriously ill on the morning of the exam. He went lo the doctor al
noon. The doctor filled out a UTSC Student Medical Certificate indicating that the
Student suffered from nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea and that the Student was "unable lo
fulfill academic obligations."
Nonetheless, the Student then went ahead and took the alternoon exam in GGRA03H3.
He did well on this exmn, well enough to earn a grade of A for the course. Not having
taken the final exmn in BGYCl3H3, which counted for 60% of the final course grade, he
received an F (27) for the course; he lrnd earned a C+ (68) on the midterm, which counted
for 40% of the course,
On December 18, 2009, the Student requested an extension of time to write the final
exam in BGYC I 3H3, which was denied on January 4, 20 I 0, He appealed this decision to
the Subcommittee on Academic Appeals and enrolled in the same course for the Winter
Term, according lo the Student, "as a precautionary measure" since he needed the course
to graduate by June 2010 and had been informed that his appeal would be considered in
mid-March, alter the course enrolment deadline. He finished the course, took the exam,
and received a final grade ofB-, He graduated in June 2010.
Re fore your Committee, the Student, for the first time seeks the remedy of late
withdrawal without academic penalty because the remedy he originally sought, taking the
exam at a later dale, is now pointless. He took the course again, sat the fornl exam, and
passed the course,

III.

Decision

Your Committee unanimously finds that the Student provided "compelling evidence ofa
significant medical or other emergency" in support of his request to defer the December
4, 2009 rescheduled final exam in flGYC13H3, as required by UTSC's provisions
governing "Special consideration, petitions and appeals" (s. B.7.) The rationale for the
denial or his deferral petition by UTSC's Subcommittee on Standing makes reference to
the lack of"compelling evidence of treatment that [the Student] received for [hisl
illness." The Student, however, since has produced a second note from the same doctor
that, in addition to restating the diagnosis indicated on the UTSC Sh1dent Medical
Certificate of December 4, 2009 in greater detail, sets out the treatment prescribed (fluids,
rest, BRAT diet, Gravol as needed).
Doth in the rationale for the initial denial by the UTSC Subcommittee on Standing and at
the oral hearing, much weight was placed on the Student's having not only laking an
exam later in the clay but having done well on it. Your Committee finds that the Student
could not reasonably be penalized for his decision to take the atlernoon exam against the

2

doctor's advice, particularly because the UTSC representative at the ornl hearing clarified
that UTSC takes the UTSC Student Medical Certificate of December 4, 2009 at face
value and does not challenge its reliability or verifiability, There was also much
discussion of the Student's Ontario Student Assistance Program (OSAP) standing, The
Student argued, supported with evidence including a letter from an Assistant Registrar at
UTSC's Pinancial Aid Office, that one of his reasons for taking the afternoon exam on
December 4 despite his illness was that he was worried about retaining his OSAP
eligibility. The Division responded that "there is no current threat to your being in good
status with OSAP" (as stated in the decision by the UTSC Subcommittee on Academic
Appeals), Yom Committee does not consider the question of the possible effect of the
Student's taking one or both exams on his OSAP eligibility relevant to the disposition of
the case,
Moving on to the question ofremedy, your Committee unanimously finds that late
withdrawal without academic penalty is appropriate given that the original remedy sought
by the Student, a deferred exam, is now beside the point; there is not only the significant
passage of time (several months since he took the course), but more specifically in this
case, the facts that the Student has taken the course again, including the final exam,
received a grade (ofB-) for the course, graduated, and joined the work force.
Your Committee appreciates that UTSC in particular, and the university as a whole, is
strongly predisposed against granting the remedy of late withdrawal without academic
penalty, a predisposition reflected in policies throughout the University of Toronto,
including but not limited to UTSC. Yam Committee, however, is charged with the fair
application of all university policies, including those that do not on their face provide for
exceptions, however generally worded, Finality is crncial for the proper functioning of
any institution, including large academic institutions, But finality is not the only value,
and rnles designed to serve it are not exempt from scrntiny of their application in light of
faimess and consistency.
Your Commiltee finds that the fair application of the policies regarding late withdrawal
without academic penalty in the present case requires that an exception be made. The
present case is exceptional in several respects, The Student seeks the remedy of late
withdrawal without academic penalty only because the remedy originally sought has
become irrelevant. The obsolescence of the original remedy is not due to any neglect or
failure on the student's part. On the contrary, it is because he took the initiative to ensme
that he would complete his program as planned, and be able to graduate in a timely
fashion, He already repeated the course, wrote the exam, received credit for it, and
graduated, The present case does not involve an expected or foreseeable circumstance
that the Student could have taken into account when he requested, and received, a first
deferral of the exam in question or, for that matter, at any time before the drop date, He
deferred the exam once and then fell ill on the day of the rescheduled exam, It cannot be
said that this course of events was something the student should have anticipated. To
characterize the onset of a serious illness on the clay of an exmn as foreseeable would
produce precisely the unfairness that resulted in the present case: to penalize a student

3

for his physical inability to take an exam, assuming of course that "compelling evidence
of a significant medical ... emergency" is present, as determined by your Commillee.
The appeal is allowed. The grade of r in the 2009 Summer Session course J3GYC 13113 is
vacated, and !he Student is allowed retroactively lo withdraw from !his course without
academic penally.

4

