Report 383

DATE:

   June 1, 2016

PARTIES:

   Ms. P.M. (the Student) v. the School of Graduate Studies (SGS)

Hearing Date(s):

   May 25, 2016

Committee Members:

   Professor Andrew Green, Chair
   Professor Hugh Gunz
   Mr. Ridwan Olow

Secretaries:

   Mr. Christopher Lang, Director, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty
   Grievances
   Ms. Krista Osbourne, Administrative Assistant, Appeals, Discipline and
   Faculty Grievances

Appearances:

For the Student Appellant:

   Ms. P.M., the Appellant (âthe Studentâ)

For SGS:

   Mr. Robert A. Centa, Counsel
   Professor Luc De Nil, Vice Dean, SGS
   Ms. Emma Thatcher, Associate Director, Graduate Affairs, SGS

   Appeal from the SGSâs decision to terminate the Studentâs registration
   in her Program. The Student failed two courses in the Department of
   Civil Engineering, and pursuant to the Departmentâs policies, the
   Department recommended that the Student withdraw from the Program and
   the SGS terminated her registration. The Student appealed the
   termination to the Graduate Academic Appeals Board. The GAAB dismissed
   the appeal, noting that despite its sympathy for the Studentâs personal
   and familial difficulties, her failed courses (one of which had been
   appealed at three levels; see Report #379) justified the Departmentâs
   recommendation for termination.

   The Student then appealed to the Academic Appeals Committee. The
   Committee emphasized that its role was to decide whether the GAAB
   decision upholding the termination was reasonable, and not to revisit
   the failures of the courses themselves. The Student adduced new medical
   evidence that had not been before the GAAB, but the Committee concluded
   that neither the SGS nor the GAAB would have come to a different
   conclusion if they had had this information; because of its limited
   nature, the new medical evidence did not support a finding that the
   GAAB decision was unreasonable. The Committee noted that it may, in
   some cases, be appropriate for the SGS to take into account the
   performance of a student in courses taken subsequent to the events
   central to the appeal; a complete exclusion of such information would
   be unfair to the students and may in some cases lead to an unreasonable
   termination decision. However, in this case, the Committee concluded
   that even taking into account the Studentâs academic success following
   her failures the GAAB decision was not unreasonable.

   The Committee concluded that the SGS followed a fair process in making
   its decision, citing the warnings provided to the Student and
   opportunities she had to provide information to the SGS and to appeal
   the underlying marks. It was reasonable for the GAAB to uphold the SGS
   decision based on the fact that the Student was unsuccessful in her
   appeals related to one of the failed courses and that she did not
   appeal the second course. Appeal dismissed.
   [1]View Report

References

   1. file:///media/12629
