Report 333

DATE:

   May 15, 2009

PARTIES:

   Mr. A. M.Â  (the Student) v. UTSC

Hearing Date(s):

   April 23, 2009

Committee Members:

   Professor Ed Morgan, Chair
   Professor Elizabeth Cowper
   Professor Michael Marrus
   Ms. Anna Okorokov
   Ms. Maureen Somerville

Appearances:

For the Student Appellant:

   Mr. A.M. (the Student)

For the University of Toronto at Scarborough:

   Vice-Dean Professor John Scherk

   Request to write a deferred examination. The Student changed his
   request after submitting his Notice of Appeal and asked the Committee
   for late withdrawal without academic penalty. The Student had twice
   been granted permission to write the deferred examination. The Student
   reenrolled and passed the course in a subsequent term; he now sought
   late withdrawal to remove the failing grade from his academic record.
   The Committee found that it had no authority to hear new requests that
   had not been submitted to the Faculty and the Student was asked to
   restrict his submissions to the request to take a deferred examination.
   The Student submitted a doctorâs note from a medical practitioner in
   India indicating that he suffered from male pattern baldness. The
   Committee found that there were inadequate medical grounds for seeking
   permission to write the deferred exam. The Committee found that despite
   the Studentâs claim that he was traumatized by this condition, no
   psychological or psychiatric report was submitted, and nothing in the
   medical file tendered indicated that there were psychological
   ramifications to his condition. The Committee observed that the
   Studentâ condition did not ordinarily impact on a personâs ability to
   take an examination in a university course. The Committee considered
   that the Student had failed on each occasion to show up at the
   appointed examination time and that the Faculty had been more than
   generous in accommodating his various requests. Appeal dismissed.
   [1]View Report

References

   1. file:///media/12583
