Case #04-05-01

   DATE: September 20, 2004
   PARTIES: University of Toronto v. Ms. A .
   Hearing Date(s): August 18, 2004
   Panel Members:
   Melanie Aitken, Co-Chair
   Scott Browning, Faculty Panel Member
   Trisha Sankarsingh, Student Panel Member
   Appearances:
   Jacqueline Freeman for Ms. A.
   Lily I. Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel, for the University
   Trial Division - s. B.i.1(d) of Code â plagiarism â research paper
   copied from internet â guilty plea â Agreed Statement of Facts â Joint
   Submission on Penalty â significance of guilty plea and Joint
   Submission on Penalty -Â  sensitivity to personal circumstances and
   future employment applications â recommended starting date of
   suspension not appropriate - appreciation of severity of matter as a
   graduate student and deterrence message â Joint Submission on Penalty
   accepted with modification â grade assignment of zero for course;
   one-year suspension commencing from the date of acknowledgement of the
   offence; two-year notation on transcript; and report to Provost with
   the recommendation that the notice recognize that the suspension
   commenced on the date of acknowledgment of responsibility for offence
   Student charged under s. B.i.1(d), and alternatively, under s. B.i.3(b)
   of the Code. The charges related to allegations that the Student
   submitted a research paper plagiarized from the internet. The Student
   pleaded guilty to the charge under s. B.i.1(d) of the Code. The parties
   submitted an Agreed Statement of Facts. The Panel accepted the
   Studentâs guilty plea. The parties submitted a Joint Submission with
   Respect to Sanction. At the time of the hearing the Student was
   enrolled at the teacherâs college of another university. The Panel
   found the Studentâs guilty plea, and the fact that the recommendations
   as to sanction were joint, to be significant. The Panel found that the
   recommendations reflected the gravity and nature of the offence. The
   Panel stated that it was sensitive to the Studentâs personal
   circumstances and her concern to be able to move forward professionally
   and academically when she submited her University academic transcript
   with job applications. The Panel accepted the Joint Submission with
   Respect to Sanction, subject to one modification. The Panel found that
   the recommended starting date of the suspension was not appropriate,
   both from the perspective of the Studentâs appreciation, as a graduate
   student, of the severity of the matter, and the deterrence message to
   the community. The Panel found that the recommended one-year suspension
   should not commence until the date of the Studentâs acknowledgement of
   her responsibility for her conduct, and that the notice of the decision
   should expressly refer to that fact. The Panel imposed a grade of zero
   in the course; a one-year suspension commencing from the date of the
   Studentâs acknowledgement of the offence; a two-year notation on the
   Studentâs academic record and transcript; and that a report be issued
   to the Provost with a recommendation that the notice expressly refer to
   the fact that the suspension commenced on the date that the Student
   acknowledged her responsibility.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12989
