Case 1147

   DATE: November 11, 2021
   PARTIES: University of Toronto v. X.Y. ("the Student")

   HEARING DATE: October 5, 2021, via Zoom

   Panel Members:
   Mr. Andrew Bernstein, Chair
   Dr. Pascal van Lieshout, Faculty Panel Member
   Ms. Julie Farmer, Student Panel Member

   Appearances:
   Ms. Tina Lie, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg
   Rothstein LLP

   Not in Attendance:
   The Student

   Hearing Secretary:
   Ms. Carmelle Salomon-Labbe, Associate Director, Office of Appeals,
   Discipline and Faculty Grievances

   The Student was charged underÂ s. B.i.1(b) of theâ¯Code of Behaviour on
   Academic Matters, 1995â¯(the âCodeâ) on the basis thatÂ the
   StudentÂ knowingly obtained unauthorized assistance inÂ connection
   withÂ a final exam. In the alternative, the Student was charged
   underÂ s.Â B.i.1(d)Â of theÂ CodeÂ on the basis that the
   StudentÂ knowinglyÂ represented asÂ theirÂ own an idea or expression of
   an idea or work of another in the final exam. In the further
   alternative, the Student was charged under s. B.i.3(b) of the Code on
   the basis that the Student knowinglyÂ engaged in a form of cheating,
   academic dishonesty or misconduct,Â fraudÂ or misrepresentation in
   order to obtain academic credit or other academic advantageÂ in
   connection with a final exam.

   Neither the Student nor a legal representative of the Student appeared
   at the hearing.â¯Assistant DisciplineÂ CounselÂ (âCounselâ)Â asked the
   PanelÂ to proceedÂ with the hearing in the absence of the
   StudentÂ pursuant to rule 17 of the TribunalâsÂ Rules of Practice and
   ProcedureÂ (âRulesâ) and section 7 of theÂ Statutory Powers Procedure
   Act.Â The Panel noted that these provisions
   requireÂ theÂ ProvostÂ toÂ establish that the University took
   reasonable steps to notify the Student of the
   chargesÂ andÂ theÂ hearing.Â The Panel further noted that
   theÂ UniversityâsÂ Policy on Official Correspondence with
   StudentsÂ provides that students enrolled at the University are
   responsible for maintaining current contact information in the
   Repository of Student Information (âROSIâ) database inclusive of a
   valid University-issued email address and a valid postal address.
   RuleÂ 9Â of the Rules provides that service can beÂ effectedÂ on a
   studentÂ byÂ courier to theirÂ mailing address or viaÂ email
   toÂ theÂ studentâs email address as recorded in ROSI.Â The Panel noted
   that the original hearing date for this matter was adjourned due to
   unforeseen circumstances that prevented the Chair ofÂ the previously
   assignedÂ PanelÂ fromÂ attendingÂ theÂ originalÂ hearingÂ date. The
   matter was adjourned to no specified dateÂ and was set down before a
   newÂ panel of the Tribunal.Â The UniversityÂ provided evidence that the
   Student had been served atÂ herÂ ROSI-listed email address with
   theâ¯chargesâ¯andÂ bothÂ noticesÂ of hearing.Â Furthermore,
   theÂ University provided evidence thatÂ CounselÂ sent numerous emails
   toÂ theÂ Student. In a further attempt to reach the Student, Counselâs
   office contacted the Student at the telephone number listed in ROSI and
   received a recordingÂ that indicated that the cellular number had not
   been assigned.Â Counselâs office also couriered materials to the
   Studentâs ROSI-provided mailing address, but the courier company
   advised that there was no one at that address by the Studentâs
   name.Â The Panel noted that there was evidence that the Student had
   accessed herÂ email account after service of theâ¯chargesÂ and
   attendedÂ the Deanâs Designate meeting, however, at one point she
   stopped accessing her email and itÂ wasÂ unlikely that
   sheÂ wasÂ actually awareÂ of the time or date of the hearing.Â The
   Panel noted thatÂ whether or notÂ the Student actually received
   noticeÂ is not a question it needs to answer.Â The Panel further noted
   that the Student has an obligation to keep her information up to date
   in ROSI and check her e-mail, and that herÂ failure to do so didÂ not
   affect the validity ofÂ the notice, which was properly provided in
   accordance with the Rules. TheÂ PanelÂ therefore ordered that the
   hearing should proceed in the Studentâs absence.

   Regarding the charges laid under s.Â B.i.1(b)Â of theÂ Code,
   theÂ PanelÂ received testimonial evidence of theÂ Deanâs DesignateÂ and
   the Professor who taught the courseÂ for which the final exam in
   question was submitted.Â The ProfessorÂ testified that she considered
   severalÂ aspectsÂ of the Studentâs answers to be suspicious and noted
   that the answers were the same or very similarÂ to other students.Â The
   Deanâs Designate testified thatÂ the five other students involved
   subsequently admitted to the offence of
   receivingÂ unauthorizedÂ assistance.Â The Panel noted thatÂ the
   Studentâs answers on theÂ examÂ had obviousÂ similaritiesÂ with at
   least some of the five other studentsâ answers;
   theÂ ProfessorÂ testified that thereÂ wasÂ a myriad of ways that the
   students couldÂ haveÂ approachedÂ each question to arrive at an answer,
   which strongly suggestedÂ that the similarities were not a coincidence;
   and the Student made the exact same random mistakes as other
   students.Â The Panel concluded that the evidence in this case was more
   than sufficient to meet the balance of probabilities thresholdÂ and
   therefore, it concluded that theÂ Student knowinglyÂ obtained
   unauthorized assistance in connection with the final exam, contrary to
   section B.i.1(b) of the Code.

   In determining sanction,â¯the Panel consideredÂ the factors set out in
   the decisionÂ University of Toronto and Mr. C.Â (Case No. 1976/77-3,
   November 5, 1976).Â Furthermore, the Panel consideredÂ various cases
   submitted by CounselÂ that were consistent with the offence committed
   by the Student.Â After consideration of these cases, the Panel ordered
   theÂ penalty requested by the University. However,Â the Panel adjusted
   the suspension to commence at the beginning of the Fall 2021
   semesterÂ soÂ in the eventÂ thatÂ the Student elects to return in the
   Fall of 2023, she would be permitted to do so. The Panel noted that
   this penalty is consistent with the authoritiesÂ from theÂ Tribunal
   which ordered similar penalties for a first offence.Â The Panel agreed
   thatÂ consistencyÂ isÂ an important value in assessingÂ penalties and
   recognized the importance of academic integrity and
   honesty.Â CounselÂ argued that the Studentâs failure to attend
   reflected a lack of contrition and is therefore an aggravating factor.
   While the Panel agreed that the Studentâs non-attendance meant
   thatÂ itÂ had no evidence of mitigating factors, it did not agree that
   the non-attendance itselfÂ was an aggravating factor.Â Furthermore, the
   Panel noted that it was not appropriate for it to draw the inference
   that the non-attendance reflectedÂ a lack of contrition. The
   PanelÂ imposedÂ the following sanctions:Â a final grade of zero in the
   course;Â aÂ two-yearÂ suspension;Â aÂ three-yearÂ notation on
   transcript; andÂ aÂ report to the Provost for publication.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/30107
