Case No. 948
THE UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
IN THE MATTER OF charges of academic dishonesty filed on September 14, 2017 and
revised on June 29, 2018
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic
Matters, 1995,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Act, 1971, S.O. 1971, c. 56 as am. S.O.
1978, c. 88
B E T W E E N:
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
- and S

W

(the “Student”)

REASONS FOR DECISION ON SANCTION

Sanction Hearing Date: January 17, 2020
Members of the Panel:
Mr. Nader Hasan, Chair
Professor Pascal van Lieshout, Faculty Panel Member
Ms. Yusra Qazi, Student Panel Member
Appearances:
Ms. Lily Harmer and Ms. Lauren Pearce, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland
Rosenberg Rothstein LLP
Mr. Lorne Sabsay, Sabsay Lawyers, Counsel for the Student
Hearing Secretary:
Mr. Christopher Lang, Director, Office of Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances
Not In Attendance:
The Student

2
A. Charges and Hearing
1.

The Trial Division of the Tribunal held a hearing to address the following charges (the

“Charges”) brought by the University of Toronto (the “University”) against the Student under the
Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters (the “Code”):
1. In or about April or May 2015, you did knowingly forge or in any other way alter
or falsify an academic record, and/or did utter, circulate or make use of such forged,
altered or falsified record, whether the record be in print or electronic form, namely
an Official Transcript from Simon Fraser University submitted with an application
for admission to the University, contrary to section B.I.3(a) of the Code.
2. In the alternative to paragraph 1, in or about April or May 2015, you did knowingly
engage in a form of cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or
misrepresentation not otherwise described in the Code, in order to obtain academic
credit or other academic advantage of any kind, by submitting an Official Transcript
from Simon Fraser University submitted with an application for admission to the
University which was forged, altered or falsified, contrary to section B.I.3(b) of the
Code.
3. On or about April 7, 2016, you did knowingly forge or in any other way alter or
falsify an academic record, and/or did utter, circulate or make use of such forged,
altered or falsified document, whether the record be in print or electronic form,
namely the following course outlines from Simon Fraser University which you
submitted to the Transcript Centre at the University, contrary to section B.I.3(a)1 of
the Code:
i. ECON 103 – 4 Principles of Microeconomics
ii. EASC 104 – 3 Geohazards – Earth in Turmoil

1

The Charges that were served on the Student erroneously made reference to section B.i.3(b) instead of
section B.i.3(a). During the hearing on July 17, 2018, the University identified this error and verbally
corrected it on the record on consent of the parties. The Tribunal agreed at that time that Charge 3 should
be amended to include the correct reference (i.e., section B.i.3(a) instead of section B.i.3(b)).

3
iii. MATH 157 – 3 Calculus I for the Social Sciences
iv. ECON 105 – 4 Principles of Macroeconomics
v. ECON 290 – 3 Canadian Microeconomic Policy
4. In the alternative to paragraph 3, on or about April 7, 2016, you did knowingly
engage in a form of cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or
misrepresentation not otherwise described in the Code, in order to obtain academic
credit or other academic advantage of any kind, by submitting forged, altered or
falsified course outlines from Simon Fraser University to the Transcript Centre at
the University, contrary to Section B. I.3(b) of the Code, as follows:
i. ECON 103 – 4 Principles of Microeconomics
ii. EASC 104 – 3 Geohazards – Earth in Turmoil
iii. MATH 157 – 3 Calculus I for the Social Sciences
iv. ECON 105 – 4 Principles of Macroeconomics
v. ECON 290 – 3 Canadian Microeconomic Policy
2.

In sum, the Charges allege that the Student knowingly forged or knowingly made use of

two sets of forged documents: (1) a Simon Fraser University (“SFU”) Transcript, and (2) various
SFU course outlines (collectively, the “Forged Documents”)
B. Liability
3.

On August 23, 2019, this Panel found the Student guilty of two counts of knowingly

altering or falsifying a document or evidence required by the University, or uttering, circulating or
making use of such forged, altered or falsified document, contrary to section B.i.3(a) of the Code.
The Reasons for Decision on Finding are reported at S.W., Case No. 948 (August 23, 2019).2

2

Re S.W. Case No. 948 (August 23, 2019), available at:
https://governingcouncil.utoronto.ca/sites/default/files/university-tribunal-decisions/Case%20948.pdf

4
4.

In light of the Tribunal’s findings on the first and third charges, the Provost withdrew the

second and fourth charges.
C. Sanction
5.

On January 17, 2020, the Panel convened to hear submissions on sanction. The Provost

sought an order imposing the following sanctions on the Student:
(a)

that the Student be immediately be suspended from the University for a period of
up to five years from the date of this Order or until Governing Council makes its
decision on expulsion, whichever comes first;

(b)

that the Tribunal recommend to the President of the University that he recommend
to Governing Council that the Student be expelled from the University;

(c)

that the 5.00 transfer credits assessed and granted as if earned by the Student from
Simon Fraser University be cancelled and removed from the Student’s academic
record; and

(d)

that a permanent notation be placed on the Student’s academic record and
transcript.

6.

The Provost originally indicated that it intended to lead evidence at the sanction hearing,

but subsequently advised that the Provost would not be leading evidence. Counsel for the Provost
submitted a book of authorities and a chart categorizing the case law, and referred to several cases
in argument. Counsel for the Student provided written submissions, a book of authorities, and
presented oral argument at the hearing.
General Principles on Sanction
7.

In imposing a penalty for forgery or falsification of an academic record, the Tribunal has

considered the following principles, which are informed by C (Case No.: 1976/77-3, November

5
5, 1976), a 1976 decision of the Appeals Board, which remains the leading authority on
sentencing in the University Tribunal context.
8.

First, forgery or falsification of academic records is among the most serious academic

offences: N.R., Case No. 714 (October 11, 2013), at para. 22; D.D., Case No. 593 (September 3,
2010), at para. 9; M.K., Case No. 491 (November 5, 2008), at para. 43. Such misconduct
undermines the integrity of the University’s academic mission. It misrepresents a student’s
accomplishments. If undetected, it may result in the student obtaining a benefit which he or she
does not deserve, deprive another more deserving student of that benefit, and tarnish the reputation
of the University, and by extension, that of other students, alumni, and faculty: A.K.G., Case No.
508 (October 14, 2008), at para. 18.
9.

Second, forgery may be difficult to detect. Some forgeries are crude and easily revealed.

But others are more cunning. The SFU transcript here appears to be genuine. Deterrence is thus a
significant consideration.
10.

Third, by its nature, forgery is only rarely an offence that can occur through a student’s

inadvertence or even mere negligence. It is usually the product of planning and knowing
participation, not a moment of weakness or poor judgment. As explained in greater detail in the
Reasons for Decision on Finding, that was the case here.
11.

Given these considerations, the cases commonly impose the most serious sanction — a

recommendation of expulsion — other than in exceptional circumstances: N.R. supra, para. 25.
This sanction has been imposed even where the Student participated in the discipline process,
agreed to a joint statement of facts or joint statement on penalty, or showed remorse.

6
12.

There is no significant disagreement from the Student’s counsel on the appropriate sanction

in light of the factual findings on liability. To his credit, counsel for the Student fairly concedes
that given the weight of authority, there is very little room for a student found guilty of these
offences to argue for a sanction less than expulsion.3
13.

Indeed, in A.L., Case No. 606 (October 10, 2012), in one of the rare cases in which the

Tribunal did not recommend expulsion in a forgery case, the Appeals Board reversed. It held that
the Tribunal had erred in not recommending expulsion given the absence of mitigating factors.
14.

Therefore, although there is no automatic rule weighing in favour of recommending

expulsion, these offences will typically result in recommendations of expulsion in all but
exceptional cases. The question for this Panel is whether there are mitigating factors sufficient to
tip the scale in favour of a lesser sanction in this case.
Mitigating Factors
15.

Mr. Sabsay noted that the Student did make certain factual concessions that relieved the

Provost of its burden of proof with respect to certain material issues. For example, the Student
conceded that the transcripts at issue were in fact forgeries.
16.

The Panel would give only minimal weight to this factor. It likely would not have been

difficult for the Provost to prove that the transcripts were forgeries. Further, based on her own
evidence at the hearing, this factual concession was in the Student’s own interest. The Student’s
defence in these proceedings was that she was an innocent of any wrongdoing, but that the agent

Mr. Sabsay’s written submissions provide, “As much as I would like to suggest an alternative sanction,
the Tribunal’s case law does not appear to give traction to such a submission” (para. 12).
3

7
whom she had contracted to shepherd her through the transfer application process had gone rogue
and submitted fraudulent transcripts without her consent. Thus, her defence relied on the fact that
the transcripts were forgeries.
17.

Mr. Sabsay also argues that it is a mitigating factor that the Student had been sexually

assaulted by her former boyfriend, Yifan Liu, who was one of the Provost’s main witnesses in
these proceedings.
18.

We would not accede to this submission. To accept this argument would require that this

Panel find that Mr. Liu did in fact sexually assault the Student. Aside from the fact that there is
an insufficient record to make that factual determination, the question of whether a sexual assault
took place is beyond the scope of these proceedings.
19.

The Student had previously testified against Mr. Liu at his criminal trial. His defence in

the criminal trial was that the Student had fabricated the sexual assault allegations as revenge for
his decision to bring her academic dishonesty to the attention of the University.
20.

Mr. Liu was acquitted at trial, which means that the Crown had not proven its case against

him beyond a reasonable doubt. It does not mean that he is “innocent” in a moral sense or that the
events complained of did not happen. To be clear, he could be factually innocent and is presumed
so as a matter of law, but it was not the role of the criminal court to make a determination of
innocence — only to determine whether the Crown has proven its case beyond a reasonable doubt.
21.

Nor is it the role of this Tribunal to determine whether the alleged sexual assault actually

happened.

But Mr. Sabsay’s submission would require this Tribunal to make precisely that

finding. Just as it would not be appropriate for this Panel to conclude that the Student was not

8
sexually assaulted, it would be equally inappropriate — given the issues and evidence before us
— for this Panel to conclude that the Student was sexually assaulted.
22.

Mr. Sabsay also argues that regardless of the merits of the allegations in the criminal case,

going through that process caused significant emotional stress for the Student, and this stress was
compounded by participating in these Tribunal proceedings. Undoubtedly, this hearing process
and the criminal trial process must have been stressful for the Student. For this hearing, the Student
was able to participate via video conference from her home in China, but given the time zone
differences, the hearings took place very late at night and very early in the morning for her.
Further, the Student must have known that if she were found guilty of the offences, she would face
significant sanctions. No doubt this was stressful as well.
23.

That said, one could make a similar argument for parties and witnesses in court proceedings

in many cases (particularly where the issues trench upon deeply private and personal matters).
Whether as a witness, a complainant, or an accused person, court proceedings are inherently
stressful.
24.

The Panel would not foreclose the idea that, in a different case, evidence of trauma might

weigh heavily in favour of mitigation. In this case, however, there was no evidence of trauma
from any medical professional, any counsellor, the Student’s friends or family, nor the Student
herself (who did not participate at the sanction hearing).
Aggravating Factors
25.

Further, in this case, even if the Panel were to ascribe significant weight to the stress that

the Student has endured, the aggravating factors are significant enough to outweigh the mitigating

9
factors. Beyond the general principles weighing in favour of a recommendation of expulsion for
these offences, there are significant aggravating factors present on the facts of this case.
26.

Chief among these factors is that these offences did not arise from a momentary lapse in

judgment. They were the result of a fraudulent scheme perpetrated over many months. The
fraudulent scheme began on or around April 2015 when the Student’s agent submitted fraudulent
transcripts on her behalf to the University.
27.

The Student gained acceptance to the University based on those fraudulent transcripts. Not

content with obtaining admission to the University through fraudulent means, the Student then
sought credit for courses she had not taken at SFU. With the help of Mr. Liu, she submitted course
outlines for courses in order to get credit for the fictitious SFU courses. From June 2015 to April
2016, the Student went back and forth with University administrators many times in her ongoing
attempt to obtain transfer credits for courses she had not taken. During the hearing, the Student
admitted that had she not been caught, she would carried on with the scheme through to graduation.
D.

Order of the Panel

28.

For these reasons, the Tribunal accepts the Provost’s submissions on sanction, and holds

that the following sanction should be imposed on the Student:
(a)

The Student is guilty of two counts of knowingly altering or falsifying an academic
record, or uttering, circulating or making use of such forged, altered or falsified
record, contrary to section B.i.3(a) of the Code;

(b)

The Student shall immediately be suspended from the University for a period of up
to five years from the date of this Order or until Governing Council makes its
decision on expulsion, whichever comes first;

10
(c)

The Tribunal recommends to the President of the University that he recommend to
Governing Council that the Student be expelled from the University;

(d)

The 5.00 transfer credits assessed and granted as if earned by the Student from
Simon Fraser University in the following courses be cancelled and removed from
the Student’s academic record:

(e)

(i)

ECON 103 – 4 Principles of Microeconomics

(ii)

EASC 104 – 3 Geohazards – Earth in Turmoil

(iii)

MATH 157 – 3 Calculus I for the Social Sciences

(iv)

ECON 105 – 4 Principles of Macroeconomics

(v)

ECON 290 – 3 Canadian Microeconomic Policy

A permanent notation shall be placed on the Student’s academic record and
transcript; and

(f)

This case shall be reported to the Provost for publication of a notice of the
decision of the Tribunal and the sanctions imposed, with the name of the Student
withheld.

Dated at Toronto, this 16th day of April, 2020.

Nader R. Hasan, Chair

