Case 948 - Sanction

   [1]Case 948 - Interim Decision
   [2]Case 948 - Finding
   DATE: April 16, 2020
   PARTIES:Â University of Toronto v. S.W.

   HEARING DATE: January 17, 2020

   Panel Members:
   Mr. Nader Hasan, Chair
   Professor Pascal van Lieshout, Faculty Panel Member
   Ms. Yursra Qazi, Student Panel Member

   Appearances:
   Ms. Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg
   Rothstein LLP
   Mr. LorneÂ Sabsay, Counsel for the Student, Sabsay Lawyers

   In Attendance:
   Mr. Christopher Lang, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances

   Not in Attendance: The Student

   The StudentÂ had already beenÂ charged and found guiltyÂ under
   s.Â B.i.3(a) of theâ¯Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters,
   1995â¯(âCodeâ) on the basis thatÂ sheÂ knowingly forged or knowingly
   made use of two sets of forged documents: (1) a Simon Fraser University
   (âSFUâ) Transcript, and (2) various SFU course
   outlines.Â TheÂ PanelÂ reconvenedÂ toÂ hear submissions on sanction.

   TheÂ PanelÂ observed that deterrenceÂ wasÂ a significant
   considerationÂ because the StudentâsÂ SFU transcript appearedÂ to be
   genuine. Further,Â counsel for the StudentÂ hadÂ fairly concededÂ that
   given the weight ofÂ theÂ relevant caselaw, thereÂ wasÂ very little
   room for a student found guilty of these offences to argue for a
   sanction less than expulsion.Â TheÂ PanelÂ also noted that
   althoughÂ there is no automatic rule weighing in favour of recommending
   expulsion, these offences typically result in recommendations of
   expulsion in all but exceptional cases.

   The question forÂ theÂ PanelÂ wasÂ whether thereÂ wereÂ mitigating
   factors sufficient to tip the scale in favour of a lesser
   sanction.Â TheÂ PanelÂ did not acceptÂ as aÂ mitigating factor that the
   Student had been sexuallyÂ assaulted by her former boyfriend, who was
   one of theÂ UniversityâsÂ main witnesses
   inÂ theÂ proceedingÂ pertaining to herÂ trauma,Â because it found no
   evidence from any medical professional, counsellorÂ or from the Student
   herself or from her friend or family.

   According to theÂ Panel, aggravating factorsÂ outweighed the mitigating
   factors.Â Beyond the general principles weighing in favour of a
   recommendation of expulsion forÂ these offences,
   thereÂ wereÂ significant aggravating factors.Â Chief among these
   factors is thatÂ theÂ offences did not arise from a momentary lapse
   inÂ judgment, they were the result of a fraudulent scheme perpetrated
   over many months. TheÂ fraudulent scheme beganÂ when the Studentâs
   agent submitted fraudulentÂ transcripts on her behalf to the
   University.Â The Student gained acceptance to the University based on
   those fraudulent transcriptsÂ andÂ sought credit for courses she had
   not taken at SFU. With the helpÂ ofÂ her former boyfriend,Â she
   submitted courseÂ outlines for coursesÂ in order toÂ get credit for the
   fictitious SFU courses.Â TheÂ Student went back and forth with
   University administrators many times in her ongoingÂ attempt to obtain
   transfer credits for courses she had not taken.Â In determiningÂ the
   sanctions, theÂ PanelÂ alsoÂ notedÂ the Studentâs admissionÂ that she
   wouldÂ haveÂ carried on with the scheme through to graduationÂ had she
   not been caught.

   TheÂ PanelÂ imposed the following sanctions:Â a five-year
   suspension;Â recommendation that the Student be expelled as per
   s.Â C.ii.(b)(i) of Code;Â removalÂ ofÂ 5.00 transfer
   credits;Â permanent notation on academic record;Â andÂ report to the
   Provost for aÂ publication with the Studentâs name withheld.
   [3]View Case

References

   1. https://governingcouncil.utoronto.ca/sites/default/files/university-tribunal-decisions/Case%20948%20-%20Interim%20Decision.pdf
   2. https://governingcouncil.utoronto.ca/sites/default/files/university-tribunal-decisions/948_Redacted.pdf
   3. file:///media/29248
