Case 916

DATE:

   March 12, 2018

PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v. M.S. (âthe Studentâ)

Hearing Date(s):

   December 15, 2017

Panel Members:

   Ms. Cheryl Woodin, Chair
   Professor Pascal van Lieshout, Faculty Panel Member
   Ms. Natasha Ramkissoon, Student Panel Member

Appearances:

   Ms. Tina Lie, Assistant Discipline Counsel for the University, Palaire
   Roland Barristers

In Attendance:

   Mr. Christopher Lang, Director, Office of Appeals, Discipline and
   Faculty Grievances
   Professor Luc De Nil, Vice-Dean, Students, School of Graduate Studies
   Mr. Brian Alexic, IT Support, Office of the Governing Council

Not in Attendance:

   The Student
   Ms. Julia Wilkes, Counsel to the Student, Wardle Daley Bernstein Bieber
   LLP
   The Student was charged with one charge plagiarism contrary to s.
   B.i.1(d) of the Code , or in the alternative, one charge of
   unauthorized assistance contrary to s. B.i.1(b) of the Code ; or in the
   further alternative, one charge of academic misconduct not otherwise
   described contrary to s.B.i.3(b) of the Code . The charges related to
   the Studentâs dissertation, which contained several passages that had
   been copied verbatim or nearly verbatim from works of another scholar.
   The plagiarism came to light after the Student had graduated and
   approached that scholar to supervise his postdoctoral project. The
   Student and his counsel consented to the hearing proceeding in their
   absence. The matter proceeded by way of agreed statement of facts (ASF)
   and a joint book of documents. Portions of the ASF were removed from
   the decision at the request of the Student on the basis that they
   summarize information relating to the Studentâs medical circumstances
   which need not be published.Â  Â The Student pled guilty to the first
   charge of plagiarism contrary to s. B.i.1(d) of the Code . Upon the
   Panel accepting the Studentâs guilty plea to the first charge, the
   University withdrew the alternative charges.
   The parties submitted a Joint Submission on Penalty (JSP) requesting:
   (a) final grade of zero in the course; (b) that the degree be cancelled
   and recalled; (c) the sanction be permanently recorded on academic
   record and transcript; and (d) that the decision be reported to the
   Provost for publication with the Student's name withheld. The JSP was
   accompanied by an undertaking that the Student notÂ  enroll in, or
   apply for admission to, any program or course at the University until
   the Fall 2020 term or later. The Student also undertook to return his
   degree certificate to the University and consented to the removal of
   his thesis from the University library and any affiliated organizations
   or databases. In deciding whether to accept the JSP, the Panel
   considered the plagiarism within its broader context. Mitigating
   factors included that it was the Studentâs first offence, he had
   cooperated throughout the discipline process, and that the plagiarism
   was committed while the Studentâs dissertation was on an expedited
   timeline. Aggravating factors included that the Student had been
   confronted about he attribution problems prior to submitting his
   dissertation, the seriousness of the offence, and the fact that it had
   occurred in the context of a dissertation thesis, which has significant
   visibility. Further, the Student intended the thesis to form the basis
   for a book, where it would have had even greater prominence and
   visibility as a representation of the Universityâs academic quality.
   The Panel found that the threshold for departing from a JSP had not
   been met in this case ( The University of Toronto and M.A. (Case No.
   837, December 22, 2016). The Panel accepted the partiesâ JSP and
   ordered:(a) final grade of zero in the course; (b) that the Studentâs
   degree be cancelled and recalled; (c) a permanent notation of the
   sanction be recorded on the Studentâs academic record and transcript;
   and (d) that the decision be reported to the Provost for publication
   with the Student's name withheld.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/13048
