UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL

UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
IN THE MATTER of charges of academic dishonesty made on March 9, 2011

AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters, 1995,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Act, 1971, S.O. 1971, c. 56 as amended S.O.
1978, c. 88
BETWEEN:
UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO

- and-

REASONS FOR DECISION
Hearing Date: September 29, 2014
Panel Members:
Mr. Paul Schabas, Barrister and Solicitor, Chair
Professor Gabriele D'Eleuterio, Faculty of Applied Science and Engineering, Faculty Panel
Member
Mr. Christopher Tsui, Student Panel Member
Appearances:
Ms. Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel for University, Paliare Roland Barristers
Ms. Lucy Gaspini, Manager, Academic Integrity and Affairs, University of Toronto Mississauga
Mr. Nathan Innocente, Teaching Assistant SOC307: Crime and Delinquency, University of
Toronto, Mississauga
Ms. Julie Waters, Academic Counsellor, Sociology, University of Toronto, Mississauga
Dr. Kathy Gruspier, Instructor: FSC239: Introduction to Forensic Science, University of Toronto
Mississauga
In Attendance:
Ms. Sinead Cutt, Administrative Assistant, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances

1.

The Trial Division of the University Tribunal convened to hear these matters on September
29, 2014 at 5:45PM.

Proceeding in the Absence of the Students

2.

Neither student was present at 5:45. At 6PM, when the front doors of Simcoe Hall became
locked, Ms. Harmer arranged for someone to wait by the doors and a note was later left on
the door providing phone numbers to seek entry to the building, should either student
attend.

3.

Following submissions from Ms. Harmer, and the tendering of co1Tespondence and the
Order of Ms. David dated July 7, 2014, the Tribunal decided to proceed with the matter in
the absence of the students.

4.

The matter had originally been scheduled to proceed on July 7, 2014, but was adjourned on
that date peremptory to Ms. ~ after she requested an adjournment, claiming that
the hearing date had only very recently been brought to her attention. Ms. ~
communicated with counsel for the Provost by email, and email notifications were sent to
her in late August at the email address she used in July, advising her of this date.

5.

With respect to Ms.~
, the Provost's office has not heard from her since 2010.
However, notification of this date for hearing was provided. Emails were sent to her last
known email address which she had used in 2010, and did not bounce back. A letter was
delivered to her last known address and was received by a "P. ~
", and a voice
message was left on the last phone number she provided, where the person to whom the
phone belonged identified herself in her recorded answer as "~
"-

6.

Accordingly, having regard to the recent contact with Ms. ~ and the various ways
in which Ms. ~ was notified of the hearing date, the Notices which advise the
students that the matter may proceed in their absence, as well as Rules 14(c) and 17, the
Tribunal agreed to proceed in the absence of the students.

Hearing both matters together

7.

The University brought a motion to join the two matters so they could be heard together.
As the Notices, set out below, indicate, the two matters involve the same incidents, same
courses and same students. Indeed, the allegation is that the two students committed
academic misconduct together. In the circumstances, therefore, having regard to the criteria
in Rule 30, the Tribunal was satisfied that it would be more efficient, and that no prejudice
would be caused to the students, if it heard the matters together.
2

-

8. The charges made against Ms. ~

, together with the particulars, are as follows:

1)

On or about February 26, 2009, you did knowingly represent as your own any
idea or expression of an idea or work of another in connection with academic
work with respect to the submission of an essay entitled "The Forensic
Controversy of Bitemark Identifications" in FSC239YSY, contrary to section
B.I.l.(d) of the Code.

2)

On or about February 26, 2009, you did knowingly use or possess an
unauthorized aid or aids or obtain unauthorized assistance in connection with
academic work, with respect to the submission of an essay entitled "The Forensic
Controversy of Bitemark Identifications" in FSC239YSY, contrary to section
B.I.l.(b) of the Code.

3)

In the alternative to paragraphs 1 and 2 above, on or about February 26, 2009, you
did knowingly engage in a form of cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct,
fraud or misrepresentation not otherwise described in the Code, in order to obtain
academic credit or other academic advantage of any kind, in connection with the
submission of an essay entitled "The Forensic Controversy of Bitemark
Identifications" in FSC239YSY, contrary to section B.I.3.(b) of the Code.

4)

On or about March 19, 2009, you did knowingly represent as your own any idea
or expression of an idea or work of another in connection with academic work
with respect to the submission of an Annotated Bibliography in SOC307H5S,
contrary to section B.1.1.(d) of the Code.

5)

On or about March 19, 2009, you did knowingly use or possess an unauthorized
aid or aids or obtain unauthorized assistance in connection with academic work,
with respect to the submission of an Annotated Bibliography in SOC307H5S,
contrary to section B.1.1.(b) of the Code.

6)

In the alternative to paragraphs 4 and 5 above, on or about March 19, 2009, you
did knowingly engage in a form of cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct,
fraud or misrepresentation not otherwise described in the Code, in order to obtain
academic credit or other academic advantage of any kind, in connection with the
submission of an Annotated Bibliography in SCO307H5S, contrary to section
B.I.3.(b) of the Code.

7)

On or about March 26, 2009, you did knowingly represent as your own any idea
or expression of an idea or work of another in connection with academic work
with respect to the submission of an essay entitled "Academic Dishonesty" in
SOC307H5 S, contrary to section BJ. l .(d) of the Code.

3

8)

On or about March 26, 2009, you did knowingly use or possess an unauthorized
aid or aids or obtain unauthorized assistance in connection with academic work,
with respect to the submission of an essay entitled "Academic Dishonesty" in
SOC307H5S, contrary to section B.I. l. (b) of the Code.

9)

In the alternative to paragraphs 7 and 8 above, on or about March 26, 2009, you
did knowingly engage in a form of cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct,
fraud or misrepresentation not otherwise described in the Code, in order to obtain
academic credit or other academic advantage of any kind, in connection with the
submission of an essay entitled "Academic Dishonesty" in SOC307H5S, contrary
to section B.1.3.(b) of the Code.

Particulars of the offences charged

10) You were at all material times enrolled as a student at the University.
11) On or about February 26, 2009, you submitted an essay entitled "The Forensic
Controversy of Bitemark Identifications" to fulfill the course requirements in
FSC239Y5Y ("FSC Essay").
12) Much of the text in your FSC Essay is copied verbatim from and/or is very similar
to the text of an essay submitted in the previous year in the same course by
~~
' another student, without attribution or acknowledgement.
13) You represented Ms. Bllllllllll work as your own without attribution and/or you
used Ms. ~ essay as an unauthorized aid when writing your FSC Essay,
and/or you obtamed unauthorized assistance from Ms. ~ in writing your
FSC Essay.
14) On or about March 19, 2009, you submitted an Annotated Bibliography to fulfill
the course requirements in SOC307H5S.
15) Much of the text in this Annotated Bibliography is copied verbatim from and/or is
very similar to the text of an Annotated Bibliography submitted in the same term
in the same course by ~ ~
' another student, without attribution or
acknowledgement.
16) You represented Ms. Bllllllllllwork as your own without attribution and/or you
used Ms. ~ Annotated Bibliography as an unauthorized aid when writing
your essay, and/or you obtained unauthorized assistance from Ms. ~ in
writing your annotated bibliography.
17) On or about March 26, 2009, you submitted an essay entitled "Academic
Dishonesty" to fulfill the course requirements in SOC307H5S ("SOC Essay").
18) Much of the text in your SOC Essay is copied verbatim from and/or is very
similar to the text of an essay submitted in the same term in the same course by
~~
' another student, without attribution or acknowledgement.
4

19) You represented Ms. ~ work as your own without attribution and/or you
used Ms. ~ essay as an unauthorized aid when writing your SOC Essay,
and/or you obtained unauthorized assistance from Ms. J:all in writing your
SOC Essay.

~
9. The charges made against Ms J:all, together with the particulars, are as follows:
1)

On or about February 26, 2009, you did knowingly aid or assist another student,
' to use or possess an unauthorized aid or aids or obtain
unauthorized assistance in connection with academic work, with respect to the
submission of an essay entitled "The Forensic Controversy of Bitemark
Identifications" in FSC239YSY, contrary to section B.I.1 .(b) of the Code.
~~

2)

In the alternative to paragraph 1 above, on or about February 26, 2009, you did
knowingly engage in a form of cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct,
fraud or misrepresentation not otherwise described in the Code, in order to obtain
academic credit or other academic advantage of any kind, in connection with the
submission of an essay by ~ ~ entitled "The Forensic
Controversy of Bitemark Identifications" in FSC239YSY, contrary to section
B.I.3.(b) of the Code.

3)

On or about March 19, 2009, you did knowingly represent as your own any idea
or expression of an idea or work of another in connection with academic work
with respect to the submission of an Annotated Bibliography in SOC307H5S,
contrary to section B .I .1. (d) of the Code.

4)

On or about March 19, 2009, you did knowingly use or possess an unauthorized
aid or aids or obtain unauthorized assistance in connection with academic work,
with respect to the submission of an Annotated Bibliography in SOC307H5S,
contrary to section B.I.1.(b) of the Code.

5)

In the alternative to paragraphs 3 and 4 above, on or about March 19, 2009, you
did knowingly engage in a form of cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct,
fraud or misrepresentation not otherwise described in the Code, in order to obtain
academic credit or other academic advantage of any kind, in connection with the
submission of an Annotated Bibliography in SCO307H5S, contrary to section
B.I.3.(b) of the Code.

6)

On or about March 26, 2009, you did knowingly represent as your own any idea
or expression of an idea or work of another in connection with academic work
with respect to the submission of an essay entitled "Academic Misconduct" in
SOC307HSS, contrary to section B.1.1.(d) of the Code.

7)

On or about March 26, 2009, you did knowingly use or possess an unauthorized
aid or aids or obtain unauthorized assistance in connection with academic work,
5

with respect to the submission of an essay entitled "Academic Misconduct" in
SOC307H5S, contrary to section B.I.1.(b) of the Code.
8)

In the alternative to paragraphs 6 and 7 above, on or about March 26, 2009, you
did knowingly engage in a form of cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct,
fraud or misrepresentation not otherwise described in the Code, in order to obtain
academic credit or other academic advantage of any kind, in connection with the
submission of an essay entitled "Academic Misconduct" in SOC307H5S, contrary
to section B.I.3.(b) of the Code.

Particulars of the offenc.es charged
9)

You were at all material times enrolled as a student at the University.

10) On or about February 24, 2008, you submitted an essay entitled "The Forensic
Controversy of Bitemark Identifications" to fulfill the course requirements in
FSC239Y5Y ("~
FSC Essay").

11) On or about February 26, 2009, you aided and a s s i s t e d ~ ~ to
submit an essay entitled "The Forensic Controversy of Bitemark Identifications"
to fulfill the course requirements in FSC239Y5Y ("Mielczarek's FSC Essay").
12) Much of the text in Ms. ~
s FSC Essay is copied verbatim from and/or
is very similar to the text of your ~ FSC Essay, without attribution or
acknowledgement.
13) You aided and assisted Ms. ~ to represent your work as her own without
attribution and/or to use your essay as an unauthorized aid when writing her
~ FSC Essay, and/or provided Ms. ~ with unauthorized
assistance in writing h e r ~ FSC Essay.

14) On or about March 19, 2009, you submitted an Annotated Bibliography to fulfill
the course requirements in SOC307H5S.
15) Much of the text in this Annotated Bibliography is copied verbatim from and/or is
very similar to the text of an Annotated Bibliography submitted in the same term
in the same course by ~ ~
' another student, without attribution
or acknowledgement.
s work as your own without attribution and/or
16) You represented~
you used Ms. ~
tated Bibliography as an unauthorized aid when
writing your essay, and/or you obtained unauthorized assistance from Ms.
~ in writing your annotated bibliography.
17) On or about March 26, 2009, you submitted an essay entitled "Academic
Misconduct" to fulfill the course requirements in SOC307H5S ("SOC Essay").

6

18) Much of the text in your SOC Essay is copied verbatim from and/or is very
similar to the text of an essay submitted in the same term in the same course by
~~
' another student, without attribution or acknowledgement.
19) You represented~
s work as your own without attribution and/or
you used Ms. ~
s essay as an unauthorized aid when writing your SOC
Essay, and/or you obtained unauthorized assistance from Ms. ~ in
writing your SOC Essay.

Summary of the Evidence

10. The charges arose from assignments the students did in two courses. In FSC239Y5Y,
Introduction to Forensic Science, it was alleged that Ms. ~
' handed in a paper
on Bitemark Identification that was substantially similar to the paper Ms. ~ had
submitted one year earlier. In SOC307H5S, Crime & Delinquency, the students handed
in annotated bibliographies that were in many places identical, and essays that had very
significant similarities. Ironically, the topic of the bibliographies was academic
misconduct.
FSC 239

11. Dr. Kathy Gruspier, who taught the FSC239 course, testified that one of the objectives of
her course is to help students develop research and writing skills. The students were
warned about plagiarism and what constituted plagiarism. They were also requested to
submit their papers to turnitin.com. Although students could opt out of the turnitin.com
process, Dr. Gruspier has never had a student do so.
12. Dr. Gruspier said that the turnitin.com report on Ms. ~
s paper showed a 37%
match with Ms. 111111111 paper handed in the previous year. This is a very high
similarity, as most results are very low, under 10% and many below 1%. Dr. Gruspier
reviewed both papers with the panel, and highlighted the very strong similarities between
them. While sentences were adjusted, and words changed in various places, the works
were strikingly similar. Indeed, in several places the papers had the same unusual
mistakes, such as the same wrong date for an entry in the bibliography, a quotation mark
at the beginning of the same sentence that has no close quote anywhere, and several
identical spelling mistakes involving the same words, including the following: "rectify"
or as the students spelled it "rectifiy", "comparison" versus "comparsion", "version" or
"verison". Other unusual similarities were the reversing of the names of two authors of a
cited work, and the phrase "Certainty V Probability." Ms. ~
did not cite or in
any way attribute any of her work to the paper by Ms. ~
-

7

SOC307
13. Nathan Innocente, a Ph.D. candidate, was the Teaching Assistant in SOC307 and was
responsible_for marking student papers. The course itself was taught by Professor Garry
Gray. He explained that one of the assignments involved the students first preparing an
annotated bibliography which was handed in for evaluation, followed by a paper on the
same topic. The students could choose from a list of topics, and ~ and ~
both chose the topic of cheating at university. There were no defined set of sources, and
students were expected to do their own research using abstracts or wherever they chose to
locate sources. All students were expected to work individually.
14. A review of the annotated bibliographies showed that the two students cited the same 17
sources (only 15 were required). Mr. Innocente said it was highly unlikely that two
students would coincidentally cite the identical 17 sources. Fmther, they cited them in the
same way, making the same citation errors, such as abbreviating "Press" to the letter "P",
shortening titles of articles in exactly the same way, reversing names of authors, and in
one case both cited an article that was not written by the author they listed.
15. When Mr. Innocente marked the students' papers he noticed strong similarities between
the two papers, and the striking similarities in the annotated bibliography described
above. The papers were highlighted to show similarities in ideas, some identical
passages, similar structure and similar headings.
16. The tribunal also heard from Julie Waters, an academic counsellor in the Sociology
Department at UTM. She attended a Dean's Designate meeting with Ms. ~ and
took notes. The meeting itself was conducted by Professor Scott Graham, and was
attended as well by Professor Gray. Ms. Waters was called because Prof Graham had
passed away and Prof. Gray was no longer at U of T. While Ms. Waters told us that
Ms. ~ admitted to working together with Ms. ~
, and therefore signed a
form admitting guilt, this evidence was not compelling. Notes of the meeting were not
typed or completed because, according to Ms. Waters, -~
admitted guilt. On the
other hand, Ms. Waters also told us that a meeting was held w i t h ~ who did not
admit anything, and although those notes had been typed up they were not provided to us.
Overall, the tribunal did not find Ms. Waters evidence to be helpful or compelling, and
we place no weight on it.
17. We also heard briefly from Lucy Gaspini, Manager of Academic Integrity and Affairs at
the University of Toronto Mississauga, who also gave evidence of the Dean's Designate
meetings and provided us with the students' academic record.

8

Findings
18. The Tribunal is satisfied that M s . ~ submitted work that was not her own in
FSC239, contrary to section B.1.1.(d) of the Code. The similarities between her paper
and the paper submitted by Ms. ~ the previous year are unmistakeable and cannot
reasonably be explained as coincidental. The evidence goes well beyond meeting the
civil burden of proof, and is overwhelming. In short, Ms. ~ knowingly copied
M s . ~ work and represented it as her own in order to obtain academic credit.
19. Similarly, both students copied one another's work and passed it off as their own in
SOC307. It is clear that they must have worked together in preparing annotated
bibliographies that not only contained identical sources - which is highly unusual in itself
- but identical errors and anomalies in citation. The papers also demonstrated close
similarities that cannot be explained other than that the students improperly worked
together to produce essentially the same paper. 1bis constitutes the same kind of
academic misconduct, contrary to section B.I. l .(d) of the Code, and is clearly established
on the preponderance of the evidence.
20. \Vhile it might have been raised that the students did not appreciate they were to work
independently, there is no basis for such a finding on the evidence. First, Mr. Innocente
testified that he made it clear that the students were expected to work independently.
Second, unless told otherwise, students know or ought to know that they are to research
and write papers independently of one another. Third, section B of the Code makes clear
that the term "knowing" includes the student "ought reasonably to have known". Fourth,
these students were not new to the University or academic rules, as disclosed by their
transcripts, and there was evidence of the emphasis placed on educating students about
what constitutes plagiarism, including in these courses. In short, the Tribunal is satisfied
that the students ought to have known that they were not to work together or copy one
another's work.
21. This leaves only the question of whether Ms. ~
' whose paper in FSC 239 was
copied by Ms. ~ the following year, committed academic misconduct with
respect to that course. Ms. Harmer argues that the students were not naive, and that their
actions in SOC307 - which they were taking at the same time as Ms. ~ was
submitting the Bitemarks paper in FSC 239 - were so similar that they must have been
done in concert with one another, and thus Ms. ~ is guilty of improperly providing
Ms. ~
with an aid.
22. Although we have no information as to how or why her paper was provided to Ms.
~
' or whether Ms. ~ was aware that M s . ~ had plagiarized it, it
9

is our conclusion, on a balance of probabilities, that Ms. ~
knew or ought
reasonably to have known that her paper would be used improperly by Ms. ~
While the facts involved in the academic misconduct in the two courses are different,
they occurred at the same time, when the students were working together- and actively
copying each other's work. In our view, then, Ms. ~ aided Ms. ~
•s
offence and is a party to it under B.ii.1.(a)(ii) of the Code.

Conclusion

23. While the students are charged with a variety of breaches of the Code, each course raises
one specific delict, or incident, of misconduct by each student. We therefore find as
follows:
(a) Ms. ~
is guilty of knowingly representing as her own the work of
another in FSC 239, and Ms. ~
is guilty of aiding Ms. ~
in the
commission of this offence; and,
(b) In SOC307, Ms. ~ and Ms. ~ are each guilty of improperly
collaborating with each other and representing as their own, work that was
prepared by both of them.
24. Following release of these Reasons, the Tribunal' s office will arrange a date for a hearing
to consider penalty.

Dated at Toronto, this f ~ yof December, 2014.

Paul Schabas, Co-Chair

10

