Case 624

   [1]Case 624 - Sanction

DATE:

   December 8, 2014 and May 11, 2015

PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v A.M.

Hearing Date(s):

   September 29, 2014 and January 26, 2015

Panel Members:

   Paul Schabas, Chair
   Gabriele D‚Eleuterio, Faculty Member
   Christopher Tsui, Student Member

Appearances:

   Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel for the University
   Lucy Gaspini, Manager, Academic Integrity and Affairs, University of
   Toronto Mississauga
   Nathan Innocente, Teaching Assistant
   Julie Waters, Academic Counsellor
   Kathy Gruspier, Course Instructor

In Attendance:

   Sinead Cutt, Administrative Assistant, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty
   Grievances

   NOTE: Heard together with Case #605

   The Student did not appear at the specified time for the hearing. The
   Panel waited for 15 minutes after which the doors were locked and a
   note was left with instructions on entering the building should she
   attend. The matter was initially scheduled for July but postponed at
   the request of the Student.

   Student charged with three offences under s. B.i.1(d) , three offences
   under s. B.i.1(b) and, in the alternative, three offences under s.
   B.i.3(b) of the Code . The charges included the Student‚s
   representation of another‚s ideas as her own in two essays and an
   annotated bibliography.

   The first charges arose from an assignment the Student submitted which
   was substantially similar to a paper that had been submitted a year
   earlier. The second set related to an essay which had significant
   similarities to another student‚s in the course and annotated
   bibliographies which were identical.

   The instructor of the first course testified that she had warned the
   students about what constitutes plagiarism and required students to
   submit papers through Turnitin.com, a plagiarism detection site. The
   Student‚s paper showed a 37% match. In addition to similar structure,
   the paper contained several identical spelling mistakes. The Student
   did not cite the earlier paper.

   The Teaching Assistant of the second course testified that he had
   marked the bibliographies and noticed that the Student‚s bibliography
   cited the same 17 sources as one from the same year. There were strong
   similarities between the two papers and identical mistakes in the
   bibliographies.

   An Academic Counsellor attended a Dean‚s Designate meeting with the
   Student and took notes. She testified that the Student had admitted to
   plagiarizing and signed a form admitting guilt, but the Panel found her
   testimony and notes unconvincing and placed no weight on it.

   The Manager of Academic Integrity and Affairs at the University of
   Toronto Mississauga also gave evidence about the Dean‚s designate
   meeting and provided the Student‚s academic record.

   The Panel was satisfied that the offences under s. B.i.1(d) had been
   demonstrated. The similarities between the papers were unmistakeable
   and the evidence overwhelming. Similarly, the Panel found that the
   Student had collaborated with a classmate on the preponderance of the
   evidence. The Panel found that even if the Student did not appreciate
   that she had to work independently, she ought to have known.

   The Panel found the Student was guilty of knowingly representing as her
   own work the work of another, of improperly collaborating with another
   student, and of representing as her own work, work that was prepared by
   both herself and another student.

   The Panel found the Student had committed two different counts of
   academic misconduct. The University sought a grade of zero for the
   Student in the course, a four-year suspension and a notation on the
   Student‚s transcript for five years.

   The Panel agreed with the University that the starting point on
   sanction was 2 years and can increase or decrease depending on other
   factors. However, the cases of four-year suspensions that the
   University referred to involved prior incidents and the Panel found
   that to be a compelling factor which differentiated these cases.

   The Panel imposed a penalty of a grade of zero in each course, a
   suspension of three years from September 1, 2014, a notation on the
   Student‚s academic record for the earlier of four years or graduation,
   and that the case be reported to the Provost for publication.
   [2]View Case

References

   1. http://live-the-office-of-the-governing-council.pantheonsite.io/media/28418
   2. file:///media/28416
