Report #327

   DATE: August 14, 2008
   PARTIES: Mr. H. L. D. (the Student) v. the Faculty of Medicine
   Hearing Date(s): June 11, 2008 and July 10, 2008
   Committee Members:
   Professor Emeritus Ralph Scane (Senior Chair)
   Professor Clare Beghtol,
   Dr. Gerald Halbert,
   Professor Glen Jones,
   Mr. Alex Kenjeev.
   Secretaries:
   Ms Nancy Smart, Judicial Affairs Officer.
   Ms Mette Mai.
   In Attendance:
   For The Student Appellant:
   Mr. Zak Muscovitch (Counsel).
   Mr. H. L. D. (the Student)
   Mr. D. Sawh
   For the Faculty of Medicine:
   Ms Sari L. Springer (Counsel)
   Ms Fiona Cherryman,
   Ms Gwen Llewellyn
   Faculty of Medicine â re-instatement in program â dismissal from
   Medical Radiation Sciences Program â precedent cited â the Committee
   cannot interfere with an assessment that a certain action or collection
   of actions merits immediate suspension from a practicum on the grounds
   of patient safety, on the grounds that the judgment was wrong, if
   fairly arrived at â in matters which have grave consequences on a
   professional career, the Academic Appeals Committee must act on âclear,
   convincing and cogent evidenceâ â Faculty not acting under a false
   assumption as to a key and fundamental fact â minority opinion that
   evidence not sufficient to justify suspension â Appeal dismissed
   Appeal from a recommendation by the Radiological Technology Program
   Review Committee that the Student be dismissed from the Medical
   Radiation Sciences Program. The Studentâs substandard performance in
   his extended practicum, capped by an incident involving danger to a
   patientâs health, led to the Facultyâs conclusion that the Student
   could not be allowed to continue in the Program. The Committee found
   that the incident triggered the termination process, and had it not
   occurred, the Student would have been allowed to finish his extended
   term and have been evaluated on the entire practicum. The Facultyâs
   decision was based upon an evaluation by the Universityâs examiners.
   Citing the Academic Appeals Committee Report #323, the Committee stated
   that it cannot interfere with an assessment that a certain action or
   collection of actions merits immediate suspension from a practicum on
   the grounds of patient safety, on the grounds that the judgment was
   wrong, if it was fairly arrived at. The Committee found no evidence of
   bias against the Student on the part of members of the Program and the
   Faculty who made the decision to suspend and then terminate the
   Student. The majority of the Committee found that the decision was
   fairly arrived at. The Committee was divided upon the proper finding to
   be made upon the happening of the incident. The Committee was
   instructed by the Chair that, in matters which have grave consequences
   on a professional career, Ontario courts insist that courts and
   tribunals such as the Academic Appeals Committee act on âclear,
   convincing and cogent evidenceâ, and decide issues on the civil
   standard of proof. The majority of the Committee found that the Faculty
   was not acting under a false assumption as to a key and fundamental
   fact when the Student was suspended and then terminated, and there was
   therefore no basis to challenge the evaluations which led to the
   Studentâs dismissal. A minority of the Committee found that the
   evidence regarding the incident was not sufficiently âclear, convincing
   and cogentâ to justify suspending the Student from the normal
   completion of his practicum which thereby destroyed his right to be
   adjudged on his performance over its full term, as previously extended
   by the Program. The minority would have allowed the appeal and
   permitted the Student to complete the balance of his practicum, before
   being evaluated upon the entire practicum. Appeal dismissed.
   [1]View Report

References

   1. file:///media/12578
