Case No.: 1126
THE UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO

IN THE MATTER OF charges of academic dishonesty filed on November 25, 2020,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters, 1995,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Act, 1971, S.O. 1971, c.56 as amended S.O.
1978, c. 88

B E T W E E N:
UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO (the “University”)
– AND –
K

Z

(the “Student”)

Hearing Date: June 15, 2021, via Zoom
Members of the Panel:
Mr. Dean F. Embry, Chair
Professor Mike Evans, Faculty Panel Member
Ms. Syeda Hasan, Student Panel Member
Appearances:
Ms. Tina Lie, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg Rothstein LLP
Hearing Secretary:
Ms. Nadia Bruno, Special Projects Officer, Appeal, Discipline and Faculty Grievances
Not in Attendance:
The Student

I.

CHARGES

1.

The Trial Division of the Tribunal held a hearing on June 15, 2021 to address the following charges
brought by (the University against the Student under the Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters
(the “Code”):
1. On or about March 21, 2020, you knowingly represented as your own an idea or expression of
an idea or work of another in Test 4 in MAT137Y1 (the “Course”), contrary to section B.I.1(d)
of the Code.
2. In the alternative, on or about March 21, 2020, you knowingly obtained unauthorized assistance
in connection with Test 4 in the Course, contrary to section B.I.1(b) of the Code.
3. In the further alternative, on or about March 21, 2020, you knowingly engaged in a form of
cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or misrepresentation not otherwise
described in the Code in order to obtain academic credit or other academic advantage of any
kind in connection with Test 4 in the Course, contrary to section B.I.3(b) of the Code.
4. On or about April 16, 2020, you knowingly represented as your own an idea or expression of
an idea or work of another in the final exam in the Course, contrary to section B.I.1(d) of the
Code.
5. In the alternative, on or about April 16, 2020, you knowingly obtained unauthorized assistance
in connection with the final exam in the Course, contrary to section B.I.1(b) of the Code.

6. In the further alternative, on or about April 16, 2020, you knowingly engaged in a form of
cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or misrepresentation not otherwise
described in the Code in order to obtain academic credit or other academic advantage of any
kind in connection with the final exam in the Course, contrary to section B.I.3(b) of the Code.

II.

PRELIMINARY ISSUE: Proceeding in the Absence of the Student

2.

The Student was neither present nor represented. The University filed evidence that the Student
was served with the charges by email at the email address provided by the Student to the University
of Toronto in ROSI on November 25, 2020.

3.

Further, the University filed evidence that on May 12, 2021 the Student was served with the Notice
of Electronic Hearing, again via the email address provided in ROSI.
1

4.

It should be noted that both the scheduling of the hearing and the hearing itself took place during
the COVID-19 pandemic. On April 27, 2021, due to the physical restrictions necessitated by that
pandemic, Assistant Discipline Counsel requested that the hearing proceed electronically. The
Student was advised of this request by email and was given a deadline of May 12, 2021 to provide
submissions in relation to this request. No reply from the Student was ever received and the hearing
was ordered and scheduled to proceed electronically as above.

5.

In addition to the above, the University filed evidence demonstrating that efforts were made to
ensure the Student was aware of the hearing and in a position to attend. In addition to the service
of documents outlined above, correspondence via email was sent to the Student which included
invitations for discussion, efforts to arrange scheduling, disclosure of material and reminders of the
hearing. All went unanswered.

6.

Given the above, the Panel found that the Student was provided with reasonable notice and proper
service as contemplated by sections 14 and 9 of the Tribunal’s Rules of Practice and Procedure
(the “Rules”). As such, the hearing proceeded in the Student’s absence.

II.

SUMMARY OF FACTS/PARTICULARS

7.

The Panel received affidavit evidence from Professor Asif Zaman who while not in attendance at
the hearing was available to answer any questions should they arise.

8.

At all material times the Student was enrolled in “MAT137Y – Calculus!”. The allegations against
the student related to two components of that course: Test 4 and the Final Exam. Counts 1-3 outlined
above relate to Test 4. The remaining counts relate to the Final Exam. The allegations in relation
to the two components of the course are broadly the same and it is ultimately alleged that the Student
submitted answers in relation to both of these components that were not her own.

9.

Both Test 4 and the Final Exam were conducted as 24-hour open book exams. Test 4 took place on
March 19, 2020 and the Final Exam took place on April 15, 2020. The rules in relation to both of
these exams contained the following:
•

Do NOT use any other aid or resource (online or offline) other than those authorized above.

•

Do NOT communicate with any person about the test other than a MAT137 teaching team
member.

2

10.

•

Do NOT post answers anywhere online or otherwise.

•

Do NOT use the answers, solutions, term work, or notes of anyone else.

•

Do NOT have someone else write the exam for you.

After the exams in question were submitted the instructors and teaching assistants in the Course
found a number of questions and answers from both Test 4 and the Final Exam on Chegg.com.
Chegg.com is a subscription-based website that allows students to post problems to the site. A copy
of the website was attached as an exhibit to the affidavit of Professor Asif Zaman. The website
advertises that a subscription is $14.95 a month and that subscribers can “take a photo of your
question and get an answer in as little as 30 minutes.” It is clear that Chegg.com can and is used by
students to cheat on assignments and exams.

11.

Specifically, in relation to the exams described above it was discovered that someone had posted
questions from Test 4 and the Final Exam to Chegg.com during the 24-hour period of those exams.
Further, answers for those questions were also posted on Chegg.com during those periods and in
response to the questions being posted.

12.

An examination of the answers provided by the Student and those posted on Chegg.com revealed
striking similarities. The differences between the answers provided by the Student and those posted
on Chegg were largely cosmetic in nature. Contrastingly, the similarities were highly unusual and
were unlikely to have happened by chance. For example, the manner in which the problems were
solved and the steps taken in those solutions were the same and unusual. Further there appeared to
be steps that were taken but that were missing from each set of answers. Both sets of answers,
however, were missing the same steps. Finally, both sets of answer contained what Professor Zaman
characterized as “nonsensical” portions. Again, both sets of answers contained the same
nonsensical portions.

III.

ARGUMENT OF THE UNIVERSITY

13.

The University argues that given the myriad of different ways a student could solve the problems
on the exams the only way to explain the similarities between the Student’s answers and those
posted to Chegg.com is that the Student took the answers from Chegg.com or was given the answers
by someone who had accessed them from Chegg.com. In doing so, the University argues, the
Student committed the offences charged.

3

IV.

FINDINGS OF THE PANEL

14.

The Panel agrees that similarities between the answers of the Student and those found on
Chegg.com show, on a balance of probabilities, that the Student somehow came into possession of
the answers posted on Chegg.com and copied them in order to formulate the answers she ultimately
submitted.

15.

It must be noted that the evidence does not show that the Student was the one who posted the
questions on Chegg.com or that she received the answers from Chegg.com. Indeed, there is no
evidence that the Student has a subscription to Chegg.com. All that can be said is that the Student
directly or indirectly came into possession of those answers and improperly relied on them.

16.

Given the above, the Panel finds the Student guilty of two counts of knowingly representing an idea
or expression of an idea or work of another as his own, contrary to section B.I.1.(d) of the Code.

V.

SANCTION

17.

The University submitted that an appropriate sanction was a mark of zero in the course, a threeyear suspension and a four-year notation of the sanction. The University provided thorough and
helpful authorities of similar cases to justify this sanction and asked the Panel to consider the nature
of the offence as well as the character of the Student.

18.

The Code contains the “Provost’s Guidance on Sanctions” in Appendix “C”. Section B.8(b)
provides that at the Tribunal level “absent exception circumstances, the Provost will request that
the Tribunal…suspend a student for two years for any offence involving academic dishonesty,
where a student has not committed any prior offences”.

19.

In the present case the University points to a number of factors that they say call for a higher
sanction than that contemplated in the Code. Namely, the University notes that the Student failed
to participate in the process before this Tribunal. The University argues that this non-participation
goes to the character of the Student and that there is no evidence of remorse, mitigating
circumstances or any acknowledgement on the Student’s part that this sort of behavior will not be
repeated. Further, the University notes, there was a financial or commercial aspect to these offences
that elevates their seriousness. Finally, the University notes that the behavior in this matter was
repeated, having taken place in relation to two different tests on March 21 and April 16, 2020.

4

20.

The Panel disagrees that the Student’s non-participation can be used as an aggravating factor.
Without knowing the reasons that motivate the Student’s non-participation the Panel is unable to
come to any conclusion regarding the Student’s character based on that non-participation. While a
failure to participate robs the Student of the ability to present evidence of remorse or mitigating
factors that may reduce a sanction, the non-presentation of that evidence is not itself an aggravating
factor that can be used to increase sanction.

21.

Similarly, while it may be true that a Student’s assurance that the behavior in question will not be
repeated may act as a mitigating factor there is no onus on a Student to provide such assurances
such that an absence is an aggravating factor. Even in the absence of assurances from the Student
it cannot be assumed that future offences are more likely simply because the present offences
occurred.

22.

With regard to the “commercial aspect” of the offences, as above, on the evidence we are unable to
conclude that the Student was a subscriber to Chegg.com or that she was aware that the answers
she used were gotten from that site. As such, the commercial nature of the site, disconnected from
the proven conduct of the Student, cannot be used as an aggravating factor.

23.

Finally, although the behavior in question was repeated, two factors must be kept in mind. Although
teaching staff reached out to the Student prior to the second offence there is no evidence that she
reviewed this correspondence. Therefore, it has not been shown that the Student repeated the
behavior after being notified that it was unacceptable. Second, it must be noted that both offences
took place in the initial weeks of the COVID-19 pandemic as lockdowns swept Ontario. It is
reasonable to assume that the global upheaval during those weeks had a negative effect on the
Student. In those circumstances we do not feel the repeated nature of the behavior during this period
is a significant aggravating factor.

24.

However, given the nature of the offence and in the absence of any mitigating factors we find that
a substantial sanction is an appropriate one. Plagiarism strikes at the very heart of academic
integrity and therefore attracts a significant sanction. Therefore, a final grade of zero, two-year
suspension and three-year notation is appropriate.

VI.

ORDER OF THE PANEL

25.

At the conclusion of the hearing, the Panel conferred and made the following order:

5

1.

THAT the Student is guilty of two counts of knowingly representing an idea or expression of an
idea or work of another as her own, contrary to section B.I.1.(d) of the Code;

2.

THAT the following sanctions shall be imposed on the Student:

(a)

a final grade of zero in the course MAT137Y1;

(b)

a suspension from the University of Toronto from the date of this order for a period of two
years, ending on June 15, 2023; and

(c)

a notation of the sanction on her academic record and transcript from the date of this order for
a period of three years, ending on June 15, 2024; and

3.

THAT this case be reported to the Provost for publication of a notice of the decision of the

Tribunal and the sanction imposed, with the Student’s name withheld.

Dated at Toronto, this 13th September, 2021

Dean Embry, Chair
On behalf of the Panel

6

