UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
GOVERNING COUNCIL
Report #382 of the Academic Appeals Committee
April 28, 2016
To the Academic Board
University of Toronto
Your Committee reports that it held a hearing on Monday, April 11, 2016, at which the following
members were present:
Professor Andrew Green (Chair)
Professor Andrea Sass-Kortsak, Faculty Governor
Mr. Alex Ivovic, Student Governor
Secretaries: Mr. Christopher Lang, Director, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances
Ms. Tracey Gameiro, Associate Director, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances
Ms. Krista Osbourne, Administrative Assistant, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty
Grievances
Appearances:
For the Student Appellant:
Mr. A.W. (the Student)
Mr. Geoffrey D. K. Wiebe, Counsel
For the Toronto School of Theology:
Mr. Robert A. Centa, Counsel
Professor Alan Hayes
Dr. Daniella Mallinick
Professor Jaroslav Skira
The Appeal
This appeal relates to a decision of the Academic Appeals Committee of the Graduate Studies
Council (“GSC”) of the Toronto School of Theology (“TST”) dated October 20, 2015 (the “GSC
Decision”). The GSC Decision remitted the appeal of the Student back to an earlier stage in the
appeal process. The Student had requested that the Academic Appeals Committee of the GSC
allow him to “transfer from „ThD‟ into „PhD‟ nomenclature in the research doctorate in
theological studies without being required to complete two further courses”.

2

The Facts
The Student commenced the Th.D. doctoral program within the TST in September 2013. He
took courses in 2013 and the Winter of 2014.
In February 2014, the Student wrote to Professor Skira, the Director of the Graduate Centre for
Theological Studies of the TST, inquiring about switching from the Th.D. program into the
proposed new Ph.D. program. The TST and the University of Toronto were developing the
Ph.D. program with a view to it replacing the Th.D. program. The Student requested information
about the process for switching to the new program, including when the „two new required
cohort courses‟ would be offered and if Th.D. students who had completed the Th.D. courses
would have to take them. The Director replied that they would try to offer at least one of the
courses in the Fall and that „all students will need to do the Cohort courses and the Area Studies
Course… it‟s not a simple transfer.‟ The Student also asked if students could take these required
courses during or after their comprehensive exams. The Director replied that „it may be that
students could progress into comps while doing the required course(s), but that is an issue the
heads of colleges would have to approve (and which is not my decision to make).”
In August 2014, the TST emailed students enrolled in the Th.D. program that it had launched a
Bridge Program to allow eligible Th.D. students to transfer into a new conjoint Ph.D. program.
The Bridge Program was open to students admitted into the Th.D. program for September 2013
and September 2014. The Ph.D. program had gone through many layers of approval including
the Association of Theological Schools, the University of Toronto Quality Assurance Process, an
external review, the University of Toronto Committee on Academic Policy and Programs,
Academic Board of Governing Council and the Executive Committee of Governing Council. The
approval process contemplated the need for a process for existing Th.D. students to transfer into
the new Ph.D. program.
Th.D. students who were admitted for 2013 or 2014 could either complete the Th.D. or apply to
enter the Bridge Program. The August 2014 announcement of the Bridge Program stated that
students who had entered the Th.D. in September 2013 had to meet certain „admission‟
requirements including meeting a minimum GPA in their current program and the admissions
requirements of the new Ph.D. program. Further, they „must successfully complete‟ a minimum
of eight courses including the two courses at the centre of this appeal. These two courses (the
„Required Courses‟) were TSJ5021 Research & Scholarship (“Research & Scholarship”), which
was to be completed in the Fall 2014 semester, and TSJ5022 Area Studies and Course Design
(“Area Studies”), which was to be completed in the Winter 2015 semester. The announcement
set a deadline for application of September 12, 2014.
The Student continued with courses in the Fall of 2014 and Winter of 2015. Although the
Student was eligible to enter the Bridge Program in the Fall of 2014 as he had entered the Th.D.
program in September 2013, he did not apply under the program by the deadline. Instead on
January 8 2015, the Student wrote to the Interim Director of the TST (Professor Skira) requesting
to „transfer from „ThD‟ into „PhD‟ nomenclature”. He stated that he had essentially met the

3

objectives of the Required Courses because he had authored an academic book and designed and
taught an undergraduate course.
David Wagschal, the Administrator of the Graduate Centre, replied to the Student on January 9,
2015 that it was still possible to join the Bridging courses, taking Area Studies in the Winter
2015 term and Research & Scholarship in the Fall 2015 semester. He asked the Student to
complete the enrollment form. The Student replied that given that extra courses were required
and that he was at the comprehensive exam phase of the Th.D., “I will remain in the Th.D.”.
On March 4, 2015, the Student again wrote to Professor Skira as Interim Director of the TST
asking for a response as to why the work he had done was not equivalent in learning outcomes to
the Required Courses. On March 10, 2015 the Interim Director responded, stating that he
misunderstood the nature of the earlier email and that as no decision had been made on that
email, he viewed the email as a “petition to be exempted from program requirements”.
However, since the Student had not applied for the Bridging program, the Interim Director stated
that the Student did not have any status and the Admissions Committee would make any decision
on the transfer and admission. However, the Interim Director also noted that the Required
Courses were required of all students and that he did not believe that it was possible to assess any
potential equivalencies. He stated “these are just preliminary comments, and do not constitute an
academic decision on my part. If you wish to pursue this, you will need to provide better
justification for equivalencies in your petition to transfer and be admitted into the new PhD.”
The Student did not apply to the Bridge program following this email. Instead, on March 25,
2015 the Student filed a notice of appeal with the Advanced Degree Appeals Division of the
TST. The notice stated that the decision to be appealed was that “I have not been permitted to
transfer from „ThD‟ to „PhD‟ nomenclature in the research doctorate without being required to
complete two further courses”. The Student stated that to enroll in the Bridge program would
have delayed his studies and prevented him from maintaining the required two-year full-time
residency. In addition to the arguments in his January 8 2015 letter, he noted that his time in the
learning community in Trinity College satisfied the cohort requirement.
On October 20, 2015 the Academic Appeals Committee of the GSC released its decision. For the
hearing, the Student had submitted a supporting letter from the Dean of Divinity of Trinity
College that the Student „has substantially met the outcomes‟ of the Required Courses and it
would have been a serious delay in his studies to have taken these courses. At the hearing, the
Student also had his supervisor (who is a former Dean of Divinity at Trinity College) support his
position. The decision of the Academic Appeals Committee of GSC stated:
noting that the Appellant did not choose to pursue the avenue available through
application to the conjoint PhD programme under the existing bridging option, and
not finding his arguments made in support of his appeal persuasive, and determining
that the channel of recourse had not been followed properly, the Panel refers the
matter back to the appropriate parties involved in Step 2 of the channel of recourse
(as described in section 14.2.1 of the “TST ThD and PhD Handbook”).

4

In terms of whether the Student‟s work was equivalent to the Required Courses, the Academic
Appeals Committee‟s decision stated “efforts to resolve this matter should first be undertaken at
earlier steps in the channels of recourse”. Further, noting that the Director had been on
sabbatical, the Academic Appeals Committee concluded “the second step of the resolution
process was not satisfactorily concluded” and “there remains room for exploration of an
accommodation within the existing bridging program.” They sent “the matter back to that step
for fuller consideration of possible resolutions.”
The TST Th.D/Ph.D. Handbook contemplated three steps for the Student‟s appeal: an informal
resolution with the Director of the Graduate Centre for Theological Studies (Step 1), an initial
appeal to the Department „if necessary‟ (Step 2) and an appeal to the AAC (Step 3). However,
there was some confusion about what the „second step‟ entailed or even if it existed. On
November 3, 2015, in response to an email from the Student, the Director of TST informed the
Student that the TST Academic Council held off considering next steps in the appeal until
December as a new policy may then be adopted on transferring credits into the PhD program.
On November 27, 2015, the Student launched his appeal to your Committee. In this appeal, the
Student seeks an order:
1. Declaring that he has met the academic requirements set by TST for transfer from the
Th.D. into the Ph.D. program through equivalency to the Required Courses; and
2. Directing the TST to transfer him into the Ph.D. program immediately.
On December 18, 2015, the TST wrote to the Student informing him that the Academic Council
had commissioned Professor Hayes who was Director of the TST to act on its behalf in place of
the Step Two that was referred to in the GSC Decision. It noted that if the appeal was not
resolved through meeting with Professor Hayes, the Student would have a right to appeal to a
new TST appeals committee. Further, it noted that the Student had a right to appeal to your
Committee.

Decision
This appeal comes before your Committee in a somewhat unusual manner. The GSC Decision
did not decide on the merits of the Student‟s appeal but instead sent the matter back to an earlier
internal stage in the appeals process. The Student appealed the GSC Decision to your
Committee. Counsel for the Student rightly noted, and counsel for TST helpfully agreed, that no
adverse inference should be drawn against the Student for coming before your Committee rather
than pursuing further internal appeals in the circumstances of this case.
A central issue in this appeal is the jurisdiction of your Committee to provide the remedy
requested by the Student. As noted by Chair Hamish Stewart in Motion Decision #359-1:
The purpose and function of the AAC, according to s. 2.1 of its Terms of Reference,
is to decide “appeals made by students against decisions of faculty, college or school

5

councils (or committees thereof) in the application of academic regulations and
requirements”. Its jurisdiction is therefore limited to considering whether those
academic regulations and requirements have been applied correctly, consistently, and
fairly. Its remedial jurisdiction is limited to making orders of an academic nature;
such as allowing a student to withdraw late without academic penalty, granting
aegrotat standing, granting a request to write a deferred examination. It is wellrecognized that the AAC has no jurisdiction to re-read a paper or examination to
consider the merits of the grade assigned, or to review decisions about admissions.”
Further, as noted in Report #368, “it is not the jurisdiction of this Committee to change Faculty
policy but rather ensure that it was applied fairly and consistently.”
In this case, a key question is whether the appeal related to an unfair application of a policy or
regulation or to a claim that a policy or regulation was unfair. The TST created the Bridge
program to allow eligible Th.D. students to transfer into the Ph.D. program. The Bridge program
included a requirement to complete the Required Courses. It did not include any provisions
about substituting for the Required Courses. There were provisions for advanced standing for
previous studies and advanced placement. These provisions, however, relate to substituting
courses for required courses. The Student, however, does not wish to substitute courses for the
Required Courses but other activities that he has undertaken including writing a book and
creating and teaching a course. While the Student notes that he wrote his book and created and
taught the course while at the TST, these activities were not course work. The TST did not
provide for such equivalencies for the Bridge program.
In Report #371 Chair Hamish Stewart addressed a jurisdictional issue relating to the conversion
of a grade a student received while on exchange in France. The Faculty had a grade conversion
scale. The Report states:
The Student‟s central complaint in this case is that the conversion formula does not
adequately reflect the difference between French and U of T grading scales. The
Faculty says it does. This is in essence a disagreement about the wisdom of the
procedure, not about the fairness of its application to the Student. On p.4 of his
submissions, the Student makes precisely this point: “I deemed the policy itself is
„unfair‟”. But the AAC has no jurisdiction over the fairness of the policy. The AAC
cannot change the Student‟s grade or otherwise modify his transcript on the basis that
the procedure for converting Institut grades to U of T grades is unfair or unwise.
The essence of the Student‟s argument is the same in this case. The Student is in effect arguing
it was unfair not to count his activities, including the publishing of a book and creating and
teaching a course, to be equivalent to completing the Required Courses. There are arguments
why such a policy of equivalencies would be fair including a recognition that such activities may
lead to deeper learning in certain cases. Equally, there are arguments why such a policy might
be unfair, such as that there is no consistent, fair way to assess such equivalencies. Notably, the
GSC did not recommend a policy to allow such equivalences when considering the issue with
respect to Th.D. students not eligible for the Bridge program.

6

However, the key for this appeal is that the TST did not allow such equivalencies. It created the
Bridging program to allow certain students in the Th.D. program to transfer to the Ph.D. program
if they wished. It clearly stated that the students had to apply for the program and must complete
the Required Courses. The Student knew of this requirement as far back as February 2014. The
Student did not apply for the Bridge program nor seek other accommodations such as taking the
Required Courses and the comprehensive exams at the same time. The TST has not granted such
an exemption to other students, as it does not grant these types of exemptions. There was no
unfairness in the application of policies or regulations in not permitting the Student such
equivalencies. In fact, allowing such an exemption in this case would be unfair to the students
who did apply for the Bridging program and completed the Required Courses. Further, the
Student will be competing against students from the TST with a Ph.D. because he chose not to
enter the Bridging program.
There was considerable discussion at the hearing about procedural fairness. Your Committee
would like to express its disappointment with the TST process. As the Student pointed out, the
Handbook was not updated to reflect the current structure of the TST, the Academic Appeals
Committee sent the matter back to what may have been a non-existent step in the process and, at
least when the Director was on sabbatical, the same person may have been responsible for the
two initial stages of the appeal. Your Committee strongly recommends that the TST undertake a
review of its appeal process to ensure that its processes are fair and transparent for students.
However, given the facts of this case, your Committee does not believe the Student was treated
unfairly. The Student did not avail himself of his many opportunities to enter the Bridging
program. The Student was clearly aware in February 2014 of the nature of the Bridging program
including the Required Courses and the concerns about potentially not being able to sit his
comprehensive exams while taking courses. He did not approach the TST to see if he could
obtain an exemption to allow him to take the courses and the comprehensive exams at the same
time. He did not enter the program in the Fall of 2014, although that would have given him the
opportunity to seek an accommodation in a more timely manner. He did not apply to the Bridge
program and give greater support for his request for exemption in January 2015 and instead
clearly stated he would stay in the Th.D. program. He was provided with the opportunities to
invoke mediation including with the Director of the TST who had returned from sabbatical, to
seek discussions with the Director following the Academic Appeals Committee decision (and if
they fail, return to the Academic Appeals Committee) or to come before your Committee. As we
noted above, we draw no adverse inference against him that he made a particular choice – to
bring this appeal to your Committee. However, the TST did provide him with ample other
opportunities to seek resolution of his appeal, including altering the process when it was clear the
process as written was not possible.
Further, the Student stated that the process was procedurally unfair because of a lack of reasons
by the Academic Appeals Committee. In particular, counsel for the Student noted that the issue
is of great importance to the Student and so, under Baker v Canada (Minister of Citizenship and
Immigration), [1999] 2 SCR 817, the Student is deserving of more than minimal fairness.
Counsel for the Student also pointed to Newfoundland and Labrador Nurses’ Union v
Newfoundland and Labrador (Treasury Board), 2011 SCC 62 to the effect that a complete

7

absence of reasons is a breach of procedural fairness. However, your Committee finds that there
was not a complete absence of reasons from the Academic Appeals Committee. The Academic
Appeals Committee sent the matter back to an earlier stage in the appeal process. The
Committee gave reasons for this decision – that the Student had not entered the Bridging
program and the earlier steps had not been properly followed and „there remains room for
exploration of an accommodation within the existing bridging option.‟ As noted above, your
Committee finds that there was no policy that would have allowed the accommodation that the
Student was requesting. However, returning to earlier steps in the process may have led to
alternate accommodations.
Even if we were to find that there were no reasons provided below, as noted in Report #350 the
Student was able to proceed to the next step and was able to obtain a hearing before your
Committee. At most a finding that there were no reasons would militate in favour of sending the
matter back to the Academic Appeals Committee to reconsider and provide reasons. However,
neither party felt remitting the matter to the Academic Appeals Committee was the appropriate
remedy and your Committee agrees in this case as there was no evidence that a policy or
regulation was applied unfairly.
Finally, at the hearing both sides stated that they would be willing to talk about possible avenues
for resolving the Student‟s concerns about his degree. The Student seems clearly to be a strong,
hard-working scholar. Your Committee strongly encourages the TST and the Student to work
together to see if they can find a solution to the Student‟s concerns.
The appeal is dismissed.

