UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
GOVERNING COUNCIL
REPORT NUMBER 273 OF THE ACADEMIC APPEALS COMMITTEE
Your Committee reports that it held a hearing on Tuesday December 17, 2002, at which
the following were present:
Assistant Dean Bonnie Goldberg, Chair
Mr Mark Braun
Professor Phil Byer
Professor Sherwin Desser
Professor Luigi Girolametto
Mr Paul Holmes, Judicial Affairs Officer
In Attendance:
Mr N.M., the Appellant
Professor Gordon Anderson, University of Toronto at Mississauga, Erindale
College
This is an appeal from the decision of the Academic Appeals Board of the University of
Toronto at Mississauga (“UTM”), dated October 4, 2001. The Academic Appeals Board
(“the Board”) affirmed a Committee on Standing decision, dated July 5, 2001, denying
the appellant late withdrawal from four courses: MAT311H5; BIO361H5; BIO407H5;
and ECO460Y5. The appellant appeals to this Committee for late withdrawal from two of
the four courses: BIO361H5; and ECO460Y5.
The appellant was an above average student during his first three years at University. In
the 2000-2001 academic year, the appellant experienced personal and financial
difficulties and could not focus on school. He was not attending classes regularly or
completing his tests and assignments. His problems were compounded by the fact that he
was not receiving OSAP and in fact, was required to pay back an overpayment from a
previous year. He was working long hours during the day. He was in conflict with
parents, who were going through their own personal and financial problems, and
occasionally, the appellant had to leave home for periods of time.
In May and July of 2001, the appellant made a series of petitions to the Committee on
Standing regarding his performance. He was granted late withdrawal without academic
penalty for four of his courses, and granted deferred examinations for the two courses in
question.

Report Number 273 of the Academic Appeals Committee
The appellant chose not to write the deferred examinations that were provided to him by
the Committee on Standing in the August 2001 period, which resulted in failures in these
two courses, and instead appealed to the Academic Appeals Board for late withdrawal
from four courses. The Academic Appeals Board found that the appellant did not present
a compelling case for an exemption from the Faculty’s regulations, and further, that the
Faculty had granted the appellant many concessions throughout his four academic years.
In the opinion of the Board, the appellant should have known the procedures for
withdrawing from courses when “personal problems interfered with your studies.”
The appellant returned to school for a fifth year to complete his degree, and earned
adequate grades. He is now enrolled as a first year medical student at a university in the
West Indies.
The appellant appeals to this Committee for late withdrawal for two of the courses, both
of which he failed. He did not appeal to this Committee for late withdrawal from two of
the courses, both of which he passed with a D (BIO407H5) and C- (MAT311H5)
The University’s position at the hearing was that the reasons for the Academic Appeals
Board decision are still pertinent and relevant. The University argued that the appellant
should not be allowed to “cleanse” a transcript of poor grades without compelling
reasons. The appellant did not offer any information to your Committee different than
that presented to the Academic Appeals Board. The appellant indicated that his
preference was not to discuss his personal problems. He reiterated that it was a difficult
year for him due to his personal and financial problems, and that he returned to school in
2002 more focused on his goals (medical school). He acknowledged that he made poor
choices in the 2000-2001 year, and did not seek any assistance from the university to deal
with his problems. He did not offer any specific reasons for why he chose not to write the
deferred examinations, except that at that point, he had decided that the year was lost to
him academically. The appellant told the Committee that our decision would not have
much bearing on his future, as he has achieved his goal of attending medical school.
However, he wished to have the failures removed from his transcript.
The Committee considered both sides of this issue, and came to the conclusion that the
decision of the Academic Appeals Board should be upheld. The appellant did not present
any information to the Committee that was new or different than that which the
Academic Appeals Board had before it in October 2001. The remedy of late withdrawal
without academic penalty is a penalty reserved for the most extenuating of circumstances.
The Academic Appeals Board recognized the difficulties facing this appellant and
granted him four such withdrawals. However, the Appeals Board also chose to grant
deferred examinations in the other courses, a decision which would have enabled the
appellant to salvage some of his year. The appellant chose not to use this opportunity. We
see no reason to disagree with the discretion of the Academic Appeals Board and do not
have before us any evidence of compelling circumstances that would permit us to grant
the appellant additional late withdrawals. Furthermore, having been given deferred
examinations and other special consideration throughout his academic career, the
appellant should have reasonably known the deadlines for withdrawing from courses

Page 2 of 3

2

Report Number 273 of the Academic Appeals Committee
when it appeared that his personal problems made continuing in the courses untenable.
He completed virtually no work in the second term, and hoped that he could have his
transcript erased. We are not prepared to grant this remedy. The appellant has moved on,
putting his difficult academic year behind him, and for this we commend him.
On the basis of the information provided to the Committee, we are confident in our
decision; however, we wish to express our regret that both sides, UTM and the appellant,
did not provide us with more detailed and helpful information.
The appeal is dismissed.

January 6, 2003

Paul J. Holmes
Judicial Affairs Officer
(Secretary)

Assistant Dean Bonnie Goldberg
Chair

Page 3 of 3

3

