Report #273

   DATE: January 6, 2003
   PARTIES: Mr. N.M. (the Appellant) v. UTM
   Hearing Date(s): December 17, 2002
   Committee Members:
   Assistant Dean Bonnie Goldberg, Chair
   Mr Mark Braun
   Professor Phil Byer
   Professor Sherwin Desser
   Professor Luigi Girolametto
   Judicial Affairs Officer:
   Mr Paul Holmes
   In Attendance:
   Mr N.M., the Appellant
   Professor Gordon Anderson, UTM
   UTM â late with withdrawal without academic penalty â personal and
   financial problems â Faculty granted deferred exams for the courses â
   deferred exams not written â no specific reason offered for not writing
   deferred exams â no new or different information presented â
   opportunity afforded by Divisional remedy not used â no evidence of
   compelling circumstances â drop dates for withdrawing from courses
   should have reasonably been known â Appeal dismissed
   Request for late withdrawal without academic penalty from two courses.
   The Student claimed that he could not focus on school due to personal
   and financial problems. The Student petitioned to the Faculty and was
   granted deferred examinations for the courses. The Student chose not to
   write the deferred examinations and he subsequently failed the two
   courses. The Student acknowledged that he made poor choices and that he
   did not seek any assistance from the University to deal with his
   problems. The Student claimed that he chose not to write the deferred
   examinations because he had decided that the year was lost to him
   academically. The Committee found that the decision of the Divisional
   Appeals Board should be upheld. The Student did not present any
   information to the Committee that was new or different than that before
   the Divisional Appeals Board; the Student chose not to use the
   opportunity that was afforded by the Divisional remedy; there was no
   evidence of compelling circumstances that would permit the Committee to
   grant late withdrawals;Â  and having been given special consideration
   throughout his academic career, the Student should have reasonably
   known the deadlines for withdrawing from courses when it appeared that
   his circumstances made continuing in the courses untenable. Appeal
   dismissed. The Committee stated that it regretted that the Faculty and
   the Student did not provide it with more detailed and helpful
   information.
   [1]View Report

References

   1. file:///media/12546
