Case #542

   DATE: April 29, 2009
   PARTIES: University of Toronto v. M.S.
   Hearing Date(s): March 26, 2009
   Panel Members:
   John A. Keefe, Chair
   Professor Lesley Lavack, Faculty Member
   Jamon Camisso, Student Member
   Appearances:
   Nick Shkordoff, DLS for the Student
   Robert Centa, Assistant Discipline Counsel for the University
   Trial Division â s. B.i.1(a) of Code â forged documents â altered term
   assignments resubmitted â Agreed Statement of Facts â guilty plea â
   Joint Submission on Penalty â prior academic offence â good prospect of
   rehabilitation â sentencing principle â see R. v. Michael Tsicos â
   grade assignment of zero for course; three-year suspension; four-year
   notation on transcript; and report to Provost
   Student charged with six offences under the Code. The charges related
   to allegations that the Student altered and resubmitted two term
   assignments. The matter proceeded on an Agreed Statement of Facts. The
   Student pleaded guilty to two charges under s. B.i.1(a) of the Code.
   The Panel found that the facts supported the finding of a contravention
   of the Code. The parties submitted a Joint Submission on Penalty. The
   Panel considered that the Student has been sanctioned previously for
   similar academic dishonesty. The Panel observed that the proposed
   penalty involved a lengthy suspension when combined with the Studentâs
   earlier academic suspension. The Panel considered that the Student
   pleaded guilty, cooperated with the proceedings, acknowledged the
   seriousness of the offence and took responsibility for his conduct, and
   found that there was a good prospect of rehabilitation. The Panel
   considered that there was a Joint Submission on Penalty and the
   sentencing principle enunciated in R. v. Michael Tsicos, and accepted
   the Joint Submission on Penalty. The Panel imposed a grade of zero in
   the course; a three-year suspension; a four-year notation on the
   Studentâs academic record and transcript; and that a report be issued
   to the Provost.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12709
