Report 355

DATE:

   April 15, 2011

PARTIES:

   C.K.,Â  (the Student) v. Faculty of Arts and Sciences, Woodsworth
   College

Hearing Date(s):

   March 10, 2011

Committee Members:

   Prof. Edward Morgan, Chair
   Prof. William Gough
   James Park

Appearances:

For the Student Appellant:

   C.K. (the Student)

For the Faculty of Arts and Sciences, Woodsworth College:

   Prof. John W. Browne, Dean's Designate, Faculty of Arts and Science
   Cheryl Shook, Registrar, Woodsworth College

   Appeal of a decision of Woodsworth College to deny the Student
   withdrawal from two courses from a Certificate Program in Business. The
   appeal relates to the preliminary issue of the timeliness of the
   appeal. The Student was enrolled in the courses approximately twenty
   years prior to the appeal in the 1990-1991 academic year. Woodsworth
   took the position the 90 day appeal period for seeking such relief
   expired in November 1991 and that the matter could not be reopened. The
   Student stressed the need for confidentiality in the proceedings and
   was satisfied with the Universityâs policy of redacting names from
   publicly available copies of published academic appeals. The Committee
   found that Woodsworthâs view that the appeal period expired twenty
   years prior was too strict. The Committee held that, if a student had
   evidence there was a mistake in their transcript dating from 20 years
   ago and the error was only just recognized, the passage of time would
   not prevent the Committee from addressing the error. The Committee
   found, however, that the Student became aware of the problem twelve
   years after the courses ended in 2003. The Student acknowledged this
   fact. The Committee found that the Director of Professional and
   International Programs at Woodsworth gave the Student all the
   information needed to submit an appeal at that point. The Committee
   held that once an alleged error is discovered and a student is given a
   proper explanation of how to submit a formal appeal, the appeal
   deadline begins to run. The Committee further held that both Woodsworth
   and the University of Toronto at large are not open to appeals from
   every student for an indefinite period of time. The Committee explained
   that to do so would place too great a burden on the University of
   Torontoâs record keeping and appeal system. The Committee concluded
   that the appeal period expired 90 days after the explanatory
   conversation the Student had with the Director of Professional and
   International Programs at Woodsworth twelve years after the 1990-1992
   academic year. The Committee found it was on the Student to bring the
   appeal within 90 days at that time, and could not wait four years later
   to do so. Appeal dismissed.
   [1]View Report

References

   1. file:///media/12599
