Case 539

DATE:

   August 11, 2009

PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v.Â S.H.

Hearing Date(s):

   February 26, 2009, June 30, 2009

Panel Members:

   Ms. Roslyn Tsao, Chair
   Professor Andrea Litvack, Faculty Member
   Mr. Sadek Ali, Student Member

Appearances:

   Mr. Robert Centa, Assistant Discipline Counsel for the University
   Ms. Julia Wilkes, DLS for the Student
   Mr. R. Singh, for the Student

In Attendance:

   S.H., the Student
   Ms. Lucy Gaspini,Â Academic Affairs Office, UTM

   Student charged under s. B.i.1(d) and s. B.i.1(b) of the Code . The
   charges related to allegations that the Student sold essays to other
   students. The evidence included the Studentâs statement to the Campus
   Police admitting that he sold an essay to another student and a sworn
   affidavit by another student charged with purchasing coursework. The
   filing of charges was delayed for six months as the Student avoided the
   attempts by the University to address the allegations. The Student
   promised to get back to the University and never did. The Student
   pleaded guilty to the charges. The Panel found the Student guilty of
   the offences under s. B.i.1(d) and s. B.i.1(b) of the Code . The
   Tribunal adjourned for one month for the penalty phase to allow the
   Student to respond to the Universityâs recommendation for expulsion. At
   the hearing, the counsel for the Student did not appear as the Student
   terminated his counsel on the date of or just before the hearing. The
   Panel allowed an adjournment for the Student to obtain new counsel. At
   the resumed hearing, the Studentâs father testified that it was very
   important for his sons to finish university and that he had taken his
   son to religious counseling after learning about his dishonest
   behaviour. He also testified that his son had started taking medication
   and had become more attentive and responsible. The Student did not
   testify but tendered copies of receipts for prescriptions for
   medication and letters confirming that he tutored for a period of ten
   months and that he volunteered at a food bank for ten hours. The Panel
   did not give any weight to the receipts as they did not prove that the
   Student was actually taking his medication. The Panel made an adverse
   finding about the character of the Student because of (i) his lack of
   cooperation and (ii) his failure to apologize or display any remorse
   despite the guilty plea. The Panel found that the letters did not
   convincingly support the Studentâs submission that he had made attempts
   to improve himself. The Panel found that the Student failed to
   demonstrate that there was no risk of re-offending given the lack of
   apology/remorse, the lack of extenuating circumstances, and that the
   Student has delayed at all stages. The Panel stated that while a
   âsellerâ in general was not a more significant player in the
   sale/purchase of academic work, engagement in an on-going enterprise
   was an aggravating factor. The Panel also found that selling of
   academic work is obviously detrimental to the University as discussed
   in V.L. (Case No. 440). The Panel found that Appendix âCâ of the Code
   also applied to sellers as well as to buyers. As for deterrence, the
   Panel stated that the fact that this is a rare case involving a seller
   and thus having a minimal effect on general deterrence is no basis for
   reducing penalty. Furthermore, the Panel found that there was a
   justification for specific deterrence as the Student has not displayed
   remorse. The Panel took into consideration the Studentâs submission
   that suspension was the more appropriate penalty based on other cases
   relating to âpurchasersâ and other plagiarism-type situations and also
   the principle of consistency acknowledged by the discipline counsel in
   Y. (Case No. 404). The Panel stated that the Student would not have
   earned the credits during the six months preceding the hearing if not
   for the delay. The Panel found that the University was not responsible
   for the delay. The Panel imposed a five-year suspension commencing the
   original date of the hearing before the delay; a seven-year notation on
   the Studentâs transcript; and a report be issued to the Provost.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12737
