Case 539

UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
The University of Toronto

IN TI;IE MATTER of charges of academic dishonesty made on October 24, 2008,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic J./Jatters, 1995,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Act, 1971, as amended.

BETWEEN:
UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO (the "University")

-andS.H.

Panel Members:
Ms. Roslyn M. Tsao, Chair
Professor Andrea Litvack, Faculty Panel Member
Mr. Sadek Ali, Student Panel Member

Appearances:

1-'fr. R. Centa, Assistant Discipline Counsel for University
Ms. Julia Wilkes, Law Student, for the Student (on June 30, 2009)
Mr. R. Singh, for the Student (on February 26, 2009)

In Attendance:
S .H., the Student
Ms. Lucy Gaspini, Academic Affairs Office, University of Toronto at Mississauga

Reasons for Decision
Delivered by Ms. Roslyn M. Tsao

1.

BACKGROUND

1.1

The trial division of the University Tribunal was convened on February 26, 2009 to consider the
charges again~t the Student as set out in a letter dated October 24, 2008 from Professor Edith
Hillan. The Notice of Hearing for those charges was dated November 11, 2008.

-2-

1.2

The Student was charged with. the following academic offences:
(a)

On or about April 8, 2007, the Student k,,owingly aided or assisted Ms. P. to commit t.1-ie
offence of plagiarism contrary to section B .I. l ( d) of the Code;

(b)

On or about April 8, 2007, the Student knowingly aided or assisted Ms. P. to obtain
unauthorized assistance contrary to section B .I.l (b) of the Code;

(c)

In the alternative, the Student lmowingly aided or assisted Ms. P. to engage in a fonn of

cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or misrepresentation in order to
obtain academic credit or other academic advantage, contrary to Section B.I.3(b) of the
Code.

(d)

On or about November 19, 2007, the Student lmowingly aided or assisted Mr. A. to
commit the offence of plagiarism contrary to section B .I. l (d) of the Code;

(e)

On or about November 19, 2007, the Student knowingly aided or assisted lvfr. A. to
obtain unauthorized assistance contrary to section B.I.l(b) offae Code;

(f)

In the alternative, the Student knowingly aided or assisted :Mr. A. to engage in a form of

cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or misrepresentation in order to
obtain academic credit or other academic advantage, contrary to Section B .I.3 (b) of the
Code.

2.

CHARGES Al'ID FACTS

1.3

An Agreed Statement of Facts as signed by the parties on Febrnary 23, 2009 was admitted into

evidence. Without repeating all of the agreed upon facts, the most pertinent are:
(a)

The Student was registered at the University of Toronto at Mississauga ("UTM") in the
Fall of 2004.

Essay Purchased bv Ms. P.
(b)

In the Fall of 2006, another student at UTM, Ms. P ., hired the Student to write an essay

for her to submit in one of her courses in exchange for $120.00. The Student did provide
an essay for Ms. P. to submit and was pa.id $120.00. Furthermore, the Student admits
t.1.at the essay consisted entirely of plagiarized material.

-3-

(c)

Ms. P. was given a failing grade on the purchased essay ai.,d, as a result, failed the course.
Ms. P., therefore, sought a refund from t½.e Student. However, Ms. P. had difficulty in
tracking down the Student, was only able to communicate wit½. the Student's bmd1er (also
a UTM student) and ultin1ately got ii.7.to an altercation with the Stu.dent's younger brother
who had nothing to do with the purchase of the essay .

. (d)

As a result of this altercation on January 13, 2008, t.1.e Campus Police became involved
and the Student's brother made a report to the Campus Police. In his signed Statement to
the _Qampus Police, the Student's brother states:

To begin with, my brother, [SJ, gets paid to complete. and do other people's
assignm€;nts, such as essays. A person I know at UTM... has paid my brother
$120 for· a school assignment to be completed by my brother. Since [ J got a
failedmark on the assignment, he approached me to somehow to pay off the $120
in short instalments, as my brother is not willing to pay the fall amount ...
(e)

Ms. P.'s statement to Campus Police states:

I had heard of [SJ around campus a couple of times, but never really took it
seriously until !was actually in a bind. At that moment !found out details of [SJ
from an acquaintance and decided to give him a call... I gave them all the books
needed, along with a note that I had for the essay. After having received the
essay about 3-4 days later, I handed it in.
(f)

The Campus Police met with the Student following the incident a..TJ. cautioned him that he
was not required to give any Statement. The Student, nevertheless, provided a signed
Statement on January 16, 2008, which confirmed that he agreed to write a paper for Ms.
P. in exchange for money and that he was aware of the fact that the essay would be
handed in for her course.

(g)

As an aside, the Student advised that he was willing to provide Ms. P. with a refund of
$50 and had agreed to drop off the funds with'the Campus Police Office the following
week. However, the Student did not ever attend at the Campus Police Office to leave the
$50 refund, as he had previously agreed.

(h)

The incident came to the attention of the Dean's office and Ms. P was tb.e subject of a,_'l
academic-offence meeting in August 18, 2008.

Ms. P. admitted her guilt to havi.11.g

received unaut.½.orized aid from the Student.

Ms. P. received_ academic sanctions

consisting of a zero grade in the course, a 12-mopth suspension a...T1d an 18-month notation
on her transcript.

-4Essay Purchased bv :Mr. A
(i)

In early November, 2007, another UTM student, Mr. A., asked .the Student to write an
essay for him at a cost of $20 or $25.

G)

M__r. A has sworn in his Affidavit of October 21, 2008 that he has known the Student
since 2007 and recalls the Student telling him that he was a "good student and wrote
essays for other students who paid him for the essays". J:vfr. A. has sworn that he had
hired the Student to write an essay for him the Fall of2007 for $30 or $40, which J:vfr. A
.

·•

had submitted and received a high grade.

It is noted that the Student denies these

particular factual allegations of:Mr. A. in the Agreed Statement of Facts.
(k)

The essay that Ivfr. A. retained the Student to write in early November, 2007 was
provided on November 19, 2007 by the Student. The essay was handed in by :Mr. A The
content of the essay attracted the attention of the professor. At the meeting with the
professor, Ivfr. A. admitted that he had had unauthorized aid from the Student and was
engaged in academic dishonesty. Ivfr. A. has been charged under the Code and these
charges remain outstanding pending the disposition of this case 1.

Attempts to Address Allegations Against the Student Between Februarv and August, 2008
(1)

As a result of the matters involving Ms. P. and Mr. A coming to light, the Assistant Dean
wrote to the Student on February 5, 2008 to advise him that she had received reports from
th_e Campus Police and other sources which indicate that he provided "unauthorized
assistance to other students" by writing essays for other students for a fee. This letter was
cl~ar as· to the allegations against the Student. The Student was to contact Ms. Gaspini
before February 19, 2008.

(m)

On or around February 19, 2008, the Student called Ms. Gaspini and indicated that he
was ill and did not want to meet with the Dean's Designate for another three months. The
S~dent also asked that Ms. Gaspini only contact him by email at a given email address.

(n)

On February 20, Ms Gaspini emailed the Student asking him to call her that day to
dis9uss "a couple of concerns" and indicating that she thought "it would be in our best ~

1 As advised by Mr. Centa.

-5-

interest to talk". There was no response from the Student. On February 21, Ms. Gaspini
emailed tb.e Student again and indicated th.at "It is i.i--n.portai.7.t that we speak". The Student
emailed back on February22 and stated "I am not in school right now. Vvhen I am back
in school I will talk to you. Thanks!".

Ms. Gaspini replied within 15 minutes ''I

understai.7.d you are not in school right now but we still need to talk C&.7. you call me on
Monday or Tuesday?"
(o)

From the Agreed Statement of Facts, there appears to be no further collhuunication
between Ms. Gaspini and the Student until April 17, 2008, when Ms. Gaspini reached the
Student's mother by telephone and asked her to tell the Student that she was calling "with
.

.

regar.d to- ai.7. important matter" and left 2 contact numbers. Later that day, Ms. Gaspini
emailed . the Student to advise that she was aware that he would be on campus on
Thursday, April 24 and that she would like to organize a meeting with th.e Dean's
Designate with him that day.
(p)

On April 18, 2008, the Student called Ms Gaspini to advise that he would not be able to
meet on April 24 th due to full-time work obligations. The Student told Ms. Gaspini that
he would get back to her with dates for the end of April or early May to meet. The
Student did not, however, call or email Ms. Gaspini after April 18 th .

(q)

On August 1, 2008, the Dean wrote to the Vice-Provost requesting that charges be laid
against the Student.

3.

Finding of Guilt

3 .1

Based on .the facts set out in the Agreed Statement of Facts and the documents contained in the
Joint Book of Documents filed by the parties as Exhibit "3 ", a,_7.d no ot.½.er evidence being called
by the Student, the Panel unanimously accepted th.e Student's Guilty Plea to charges (i), (ii), (iv)
and (v). The University has withdrawn charges (iii) and (vi).

4.

Penalty Pilase

Scheduling Background
4.1

The penalty phase was adjourned to March 30, 2009 following the guilty plea on February 26,
2009. This was to permit the Student to make a full response to the University's request for a
recoffil-nendation for expulsion.

-64.2

The Student wanted to tender expert evidence of a psychiatrist, Dr. Syed, for the penalty phase.
The Panel also notes that the Student's counsel alluded to the possibility that the Student would
make an apology in requesting the adjournment. University counsel advised that he would want
disclosure of all documentation considered by Dr. _Syed and of his notes of any meetings with the
Student in advance of Dr. Syed giving evidence.

4.3

-On March 30, 2009, _the Sttldent attended at the hearing but his counsel emailed that afternoon
that the Student had "terminate_d" him as his COlli7.Sel.

It is presumed that this termination

:J.

occurred on.March 30 th or only just before since there was no prior notice given by counsel or the
Student of the_change in representation.
4.4

The Student's: father, Dr. H., acted as agent for the Student on March 30 th and, accepted the
University's offer of an adjournment so that the Student could obtain new counsel to give him
advice as to the evidence of Dr. Syed and to address disclosure requests of the University counsel
if Dr. Syed was being tendered. The Panel notes that Dr. H. wanted to tender a written "apology"
from his son that evening but that the Panel advised him to leave it with new counsel to introduce
at the resumption of the hearing.

Again, University counsel advised that he would want

disclosure of all documentation considered by Dr. Syed and of his notes of any meetings with the
Student in advance of Dr. Syed giving evidence. This issue was to be discussed between counsel
and, if it could not be resolved, then a motion in advance of the penalty hearing would be
arranged.
4.5

The Chair, via telephone conferences, case-managed the ensuing scheduling of a hearing date for
penalty and any other preliminary matters. During a conference call on April 15, 2009, the
resumption date of June 30, 2009 was selected with the Student's_ interim counsei2, Mr. Mirza,
--

and was on a pre-emptory basis to the Student, with or without counsel. The Student was
-counselled- by the Chair to seek the assistance of Downtown Legal Services in the event that he
was una:ble to retain his interim counsel for the resumption date.
4.6

On June 18, 2009, 1-ir. Mirza emailed to advise that the Student's file was being immediately
transferred to Downtown Legal Services and that the resumption date of June 30 th would remain
in place. -

2 Mr. F_ Mirza, acted on behalf of the Student during some of the conference calls on an interim basis until he could

be formally and fully retained.

-7-

Student's Evidence for Penaltv Phase
4.7

On June 30, 2009 the hearing resumed for foe Penalty phase.

4.8

The Student tendered Dr. H., the Student's father, as a witness for this phase 3 . Dr. H. is the
Student's father.

Dr. H. explained that he and his wife brought faeir famiiy to Canada from

Bangledesh in October, 1995. Dr. H. has a PhD degree from a.i.1 American university and :Mrs. H.
has a Master's degree in Statistics. Unfortunately, neifoer Dr. or :Mrs. H. has had much success in
finding fruitful employment in Canada a.i---id have been surviving on life-savings.
4.9

Dr. H. indicated that the family's financial problems were not discussed with his 2 sons and that
they were sh:l!ered from the burden of t.11eir difficult financial circumstances except by the
obvious inability of the children to have the type of luxuries that their fellow schoolmates may
have had. Dr. H. also testified that the Student and his brother had received student loans which
were currently outstanding. The Student, who has lived with his parents during university, has
not paid nor contributed to the household expenses. The Student did some tutoring in 2007 and,
according to Dr H. kept his income for his own (social) expenses.

4.10

Dr. H. testified that it was very important to have his sons graduate from university so that they
can fmd employment. He farther confirmed that his sons are aware that graduating is important
for the family.

4.11

Dr. H. further testified that he took his son to counselling on April 20, 2008 after learning of the
Student's dishonest behaviour. A letter from the fa1am/Resident Scholar of the Islamic InstitJ.te
of Toronto dated June 26, 2009, 4 was tendered through Dr. H. and confirms that the student has
been given "counselii.1g" (sic) "on and off, since April 20, 08. The purpose of the sessions has
been to instill in him a deep sense of morality and make him aware of the dire consequences of
such cardinal sins as breach of trust, lying and cheating-... ".

4.12

Finally, Dr. H. gave evidence that, the Student had started to take medication in February, 2009,
and has b~come more responsible, attentive to his classes a..11d is "more mature and more focused

3 Dr. H. testified under oath and submitted a written "letter" entitled "Our Perspective on [S]", the contents of which
he adopted duri_J]_g his testimony.
4 The letter is hears·ay as the author did not testify to introduce the letter. However, the University has not opposed
its introduction as evidence. Accordingly, the Panel has considered the letter but factored its hearsay nature in
giving it weight as evidence.

- 8-

on acaderc.ics".

Dr. E

states "We as a family remain comn1itted to de the right faing and

teaching our children to be responsible and accountable for their mistakes. [SJ is not arr exception
in this matter. "
4.13

The Student did not testify nor provide any Vvritten statement duri..rig the penalty phase.

4.14

The Student, t.½rou:gh counsel, tendered copies of 2 receipts dated February 6, 2009 for
prescriptions for Divalproex and Risperidone.

The Student did not tender evidence from his

prescribing physician nor was any evidence tendered to confrrm whether the Student was taking

..

such medication regularly, or at all. No receipts for any other dates were tendered. Accordingly,
the Panel gives no weight to the receipts nor any submission regarding any medical conditions
allegedly suffered by the Studt::nt.
4.15

The Student also tendered a letter from All World Tutoring Services dated March 30, 2009
confirming that he tutored from January to October, 200J5 and a letter from the Eden Community
Food Bank dated June 25, 2009 confirming that he completed 10 community service hours 6.

5.

Decision and Reasons for Penalty

5 .1

The University has requested the following penalty:
(a)

a 5 year suspension to coITu.uence at the end of the hearing; and

(b)

a recommendation to the President of Governing Council that the Student be expelled.

5.2

.The Student has requested a 5 year suspension to commence at the end of the hearfag.

5 .3

The Panel was directed by both parties to the decision in file 1976/77-3, In the Matter of the

University of Toronto Code of Behaviour and an Appeal by Mr. C (hereinafter "In the Matter of
Mr. C") and in particular, to the following factors to consider in imposing penalty:
(a)

t:b.e character of the person charged;

5 The letter is hearsay as the author did not testify to introduce the letter. However, the University has not opposed
its introduction as evidence. Accordingly, the Panel has considered the letter but factored its hearsay nature in
giving it weight as evidence.
6 There was no reference as to when the hours were completed and, as such, it is not clear whether the Student orJy
recently completed this hours.

-9-

(b)

the likelihood of a repetition of the offence;

( c)

the nature of the offence committed;

( d)

any extenuating circumstances surrounding the commission of the offence;

(e)

the detriment to the Univ_ersity occasioned by the offence;

( f)

the need to deter others from committing a similar offence.

Character

or the Student/Extenuating Circumstances Surrounding the Commission of the

Offence /Likelihood ofa Repetifion of the Offence
5 .4

There was minii:nal evidence tendered by the Student a:bout his good character. Moreover, the
Panel notes that the following omissions on the Student's part give rise to an adverse finding
about the character of the Student:
(a)

The Student did not actively respond to nor reply to the requests of the University to meet
with the Dean's Designate which were initiated in February, 2008. This is despite the
Student and his family being aware of the allegations of dishonesty and the Student
purportedly begin..n.ing moral counselling with the Islamic Institute of Toronto on,
February 20, 2008. The Student put off Ms. Gaspini's requests to meet and did not follow
through on his promise to get in contact with her on April 18, 2008, such that the request
for formal charges had to be made on August 1st, some 6 months later. This lack of cooperation until facing formal charges is notable.

(b)

The Panel accepts that the plea of guilty is an acknowledgment of guilt and that the
Student has cooperated in the presentation of an Agreed Statement of Facts. However,
the Student has not apologized nor conveyed any remorse for his actions. However,
despite the indications by the Student's ·first counsel and then, his father, that an apology
might be given by the Student, there was no viva voce nor written apology tendered by
the Student. Dr. H. did not, and fairly so, purport to convey an apology from his son
(r.ather, Dr. H. conveyed his regret about his son's behaviour). The Panel recognizes that
the• Student is not obligated to testify during any hearing of charges, but the Panel is not
cgnvin.ced that it may not draw an adverse inference if, during the penalty phase, the
Student does not testify but in.stead tries to introduce mitigating character evidence
through another witness or documentary· evidence, as was done here.

- l U '

5 .5

f',

The letter from the Imam does not provide &7.y opinion or observations as to whether the Student
has acb1owledged hls guilt or remorse to the Imam or whether the Imam was aware of the
purpose for which he was providi..--ig his letter.

The letter regardii1g the Student's recent

community service does not convincingly support the Student's submission that has made
attempts to improve himself.
5. 6

With respect to extem1ating ci:rcu.msfali]_ces, the Panel notes that tilere is no evidence of any
extenuating circumstances.

fa particular, the Student's father testified that he sheltered the

children froIIJ, the knowledge of the family's fmancial problems. In any case, many students face
difficult financial circumstances without resorting to academic dishonesty. As noted above, there
was no medfoaJ evidence regarding any extenuating circumstances at the time of the offence nor
any subsequent diagnosis.
5 .7

With respect to the like1ii:Jwod of repetition, the Panel notes that the Student was apparently
raised by Dr. H and his wife in an ethically-minded fashion and that Dr. H. is sincere about their
intention to keep the Student on track if he is given the opportunity to complete his educatio:q..
However, the Student is an adult and committed the offence while living with his parents and,
apparently, with the lu1owledge of his brother. Accordingly, the Panel is not convinced that there
is no risk of re-offending given the lack of apology/remorse, that no extenuating circumstances
were proffered (see above) and that the Student has delayed at all stages of this process.

Nature of the Offence/Detrirn.ent to the University
5. 8

The nature of the offence in this case is unique --- the Student has admitted to the sale of essays to
other students, for financial gain, and with the knowledge that the essays would be submitted for
academic credit in that other student's name. Neither counsel for the University nor agent for the
Student was able to find any previous _decision of this TribUJ.-ial involvi.t7.g the "seller" and it is
acknowledged that it is rare that the Tribunal would have jurisdiction to sanction the "sellers" as
t.½.ey are very often commercial enterprises which do not involve current or former University of
Toronto students. It is also very difficult to detect the purchase of academic work since it is
generally "original" work not authored by the student submitting same for credit (although 1.11. this
case, the Student's essay for Ms. P's was admittedly plagiarized from other sources).

5 .9

The University has urged the Panel to impose a more significant sanction on the Student, given
his role as the "seller" in 1:t'le 2 transactions before the Panel. The University's rationale is that the

- 11 -

seller is engaged in a "corrupt enterprise" for financial gain and should garner more serious
punishment. It is also argued that the level of intent of the seller is deliberate and cannot be
spontaneous as the researching and writing of an essay requires sustained in.tent on the part of the
seller. The Panel does not agree, as a general proposition, that the seller is a more significant a
player in the sale/purchase of academic work.

The purchaser who has contracted and made

payment for the work and has likewise displayed sustained intent, especially given that the
.purchaser can choose not to submit the work at any time after purchasing it. However, where
there is evide~9e that the seller has engaged in an ongoing enterprise, as in this case, this should
be an aggravating factor in assessing penalty.
5.10

Somewhat cori'versely, the Student has asked the Panel to recognize that the seller and purchaser
differ insofarJ1.s the buyer is the "initiator" and the seller. is, thereby, less culpable and cites the
decision of the Tribunal in VA. and A.H. 7. The Panel does not agree with this submission as a
blanket proposition. The seller, in this case, was known to be engaged in this type of transaction
and was not approached for the first time by Ms. P or Mr. A --- he had, what might be termed, an
outstanding "reputation for selling" that other students could approach him to act upon.

5 .11

The detriment to the University fabric of purchasing or, in this case, selling work which will be
submitted under dishonest and unethical circumstances is manifestly obvious. This is addressed
in the Tribunal decision in V.L. (Case No. 440) at paragraph 21:

Moreover, the "enterprise" of purchasing work for submission to the University
is emblematic of the highest and greatest danger to the University community
that the Code attempts to prevent, namely the circumstance when respect for
learning is forsaken 'in favour of self interest, when trust becomes a hostage of
expediency.' In this regard, a failure to recognize the severity of this threat
wo_uld in effect be punitive to those students and teachers who strive through
their honest hard work to maintain those values.
5.12

Finally, Appendix "C" of the Code - Provost's Guidelines on Sanctions, Offences and Suggested

Penalties For Students recommends that:
5,~,,
For submitting purchased work, the sanction recommended shall be
expulsion from the University. The minimum sanction shall be suspension from
the University for a period of time and zero as the final grade where the offence
occurred.

7 File 2001-02-08

i

,,_

- 1L -

Although, the Stu.dent did not submit purchased work, for the reasons above, the Panel is of th.e
view that fae recommended sanction for the purchaser confinns the seriousness of the offence,
regardless of whether the it is the purchaser or th.e seller beir1g charged. Obviously, the latter pa...'i
of th.e minimum sanction would seemingly orrly be applicable to the seller if he/she was enrolled
in the same course as the buyer.
5 .13

The Parrel further fmds, as a fact, t.11.at the Student was engaged in the practice of selling academic
work to other students prior to these present 2 instances. The statement of the Student's brother to
the Campus lolice 8 confirms that the Student was engaged previously in this kind of activity.
Ms. P knew of the Student's reputation for this kind of activiry. Mr. A swears that he purchased
an essay from t.½e Student before. Although the charges before the Tribunal relate to only 2
transactions, the Panel finds that there is evidence of previous offences having been committed.

5 .14

fa short, tb.e Panel considered that both penalty positions advocated by the University and by the

Student to be wit.Jun the appropriate range.

Deterrence

5.15

Although sellers fall under the jurisdiction of this Tribunal much less often than buyers, when a
seller is a student, or former student, they will be subject to the Code to the fullest extent possible.

5 .16

There is no basis to reduce penalty because the general deterrence effect will be minimal given
the nature of the perpetrators. General deterrence considerations may be relevant to impose an
increased penalty or may be neutral but it can not be argued that since there may be little effect on
general public deterrence that the penalry may be reduced.

5 .1 7

There is justification for specific deterrence in this case. The Student, without the guidance of his
parents at_ this juncture may well re-offend. He has not displayed ai7.y remorse or insight into his
offence.

5 .18

A harsh sanction is required to meet the concerns of both general and specific deterrence.

5 .19

The Student's agent has distinguished the more serious cases where expulsion was imposed an.cl
demonstrated that suspension is the more appropriate penalty based upon other cases before the

8 See Agreed Statement of Facts, paragraph 29.

- 13 -

Tribunal relating to "purchasers" (sometii--nes repeat offenders) and other plagiarism-type
situations. fa a recent a decision of May 15, 2009 9 relating to a purchaser of an essay, discipline
counsel acknowledges in a joint submission on penalty that, although Appendix "C" of the Code
recom1.-n.ends that expulsion is sought for purchased papers, "the principle of consistency must
inform the Triburial when it in1poses sanctions" and that "while some cases similar to this one did
result in expulsion, the majority did not."

6.

Penalty

6.1

The Panel v1ews the within offences as very serious and considers this case to be approaching the
level warranting expulsion. The Panel also views the lack of co-operation by the Student to
address th~ charges as early as possible to be significai.1t in this matter.

Furt1.1.ermore, the

adjournment ofthe hearing date on February 26, 2009 after the plea of guilty to allow the Student
to provide medical evidence for penalty considerations was granted in good faith. The further
adjournment on March 30, 2009 and the ultimate setting of a hearing date of June 30, 2009 was
arranged based on the availability of the Student's prospective new counsel. fa the end, neither
medical evidence nor prospective counsel attended on June 30 th .
6.2

During the period from February 26 until June 30, 2009, the Student was able to complete courses
and obtain credits that he would not have been able to do had the suspension been imposed at the
February 26th hearing date.

6.3

The Panel finds that the University was not responsible for any of the delay in addressing penalty

in this matter after February 26 th .
6.4

Accordingly, the Panel imposes the following penalty:
(a)

That the Student be suspended from attendance at the University of Toronto for a period
of five (5) years, comn1encing February 26, 2009 (accordi..rigly, any course work J..L+ter that
date should not be credited to the Student);

(b)

That a notation be placed on the Student's transcript for a period of seven (7) years from
the date of the fmal hearing on June 30, 2009 to the effect that the Student was suspended
.~from the University for academic misconduct; and

9 University of Toronto and Yoon, May 15, 2009, see paragraph 18

- 14 -

( c)

That a report of the decision be made to the Provost for publication in the University's
newspaper with the Student's name withheld.

6.5

The Panel wishes to_than...1< both Mr. Centa and Ms. '\1/ilkes_ for their thorough and able arguments.

tL

Dated at Toronto, this Kday of August, 2009

Roslyn
(_

M.,:fu,

Chair

