Case #921

   DATE: September 5, 2017
   PARTIES: University of Toronto v. Z.S. (âthe Studentâ)
   Hearing Date(s): June 16, 2017
   Panel Members:
   Ms. Dena Varah, Barrister and Solicitor, Chair
   Professor Louis Florence, Faculty Panel Member
   Ms. Sophie Barnett, Student Panel Member
   Appearances:
   Ms. Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland,
   Barristers
   The Student
   Ms. Clara Ryu, Downtown Legal Services ("DLS"), Student Counsel for the
   Student
   Ms. Lucy Gaspini, Manager, Academic Integrity and Affairs, Office of
   the Dean, University of Toronto Mississauga
   Ms. Alexandra DiÂ  Â Blasio, Academic Integrity Assistant, University
   of Toronto Mississauga
   In Attendance:
   Ms. Krista Osbourne, Administrative Clerk and Hearing Secretary
   Mr. Sean Lourim, Technology Assistant, Office of the Governing Council
   Trial Division - s. B.i.1(a) - forgery â s. B.i.3(b) âÂ  academic
   misconduct â changed date on a doctorâs note submitted in support of
   request for deferred exam âÂ  enrolling in classes while suspended â
   two prior offences â agreed statement of facts â joint book of
   documents â joint submission on penalty â guilty plea â notation longer
   than suspension âÂ  final grade of zero in the affected courses,
   suspension of five years, transcript notation until graduation, and
   report to the provost.
   This hearing dealt with two separate incidents of misconduct.Â  In the
   first, the Student was charged with one charge of forgery contrary to
   s. B.i.1(a) of the Code , or in the alterative, academic dishonesty not
   otherwise described contrary to s. B.i.3(b) of the Code .Â  These
   charges were laid in relation to a forged University Verification of
   Student Illness or Injury Form that the Student had submitted in
   support of his application to defer an exam. The Student had changed
   the date on the doctorâs note that accompanied the Form.Â  Â The second
   incident of misconduct related to the Student signing up for courses
   while he was suspended from the University, giving rise to a charge of
   academic dishonesty contrary to s. B.i.3(b) of the Code . The matter
   proceeded by way of an Agreed Statement of Facts and the parties relied
   on a joint book of documents. The Student pled guilty to one charge of
   forgery contrary to s. B.i.1(a) of the Code and one charge of academic
   dishonesty contrary to s. B.i.3(b) of the Code . Upon accepting the
   Studentâs guilty plea, the University withdrew the alternative charge
   of academic dishonesty that was laid in relation to the forged doctorâs
   note.
   The parties submitted an Agreed Statement of Facts on Sanction and a
   Joint Submission on Penalty (JSP) proposing: (a) a final grade of zero
   in the affected courses; (b) suspension from the University for five
   years; (c) a notation of the sanction on the Studentâs academic record
   and transcript until graduation; and (d) that the matter be reported to
   the Provost for publication.Â  The Student had been sanctioned on two
   prior occasions for misconduct. The Panel accepted all of the JSP
   sanctions, ordering a final grade of zero in the affected courses;
   suspension from the University for five years; a notation of the
   sanction on the Studentâs academic record and transcript until
   graduation; and that the matter be reported to the Provost for
   publication.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12951
