Report 276

DATE:

   March 20, 2003

PARTIES:

   Ms N.K. (the Student) v. UTSC

Hearing Date(s):

   February 26, 2003

Committee Members:

   Professor Emeritus R. Scane (Chair)
   Professor C. Beghtol
   Mr. M. Braun
   Professor L. Girolametto
   Ms K. Lewis

Judicial Affairs Officer:

   Mr. P. Holmes

In Attendance:

For the Student:

   Ms N.K. (the Student)
   Ms S. Choudhury
   Mr. G. Bazov

For UTSC:

   Associate Dean I. McDonald

   Request for late withdraw without academic penalty in one course, or
   alternatively, to re-write the final examination for 100% of the course
   mark, and to re-write the final examination in another course. The
   Student did not write the final exams in either course. She claimed
   that she suffered illness during the exam period. With respect to the
   first course, the Committee considered the course grading scheme and
   found that the Student would not be unfairly advantaged over other
   students if she were to allowed re-write the final examination for her
   entire course grade. The Committee found that the evidence did not
   establish the Divisional Appeals Committeeâs finding that the Student
   did "no work", as distinct from no assignments in the course. The
   Committee considered the medical notes prepared by the Studentâs family
   doctor and found that the medical documents, together with the
   Student's evidence, adequately covered the relevant time period,
   despite the fact that the Student did not visit a doctor on the date on
   the examination. On the Studentâs initial visit, the doctor anticipated
   that the Student's condition would be seriously debilitating over the
   subsequent days, and on a following visit, the doctor confirmed the
   earlier prognosis. A minority of the Committee found that the medical
   and other evidence did not justify relief. The Committee found that
   neither remedy requested was so clearly indicated or excluded and that
   the Student should be permitted to elect either remedy. With respect to
   the second course at appeal, the Committee considered the medical note
   from the doctor visited on the day of the missed exam and found that
   while the diagnosis was different from that given by the Studentâs
   family doctor, there was no evidence for the negative finding of the
   Divisional Appeals Committee that the diagnosis was "inconsistent.â The
   Committee considered the Facultyâs Academic Regulations and found that,
   while not an exhaustive definition, the term "actually prevent"
   suggests that a student acting in good faith should reasonably feel
   that she or he is not up to getting to the examination site and
   completing the examination. The Committee found that the medical notes
   were equivocal as to the degree of the Studentâs incapacitation at the
   time of the examination and that the onus of establishing that a
   student has reasonable grounds for failing to attend an examination
   rests on the student. Appeal allowed in part. Request for retroactive
   late withdrawal from one course or alternatively, to re-write the final
   examination for 100% of the course mark allowed. Request to re-write
   the final examination in another course denied. The Committee ordered
   that the Student could elect to withdraw from the course without
   academic penalty or write a final examination for 100% of the mark in
   the course. In default of timely notification, the Student was deemed
   to have elected late withdrawal.
   [1]View Report

References

   1. file:///media/12548
