Case 1119

   DATE: July 21, 2021
   PARTIES: University of Toronto v. D.K. ("the Student")

   HEARING DATE: April 27, 2021, via Zoom

   Panel Members:
   Mr. Douglas F. Harrison, Chair
   Professor Margaret MacNeill, Faculty Panel Member
   Ms. Yerin Lee, Student Panel Member

   Appearances:
   Ms. Tina Lie, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg
   Rothstein LLP

   Not in Attendance:
   The Student

   Hearing Secretary:
   Ms. Krista Kennedy, Hearing Secretary, Office of Appeals, Discipline
   and Faculty Grievances, University of Toronto

   The Student was chargedÂ underÂ ss. B.i.1(b)Â andÂ B.i.1(d)Â of
   theâ¯Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters, 1995â¯(the âCodeâ) on the
   basis thatÂ heÂ knowinglyÂ usedÂ or possessed anÂ unauthorizedÂ aid,
   namely,Â an iPhone at a final examÂ and he knowinglyÂ represented as
   his own, ideas or work of another in a final exam short answer.Â In
   theÂ alternative,Â the StudentÂ was charged withÂ knowinglyÂ usingÂ or
   possessingÂ anÂ unauthorized aid or obtainingÂ unauthorized assistance
   in connection with the final shortÂ answerÂ assignment, contrary to s.
   B.i.1(b) of the Code. In the further alternative,Â theÂ Student was
   charged withÂ knowingly engagingÂ on two occasions,Â in a form of
   cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or
   misrepresentationÂ in order toÂ obtain academic credit or other
   academic advantage, contrary to s. B.i.3(b) of the Code.

   Neither the Student nor a legal representative of the Student appeared
   at the hearing.Â The Panel waited fifteen minutes to allow for the
   Student to appear. At this time the University sought an order to
   proceed with the hearing in the Studentâs absence.Â The University
   provided evidence that the Student had been served on their ROSI-listed
   email address with the charges and the notice ofÂ electronicÂ hearing.
   Further, there was evidence before the PanelÂ that Counsel for the
   UniversityÂ emailedÂ the Student at hisÂ ROSI-listedÂ email
   addressÂ toÂ introduceÂ herself, provideÂ a discloser brief as well
   asÂ request availabilityÂ forÂ a hearing.Â The Student was subsequently
   provided an opportunity to provide submissions in relation to the
   requestÂ ofÂ the University for the hearing to proceed electronically
   due to the COVID-19 pandemic. The Student did not respond to this
   request and the hearing was ordered to proceed electronicallyÂ as
   permitted byÂ rule 47 of theÂ University TribunalâsÂ RulesÂ of Practice
   and ProcedureÂ (âRulesâ)Â and the provisions of
   theÂ StatutoryÂ PowersÂ ProceduresÂ ActÂ (âSPPAâ).Â Having not heard
   from the Student, Counsel for the UniversityÂ sent a package to the
   Student via courier to the mailing address provided in ROSI. This
   package contained a letter from Counsel, the notice
   ofÂ electronicÂ hearing, a copy of the email containing the
   ZoomÂ coordinatesÂ and the charges. TheÂ attempt to deliver the package
   wasÂ unsuccessfulÂ andÂ the following day,Â it was being held atÂ a
   FedExÂ facility.Â Furthermore, Counselâs office attempted to reach the
   Student via the telephone number listed inÂ ROSIÂ butÂ the numberÂ was
   not assigned.Â On review of theÂ evidenceÂ andÂ consideringÂ ss. 6
   andÂ 7(3) of the SPPA andÂ rules 9(c), 13 and 17 of theÂ rules,Â the
   Panel ordered that the hearing proceed in the Studentâs absence as they
   found that reasonable notice had been provided to the Student.

   Regarding the charge laid under s. B.i.1(b) of the Code,
   theÂ PanelÂ receivedÂ affidavit evidence submitted on behalf of the
   University. The affidavit evidence outlinedÂ thatÂ the
   StudentÂ attended a final exam for hisÂ Introduction toÂ Organic
   ChemistryÂ IÂ courseÂ where theÂ front page of theÂ final exam booklet
   outlined thatÂ the only aids allowed during the exam were
   unboxedÂ molecularÂ models. The exam booklet further noted thatÂ if any
   electronic devices, including phones, were found in a studentâs pocket,
   it may be an academic offence.Â TheÂ affidavit evidenceÂ also
   outlinedÂ that a little more than an hour after the exam began, one of
   the invigilators foundÂ an iPhone in the StudentâsÂ possession, which
   was turned on.Â The invigilator confiscated the iPhone. At the
   conclusion of the exam, the Student acknowledged, in writing, thatÂ he
   was in possession of anÂ unauthorized aid into the exam and admitted
   that he had committed an academic offence under the Code.Â The Panel
   noted that a finding of possession of anÂ unauthorizedÂ aid does not
   require any evidence that the unauthorized aid was used during the
   final exam.Â The Panel found that the Studentâs admission of possession
   is sufficient to meet the requirements of the offence, however, the
   Panel noted that the evidence presented by the University demonstrates
   that the Student possessed an unauthorized aid in the final exam.
   Therefore, the Panel foundÂ the Student guilty ofÂ knowingly using or
   possessing anÂ unauthorizedÂ aid, contrary to s. B.i.1(b) of the Code.

   Regarding the charge laid under s. B.i.1(d) of the Code, the Panel
   received and heard evidenceÂ ofÂ the Professor for which the final
   examÂ assignmentÂ in question was submitted.Â The online exam
   assignmentÂ provided for the use of lecture notes and the course
   textbook but not any online resources.Â The Professor noted
   thatÂ sheÂ discoveredÂ a number ofÂ the questions and answers to the
   exam questions posted on Chegg.comÂ (âCheggâ). Due to this discovery,
   the Professor and the teaching assistantsÂ searched the examsÂ for key
   phrases, spelling errors and incorrect answers from the Chegg
   sources.Â SimilaritiesÂ were found between the answers of the Student
   and the Chegg sourcesÂ for multiple questions on the Studentâs
   exam.Â The ProfessorÂ andÂ herÂ colleague reviewed
   theÂ similaritiesÂ between the Studentâs answers and those found in the
   Chegg sourcesÂ and determined thatÂ theÂ numberÂ ofÂ similaritiesÂ were
   suspicious and unlikely coincidental.Â The Panel found that it
   wasÂ clearly evidentÂ that the Student copied answers from the Chegg
   sourcesÂ due to the similarities in his answers and those found on the
   website, the unusual commonalities between the two, and the iconÂ link
   toÂ theÂ CheggÂ webpageÂ contained in the Studentâs submitted answer.
   Furthermore, the Professor for the course provided evidence that the
   final exam assignment was difficult and could have taken the students a
   full 24 hours to complete the exam; question 2 alone was designed to
   take approximately 2 hours to completeÂ yet the Student completed the
   entire exam inÂ aboutÂ three and a half hours. Based on the totality of
   the evidence the Panel was satisfied that the Student knowingly made
   use of the Chegg sourcesÂ to complete the final examÂ assignmentÂ and
   therefore is guilty of knowingly representing as his own, ideas and
   work of another in the final exam, contrary to s. B.i.1(d) of the Code.

   Due to the foregoing findings, the University withdrew the alternative
   charges.

   In determining sanction,â¯the Panel considered the submissions of the
   UniversityÂ and theÂ guidance for sanction in the Code.Â The Panel also
   considered the principles and factors relevant to sanction discussed
   inÂ University of Toronto and Mr. C.Â (âMr. C. factorsâ).Â Â The Panel
   noted thatÂ due to theÂ abbreviated timeÂ between the two offences in
   question (threeÂ weeks),Â not only is there a great likelihood of
   repetition,Â but there is alsoÂ evidence of actual repetition.Â With
   respect toÂ the nature of the offence, the detriment to the University
   and the needÂ for deterrence, the Panel noted thatÂ plagiarism is an
   extremely serious offence that harms the institution and the academic
   processÂ andÂ can be seen asÂ an attempt to defraud the
   University.Â The Panel further noted that the possession ofÂ an
   unauthorized aid is a serious matter as it can bring harm to the
   academic processÂ and thus the penalty must act as a general deterrent
   against this behaviour.Â The Student admittedÂ to possessing the iPhone
   during the examÂ and given the easeÂ withÂ which one can hide an
   iPhoneÂ and potentially make improper use of it in an exam, the
   sanction must be severe enough to deter others from consideringÂ the
   possession of an unauthorized aid.Â The Panel noted that the offence of
   plagiarismÂ was not one that could beÂ attributed to inadvertence or to
   a choice made in the heat of the moment, butÂ wasÂ an offence that
   involves planning,Â deliberation,Â and conscious execution, and that is
   among the most seriousÂ forms of academic misconduct. Therefore, the
   sanctionÂ mustÂ create a strong deterrent against its commission by
   others.Â Taking into consideration the evidence, the Studentâs actions,
   the authoritiesÂ and the Mr. C factors, the PanelÂ determined that a
   more severe sanction should be imposed. The Panel imposed the following
   sanction: a grade of zero in both courses;
   aÂ two-and-a-half-yearÂ suspension; a notation on the transcript until
   graduation; and a report to the Provost for a publication.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/29947
