Report #311

   DATE: December 6, 2006
   PARTIES: The Student Appellant v. the Faculty of Arts & Science
   Hearing Date(s): November 7, 2006
   Committee Members:
   Assistant Dean Bonnie Goldberg, Chair
   Ms Saswati Deb
   Professor William Gough
   Professor Louise Lemieux-Charles
   Dr. Cindy Woodland
   Judicial Affairs Officer:
   Dr. Anthony Gray
   In Attendance:
   The student
   Mr Philip Viater, for the appellant
   Vice Dean Susan Howson, Faculty of Arts & Science
   Sari Springer, Counsel for the Respondent
   Faculty of Arts & Science ‚ request for late withdrawal without
   academic penalty ‚ consideration afforded to accommodate illness ‚
   final examinations re‚weighted to count for 100%¬  ‚ allegation that
   Faculty transgressed its policies and provisions ‚ University of
   Toronto Grading Practices Policy ‚ Faculty of Arts and Science policy
   on ‚Missed Term Tests‚ ‚ Faculty of Arts and Science policy on ‚Marking
   Schemes‚ ‚ Faculty‚s policies appropriately applied ‚ provisions
   applied to setting of evaluation not to method following accommodation
   ‚ recommendation that Faculty consider adding additional clarification
   to its ‚Missed Term Tests‚ ‚ Appeal dismissed
   Request for late withdrawal without academic penalty from two courses.
   The Student was absent from the terms tests for medical reasons. To
   accommodate the Student‚s illness, the Faculty re‚weighted the final
   examinations to count for 100% of the Student‚s final mark in both
   courses. The Student did not write the final examination for either
   course and received a mark of ‚zero‚ in both. The Student claimed that
   he was too sick to write the examinations, but provided medical
   documentation for only one of the examinations. The student claimed
   that the Faculty transgressed two policies and three provisions. The
   Committee found that the Faculty and Divisional Appeals Committee‚s
   appropriately applied the Faculty‚s policies to the Student‚s
   situation, and that the Faculty‚s policies were neither transgressed
   nor unfair. In each instance of illness and accommodation, the Faculty
   followed its procedures. The provisions in question applied to the
   setting of the evaluation of the course and once a student is in a
   course and requires accommodation, a different set of considerations
   come into play. With reference to Classroom Procedures, section II.2 of
   the University of Toronto Grading Practices Policy, the Committee found
   that the Faculty correctly invoked its ability to set its own policies,
   particularly its policy regarding ‚Missed Term Tests‚, by which
   exemptions to II.2.(c)¬  may be determined. With reference to the
   Faculty of Arts and Science policy on ‚marking schemes‚, the Committee
   found that the courses at appeal only became courses where one form of
   evaluation was used as a result of the Faculty‚s efforts to accommodate
   the student‚s illness and his decision to remain in the course. With
   reference to the Faculty of Arts and Science policy regarding ‚Missed
   Term Tests,‚ the Committee found that the Faculty followed its
   procedures when the student missed the first term test with accepted
   medical documentation, by implementing provision 3(b). The prohibition
   against 100% finals applied only to 100 level courses. In applying the
   policy regarding ‚Missed Term Tests,‚ the Faculty appropriately looked
   to the evaluation method of the course when it was first set, not after
   the student sought accommodation. Appeal dismissed. The Committee
   recommended that the Faculty consider adding additional clarification
   to its policy regarding ‚Missed Term Tests,‚ to avoid any future
   misinterpretation.
   [1]View Report

References

   1. file:///media/12566
