UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
GOVERNING COUNCIL
Report #311 of the Academic Appeals Committee
December 6, 2006
Your Committee reports that it held a hearing on Wednesday November 7, 2006, at
which the following were present:
Assistant Dean Bonnie Goldberg, Chair
Ms Saswati Deb
Professor William Gough
Professor Louise Lemieux-Charles
Dr. Cindy Woodland
Dr. Anthony Gray, Judicial Affairs Officer
In Attendance:
The student
Mr Philip Viater, for the appellant
Vice Dean Susan Howson, Faculty of Arts & Science
Sari Springer, Counsel for the Respondent
The Appeal
The student is appealing the decision of the Academic Appeals Board of the Faculty of
Arts and Science (“the Faculty”) dated December 7, 2005, denying the student’s request
for late withdrawal without academic penalty from two courses: Introduction to Greek
History (CLA230) and Introduction to Roman History (CLA231).
Facts
The student enrolled in the Faculty (St. Michael’s College) in September 2001 and
graduated in November 2005 with an Honours Bachelor of Arts. He took the two courses
that are the subject of this appeal in the 2005 Winter term. These were second year
courses, which had two term tests (each worth 30%), and a final examination (worth
40%).
The first term test for the Introduction to Roman History course was on January 26, 2005.
The student did not write this test due to illness and provided a doctor’s note to his
instructor. The first term test for the Introduction to Greek History course was on
February 10, 2005. The student did not write this term test and provided a doctor’s note
to his instructor. Both notes were not retained, but there is no dispute that the student
provided medical documentation that was accepted.

37882v2

1

Both professors told the student, and the student agreed, that the second term tests would
be re-weighted to 60% each. This was well before March 6, 2005 add-drop deadline.
The second term test for Introduction to Roman History was on March 16, 2005. The
second term test for Introduction to Greek History was scheduled for March 17, 2005.
The student did not write either second term test, and provided a March 16th doctor’s note
attesting to “sore throat and chills.”
Both professors indicated to the student that the final examinations would be re-weighted
and would count for 100%. The student agreed. On March 16, one professor wrote:
Your condition, if it is properly documented, will of course be excused. I will not
however, set any make-up tests – if I did, I would have to do so for other students.
In your case, it seems that you will have to write a 100% final examination.
Assuming that you prepare properly there is no reason to think that you cannot
succeed on the Final, especially given the fact that you will in affect be tested
only on the second half of the course material.
At this time, the student sought advice from the St. Michael’s College Registrar who
suggested that if the student did not want to write a 100% final examination, he could
petition for late withdrawal without academic penalty (since the add-drop date had
passed). The student declined to do so and remained in both courses.
The final examination in Introduction to Greek History was scheduled for May 3, 2005.
The final examination in Introduction to Roman History was scheduled for May 6, 2005.
The student did not write either final examination and received a “zero” in each. The
student indicated that he was too sick to write the examinations, but only provided
medical documentation for the May 3rd examination. He wrote another final examination
in another course on May 5th.
Previous Decisions
On May 4th, the student petitioned the Faculty’s Committee on Standing. The student
explained that he did not petition for late withdrawal without academic penalty in March
because he needed the courses to graduate. However, after studying for two weeks
(presumably in late April), he became ill and went to see a doctor on May 3rd. He
contended that his reading of the information in the Faculty of Arts and Science Calendar
was “that a single piece of work cannot count for all of the final mark.” He noted that he
was under pressure, and was physically and emotionally strained.
On May 27th, the Committee on Standing released its decision, which it re-released on
July 13th with a correction, denying the student’s petition. The Committee found that the
student presented no compelling reasons for not completing the courses. He was allowed
the 100% final examinations in order to obtain credit, despite having missed the term
tests. The original course outlines of both courses met the Faculty’s requirements; any
new weighting was done to accommodate the student’s absences for medical reasons.

37882v2

2

The student petitioned the Committee on Standing a second time on June 9th. In this
petition, the student indicated that “I knew I did not have sufficient material needed to
complete the final exams since I missed a lot of classes due to illness. The final exams
were also cumulative throughout the whole term.” Again, the student relied on his
interpretation of the Faculty’s policy, which according to the student invoked a
prohibition against evaluation based on a single piece of work. The student emphasized
that he was applying to law school, which both increased his stress and required the
completion of his degree by June.
The Committee denied the petition on July 28th. The Committee found that the
consideration afforded to the student based on illness resulted in the 100% final
examinations, to which the student had consented. The Committee noted that a reluctance
to write 100% finals is not grounds for late withdrawal without academic penalty.
However, the Committee indicated that since the student had provided medical
documentation relating to the May 3rd examination, he would be allowed to write a
deferred examination in Introduction to Greek History. He was also offered this option
for Introduction to Roman History if he could provide medical documentation to
substantiate his claim of illness.
The student rejected this relief and appealed to the Faculty’s Academic Appeals Board.
The Academic Appeals Board denied the appeal on December 7, 2005. The Board found
that since the student had done no work in the course, he should have been aware of the
risks inherent in sitting 100% final examinations. The fact that the student had missed
only three weeks of class due to illness meant that the student had attended the majority
of lectures and had ample time to prepare. The Board also found it incongruous that the
student was able to write an examination on May 5th, but was too ill to write
examinations on May 3rd or May 6th. With respect to the application of policy, the Board
found that:
Neither instructor transgressed Faculty policy. You may have confused [the
courses] which bear the words “introduction to” in their titles with first year (100level) courses; however, they are indeed second year courses with the associated
demands and expectations. … The Faculty guidelines sanction 100% final
examinations, under acceptable conditions, for second, third and fourth year
courses, and prohibits 100% final examinations ONLY for first year courses.
…Furthermore, no discrepancy exists between the Arts and Science Calendar and
the guidelines for term tests found in the academic handbook for faculty; you and
your counsel have misread the statement. Section a) refers to courses in which a
term test is the ONLY item of term work to be evaluated in a course. In both
[courses], there were two opportunities for evaluation during the term.

Decision
The student cites two different policies and three different provisions as having been
transgressed by the Faculty. We find that Faculty’s Academic Appeals Board, and the

37882v2

3

Committee on Standing appropriately applied the Faculty’s policies to this student’s
situation, and that the Faculty’s policies were neither transgressed nor unfair. In each and
every instance of illness and accommodation, the Faculty followed its procedures.
Contrary to the submissions of the student, the provisions in question apply to the setting
of the evaluation of the course. Once a student is in the course, gets ill, and requires
accommodation, a different set of considerations come into play.
First, the student referenced the University of Toronto Grading Practices Policy, and in
particular the following section:
Classroom Procedures
II.2 To ensure that the method of evaluation in every course reflects appropriate
academic standards and fairness to students, divisional regulations governing
classroom procedures must be consistent with the practices below.
… c) Student performance in a course shall be assessed on more than one
occasion. No one essay, test, examination etc. should have a value of more than
80% of the grade. Criteria for exemption may be determined by the division.
In formulating their own regulations, divisions may add to items (a) to (g) and
may adopt fuller or more specific provisions …
The Faculty invoked its ability to set its own policies by which exemptions to II.2.(c)
may be determined. Specifically, the policy regarding “Missed Term Tests” is one such
example, and is detailed below. It is worth noting though that the Faculty also created a
multitude of safeguards to preserve the fairness to students.
Second, the student refers to the Faculty of Arts and Science policy on “marking
schemes” which states that:
Both essays (or equivalent work) and examinations (including term tests) are
normally required for standing in courses. In courses where only one form of
evaluation is used, a single piece of work cannot count for all of their final mark.
These were not courses where only one form of evaluation was used. There were two
term tests and a final examination. They became courses where only one form of
evaluation was going to be used, as a result of the Faculty’s efforts to accommodate the
student’s illness during all 4 term tests, his agreement to sit 100% final examinations, and
his decision to remain in the course.
Third, the student cites the Faculty of Arts and Science policy regarding “Missed Term
Tests.” The policy states as follows:
Students who miss a term test will be assigned a mark of zero for that test unless
they satisfy the following conditions:

37882v2

4

1.

2.
3.

4.
5.

Students who miss a term test for reasons entirely beyond their control
may, within one week of the missed test, submit to the instructor or
department/program a written request for special consideration explaining
the reason for missing the test, and attaching the appropriate
documentation, such as a medical certificate.
…
A student whose explanation is accepted by the department will be entitled
to one of the following considerations:
a. In courses where there is no other term work as part of the evaluation
scheme, a make-up test must be given;
b. In other courses, the department/program may either give a make up
test or increase the weighting of other graded work by the amount of
the missed test. In no case may the weighting of the final exam in a
100-level course be increased beyond 2/3 of the total course mark.
…
A student who misses a term test cannot subsequently petition for late
withdrawal from the course without academic penalties on the grounds
that he or she had no term work returned before the drop date.

The Faculty followed its procedures when the student missed the first term test, as it is
required to do, by implementing 3(b) as the student’s medical documentation was
accepted. This was a course whose pre-set evaluation included different methods of
evaluation – two term tests and a final examination, and at least one term test prior to the
drop-date. The professor had the discretion – which was exercised – to decline to offer a
make-up and to instead re-weight the other graded work. As the Appeals Board noted, the
prohibition against 100% finals applied only to 100 level courses and not to these
courses.
Once the student missed the second term test, the course does not become a course
captured by 3(a) with a required make-up examination. The course remains a course
captured by 3(b) and that is how the Faculty treated it, by re-weighting the final
examination. To apply this policy, the Faculty looked to the evaluation method of the
course when it was set, not after a student seeks accommodation. However, the
Committee recommends that the Faculty consider adding additional clarification to this
policy to avoid any future misinterpretation.
Further, we wish to address what happened in May. The student petitioned that he was
too sick to write his Introduction to Greek History and Introduction to Roman History
final examinations, but only provided medical documentation for the May 3rd, and sat an
examination on May 5th, the day before he was to write the final examination on May 6th.
The student’s representative asked us to consider this fact “irrelevant.” With respect, we
find this fact relevant to our decision as the student simply declined to write the
examinations in the manner that he had consented to, almost two months earlier. In midMarch, the Registrar informed the student that he still had another option available to
him, which was to petition for late withdrawal without academic penalty. The student
declined to do so, and stayed in the course. However, when it was clear to him that was

37882v2

5

either too ill or ill-prepared to write the examinations, he sought this remedy. The
Committee on Standing granted him instead the option of at least one deferred
examination. This was a fair accommodation although we acknowledge that the
Committee did not render its decision until late July, and thus the time frame in which the
student had to prepare would have been compressed and challenging. Nevertheless, the
student was offered, but declined, this accommodation. The student was repeatedly
accommodated for illness and his poor decisions. The Committee finds no merit to the
argument that the student was treated unfairly, that his rights were violated, or that the
Faculty misapplied its policies.
The appeal is dismissed.

37882v2

6

