UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
GOVERNING COUNCIL
Report Number 304 of the Academic Appeals Committee
October 18, 2005
Your Committee reports that it held a hearing on Tuesday, September 27, 2005, at which the
following members were present:
Professor Emeritus R. Scane (Chair)
Professor C. Beghtol
Professor P. Byer
Mr. R. Campbell
Professor Ian McDonald
Dr. A.Gray, Judicial Affairs Officer, Secretary
In Attendance:
For the Student Appellant:
Ms B (The Student)
For the University of Toronto at Mississauga:
Professor G. Anderson
This is an appeal from a decision of the Academic Appeals Board of the University of
Toronto at Mississauga (UTM), dated February 24, 2005 which dismissed an appeal from a
decision of the Committee on Standing dated October 7, 2004. The latter decision denied a
petition from the Student for permission to return early from a three year suspension which
had been imposed following the completion of the Winter term in 2003.
The Student has had a poor academic record since being admitted into a B.A. programme at
UTM in the Fall Term of 1998. By the end of the Winter term, 1999, she was on academic
probation, and at the end of the 2000 Winter term, she was suspended for one year for failure
to attain the required sessional and cumulative GPA. She returned in the Fall term of 2001,
after serving her suspension, but at the end of the Winter term, 2002, she was suspended for
three years for the same reason. However, this suspension was lifted by the decision of the
Academic Appeals Board of UTM, dated December 11, 2002, and the Student returned for
the Winter term, 2003. Again, she failed to obtain a sufficiently high GPA to maintain
academic standing, and incurred the three year suspension from which she is now seeking

35048 v2

2
permission to return early. At the time of the latest suspension, she was 4.5 credits short of the
required number for her degree.
The Student admits that she is completely at fault for her performance to date. She describes
the reasons for her performance to date as failing “at prioritizing [her goals] correctly”, and
“not taking my education seriously and failing to make the best of the opportunity of being
admitted to the [U. of T.]”. She also cites bad course choices and ignorance of drop dates as
contributing to her past problems. She argues that, during her recent suspension, she has
gained maturity, and come to appreciate the value of an education. She hopes to obtain a B.Ed.
degree and pursue a teaching career. With this in mind, she has completed the Early
Childhood Education programme at Sheridan College with high marks, has worked in the
educational field, and volunteered with several organizations working with children and youth.
In her appearance before your Committee, she presented herself as composed and articulate,
and confident of her ability to put her academic past behind her and succeed in achieving her
goals. She desires to return now to the University and get on with the career she envisions for
herself.
A request for relief from some or all of the usual consequences of inadequate academic
performance, where the student is not claiming that there were mitigating factors which
should be taken into consideration in weighing that performance, requires the student
requesting the relief to satisfy the appeal tribunal that the granting of the relief will not
compromise the academic standards of the University, and that the policy underlying the
establishment of the normal penalty or consequence will still be upheld and applied if the
penalty is removed or modified. In applying that very general test to an individual case, the
tribunal must accept that the published standards, and the consequences of failing to achieve
them, are sound, and take care not to subvert them by a relief too easily granted. On the other
hand, the University has long acknowledged that there will be cases where it is appropriate
and just to grant relief, and tribunals must also be prepared to recognize these cases where
they are clearly established.
In its decision refusing to allow relief to the Student in this case, the Academic Appeals
Board of UTM found that she did not “provide a compelling case”. The Student complained
before your Committee that this phrase did not provide sufficient guidance as to what she was
required to establish. It is true that the phrase is more evocative than definitive, but it suggests
the Board’s understanding that a student seeking such relief must make a case that is stronger
than merely establishing that it is more probable than not that the policy underlying the
academic sanctions will not be compromised if relief is granted. Your Committee agrees that
this greater onus is appropriate and correct.
In establishing the three-year suspension, which, apart from the ultimate penalty of denial of
further registration, is the University’s most severe academic sanction, your Committee
believes that the University intended, at the least:
1. to give the student opportunity to mature in her or his approach to the exercise of
the personal choices to be made if success in university level studies is to be
achieved;

35048 v2

3
2. to require the student to spend sufficient time at non-university activities, away
from the university, that the student has a realistic opportunity to evaluate whether
further university studies are the student’s best career path.
It follows that, if relief from the full rigor of the suspension is to be granted, the
student seeking such relief must satisfy the University that the desired maturation has
occurred and that the student has realistically evaluated her or his academic prospects.
Here, the Student has not satisfied your Committee on either ground. Although it was
not possible to schedule this hearing until two weeks after the term started, the Student
wanted to resume her studies this term. Although this would be a precarious
undertaking for her, and she would have no time to lose, she did not yet appear to have
a clear plan as to what courses she would select. In particular, she could not explain
how she could complete the Psychology programme to which she aspired but to which
she has not been admitted. Her future plans involve seeking a B.Ed. degree after her
B.A., but she does not appear to have considered or investigated the likelihood of
admission to an education faculty with her academic record. The volunteer and other
work she has done with children and youth is a positive step, and as mentioned, she
presents herself well, but she seriously overestimated her ability to place her academic
house in order when she persuaded the Academic Appeals Board, in December 2002,
to lift the previous suspension. The failure to capitalize on the opportunity then
afforded to her seriously diminishes her credibility before your Committee, not in the
sense of truth or deliberate falsehood, but as to the reliability of her self-appraisal.
The appeal is dismissed.

35048 v2

