Report #304

   DATE: October 18, 2005
   PARTIES: Ms B (The Student) v. UTM
   Hearing Date(s): September 27, 2005
   Committee Members:
   Professor Emeritus R. Scane (Chair)
   Professor C. Beghtol
   Professor P. Byer
   Mr. R. Campbell
   Professor Ian McDonald
   Secretary:
   Dr. A.Gray, Judicial Affairs Officer
   In Attendance:
   For the Student Appellant:
   Ms B (The Student)
   For UTM:
   Professor G. Anderson
   UTM â request for early return from three year suspension â failure to
   attain the required sessional and cumulative GPA â no mitigating
   factors contributing to academic performance â desired maturation had
   not occurred â Student did not realistically evaluate prospects â no
   consideration or investigation of likelihood of admission to education
   faculty â selfâappraisal not reliable â appeal dismissed
   Request to return early from a three year suspension. The Student was
   suspended for failure to attain the required sessional and cumulative
   GPA.Â  The Student did not claim any mitigating circumstances
   contributed to her poor academic performance. The Student claimed that,
   during her recent suspension, she had gained maturity, and come to
   appreciate the value of an education. The Committee considered the
   policy underlying academic sanctions and the Studentâs academic history
   and found that the desired maturation had not occurred and that she had
   not realistically evaluated her prospects. The Student requested to
   resume her studies immediately but did not have a plan as to what
   courses she would select and she did not appear to have considered or
   investigated the likelihood of admission to an education faculty with
   her academic record. The Committee found that the Student presented
   herself well but that her failure to capitalize on the opportunity
   afforded to her by the lifting of a previous suspension seriously
   diminished the reliability of her selfâappraisal.Â  Appeal dismissed.
   [1]View Report

References

   1. file:///media/12561
