Case #975

   DATE: October 26, 2018
   PARTIES: University of Toronto v. K.S. (âthe Studentâ)
   Hearing Date(s):Â  Â  July 31, 2018
   Panel Members:
   Ms. Dena Varah, Barrister and Solicitor, Chair
   Professor Pascal van Lieshout, Faculty Tribunal Member
   Ms. Alice Zhu, Student Member
   Appearances:
   Ms. Lily Harmer, Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenbert Rothstein
   LLP
   Ms. Jacqueline Cummins, Law Clerk, Paliare Roland Rosenbert Rothstein
   LLP
   Ms. Christina Di Matteo, Academic Integrity Specialist, Faculty of Arts
   and Science
   Mr. Brian Alexic, lT Support, Office of the Governing Council
   Ms. Krista Osbourne, Administrative Clerk and Hearing Secretary, Office
   of the Appeals, Discipline, Faculty Grievances
   Not in Attendance:
   The Student
   Trial Division - s. B.i.3(a) â forging or falsifying an academic
   recordÂ  Â â forged transcriptÂ  âÂ  student did not attend hearingÂ
   Â â suspension ofÂ  five years pending expulsion and a report to the
   Provost with the Studentâs name withheld.
   The Student was charged with two charges of forging or falsifying an
   academic record contrary to s.B.i.3(a) of the Code , or in the
   alternative, two charges of academic dishonesty not otherwise described
   contrary to s. B.i.3(b) of the Code . The charges related to an
   application that the Student had made to an employment agency which
   contained a forged Certificate of Degree and Academic History for the
   Student. The Student did not attend the hearing. In finding that the
   University had taken appropriate steps to notify the Student of the
   hearing, the Tribunal heard evidence on behalf of the University and
   Discipline Counsel to the effect that numerous attempts had been made
   to contact the Student via email, courier, and telephone. The hearing
   proceeded in the Studentâs absence.
   The Tribunal found that the Student was guilty of both counts of
   forging an academic record on the basis of affidavit evidence that the
   Student had provided a Certificate of Degree and an Academic History to
   an employment agency in India that did not reflect the Studentâs
   performance at the University. The University withdrew the alternative
   charges.Â  The Tribunal accepted the Universityâs submission on
   penalty, given the seriousness of the offence and the lack of any
   evidence of mitigating circumstances without the Studentâs
   participation in the process. The Tribunal ordered: an immediate
   suspension for a period of up to five years; a recommendation to the
   President that the Student be expelled; and that the case be reported
   to the Provost with the Studentâs name withheld.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12976
