Case #728

   DATE: May 15, 2014
   PARTIES: University of Toronto v N.D.
   Hearing Date(s): January 13, 2014
   Panel Members:
   Andrew Pinto, Chair
   Dionne Aleman, Faculty Member
   Jonathan Hsu, Student Member
   Appearances:
   Robert Centa, Assistant Discipline Counsel
   Joseph Guiyab, Legal Case Worker
   In Attendance:
   Lucy Gaspini, Manager, Academic Integrity and Affairs
   Christopher Lang, Director, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances
   Trial Division â s. B.i.1(d) , s. B.i.1(e) and s. B.i.3(b) of the Code
   â alteration of test prior to remarking â plagiarism â credit
   previously obtained â Student not present, representative present â
   Agreed Statement of Facts â Joint Submission on Penalty Â â guilty plea
   â additional offence committed between offence and hearing â one prior
   offence â Student permitted to write a deferred examination â grade of
   zero in the course; five-year suspension; five-year transcript
   notation; report to Provost for publication; Panel to deal with
   implementation issues of deferred exam
   The Trial Division of the Tribunal was convened to consider three
   charges under s. B.i.1(d) , one charge under s. B.i.1(e) , and, in the
   alternative, three charges under s. B.i.3(b) of the Code laid against
   the Student. The charges related to allegations that the Student had
   altered versions of two tests submitted for re-marking and had
   submitted an essay which had already received credit or was
   plagiarized. The Student and University entered into an Agreed
   Statement of Facts (ASF) and a Joint Submission on Penalty (JSP).
   The Student did not attend the hearing but sent a representative. The
   ASF and JSP were signed by the Student and the Panel determined it was
   entitled to proceed in the Studentâs absence. The Student pleaded
   guilty to all seven charges and the University withdrew the three
   alternative charges. The Panel accepted the guilty plea and the Student
   stood convicted on the four charges.
   The JSP included a five year suspension which was at the high end of
   the penalty spectrum. The University justified it by stating that the
   Student committed a second offence just weeks admitting guilt to
   academic misconduct, had a prior offence and the offence was not one
   that could be committed negligently. Mitigating factors were the
   Studentâs admission of guilt and cooperation with the ASF and JSP. The
   Student would also be allowed to write a deferred examination as it
   would be unfair for her to wait five years. The Panel reviewed similar
   cases in which the student received a four year suspension.
   The Panel accepted the JSP and assigned a grade of zero in the course,
   imposed a five-year suspension from the date of the order, ordered a
   notation on the Studentâs transcript for five years or until graduation
   and ordered that the case be reported to the Provost for publication.
   The Panel also remained seized to deal with implementation issues
   concerning the Studentâs deferred exam.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12852
