Case 1057

   DATE: June 29, 2021
   PARTIES: University of Toronto v. A.I.

   HEARING DATE: April 1, 2021, via Zoom

   Panel Members:
   Ms. Sabrina Bandali, Chair
   Professor Ken Derry, Faculty Panel Member
   Ms. Alice Zhu, Student Panel Member

   Appearances:
   Ms. Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg
   Rothstein LLP
   Mr. Stuart Leary, Representative for the Student, Downtown Legal
   Services
   The Student

   In Attendance:
   Ms. Carmelle Salomon-Labbe, Associate,Â Appeals, Discipline and Faculty
   Grievances

   The Student was chargedÂ underÂ s. B.i.1(a) of theâ¯Code of Behaviour
   on Academic Matters, 1995â¯(the âCodeâ) on the basis
   thatÂ sheÂ knowingly falsified a documentÂ or evidence required by the
   University of Toronto, namely, the Student wrote a false name and
   address on the examination booklet during a final examination
   orÂ knowingly uttered, circulated orÂ made use of that forged, altered
   or falsifiedÂ document. InÂ addition,Â and in the alternative,Â the
   Student knowingly forged or in any other way altered or falsifiedÂ an
   academic record, namely, anÂ examination bookletÂ for a final
   examination,Â orÂ knowingly uttered, circulated or made use of that
   forged, altered or falsified academic record contrary to s. B.i.3(a) of
   the Code. In the further alternative, the StudentÂ knowingly engaged in
   a form of cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or
   misrepresentation in order to obtain academic credit or other academic
   advantage, contrary to s. B.i.3(b) of the Code.

   TheÂ Student attended the hearing and was
   represented.Â TheÂ UniversityÂ and the StudentÂ submitted an Agreed
   Statement of Facts (âASFâ) and Joint Book of Documents (âJBDâ).Â The
   Student deferred her final exam in the course to theÂ summer of
   2019Â whenÂ the Student, as admittedÂ in the ASF,Â attended the exam,
   wrote her nameÂ and student numberÂ on the Exam Attendee List, was
   unable to answer the examÂ questions, erased and crossed out her own
   information on the exam booklet and replaced it with a fictitious name
   and contact information, submitted theÂ fictitiouslyÂ named exam to
   make it appearÂ thatÂ she had not written it,Â and made assertions to
   the Professor of the courseÂ that she was expecting to receive a mark
   for herÂ examÂ she purported to submit knowing there was no
   examÂ containing her name or other identifying information.Â The
   Student admittedÂ guiltÂ to all three charges.Â The Panel was satisfied
   that the Studentâs admissions were voluntary, informed and
   unequivocal.Â The Panel found that the evidence contained in the ASF
   and JBDÂ provide a clear basis for a finding of guilt, therefore, the
   Panel concluded that theÂ first charge had been proven and accepted the
   guilty plea of the Student in respect to this charge.Â The University
   withdrewÂ the alternative charges.

   TheÂ Panel receivedÂ submissions from both the University and the
   Student with respect to the sanctionsÂ that should be imposedÂ on the
   Student. The UniversityÂ asked the Panel to take into
   considerationÂ thatÂ it is a serious matter to suggest an exam was
   lostÂ as it is anÂ attempt toÂ undermineÂ the integrity of the
   professor who was responsible for the administration of the exam.Â The
   Student asked the Panel to take into considerationÂ that there was no
   evidence that the conduct was preplanned, that she did not have any
   prior offences, her guilty plea, and the fact that there was little
   risk of repetition becauseÂ sheÂ hadÂ completedÂ enoughÂ credits to
   graduate.

   The Panel considered the factors and principles relevantÂ to sanction
   set out inÂ University of Toronto and Mr. CÂ (Case No. 1976/77-3,
   November 5, 1976), namely, the character of the Student, the likelihood
   of repetition, the nature of the offence, any extenuating
   circumstances, the detriment to the University and the need for
   deterrence.Â The Panel considered the seriousnessÂ of the offence, the
   lack of extenuating circumstances, and the need for general deterrence.
   Balanced against these factors are the Student's cooperation in the
   process and entry into the ASF. She admitted guilt, expressed that she
   is remorseful for her actions, and attended the hearing, which reflects
   the Student's character and demonstrates that she is taking
   responsibility for her actions. The PanelÂ further noted that since the
   StudentÂ hadÂ completed her requirements to graduate,Â the
   likelihoodÂ of repetition is low.

   Having regard for all of the above, the Panel imposed the following
   sanctions: a finalÂ grade of zero in the
   course;Â aÂ 21-monthÂ suspension; aÂ 33-monthÂ notation on the
   transcript; and a report to the Provost forÂ publication.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/29941
