Case #981

   DATE: March 4, 2019
   PARTIES: University of Toronto v. O.R.

   Hearing Date(s): December 3, 2018

   Panel Members:
   Ms. Shantona Chaudhury, Chair
   Prof. Pascal van Lieshout, Faculty Panel Member
   Ms. Alice Zhu, Student Panel Member

   Appearances:
   Ms. Tine Lie, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland,Â Rosenberg
   Rothstein LLP

   In Attendance:
   Ms. Tracey Gameiro, Associate Director, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty
   Grievances

   Not in Attendance:
   The Student

   Trial Division â s. B.i.1(d) of Code â plagiarism â Student submitted
   an essay for course credit knowing it contained verbatim or nearly
   verbatim text from the essays of two other students - Student did not
   attend hearing â reasonable notice of hearing was provided, but
   University not obliged to show Student had actual notice of hearing ââ
   finding of guilt â plagiarism warrants strong penalty to serve as
   deterrent â no evidence of remorse or extenuating circumstances â final
   grade assignment of zero for course; two-year suspension; three-year
   notation of sanction on transcript; and publication of notice of
   decision and sanctions, with Studentâs name withheld.

   The Student was charged with one count of academic misconduct under s.
   B.i.1(d) of the Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters, 1995 (the
   âCodeâ) on the basis that he knowingly represented the work of two
   other students as his own in an essay submitted for course credit.Â
   The student was charged, in the alternative, with one offence under s.
   B.i.1(b) of the Code (unauthorized assistance) and, in the further
   alternative, one offence under s. Bi.3(b) of the Code (cheating for
   academic advantage).

   Neither the Student nor a legal representative of the Student appeared
   at the hearing.Â  The University submitted affidavit evidence
   indicating that numerous attempts had been made to notify the Student
   of the hearing.Â  The Panel stated that while there was no evidence
   confirming the Student had actual notice of the hearing, the University
   had no obligation to prove actual notice: the question before the Panel
   was whether the University had taken reasonable steps to notify the
   Student of the Charges against him and of the hearing.Â  The Tribunal
   concluded that the Student had received reasonable notice of the
   charges and the hearing in accordance with the notice requirements set
   out in the Statutory Powers Procedure Act and the University Tribunal
   Rules of Practice and Procedure .Â  The Tribunal therefore proceeded to
   hear the case on it merits in the absence of the Student, and the
   Student was deemed to deny the charges against him.

   On the question of liability, the evidence established that the
   Studentâs essay consisted essentially of the first paragraph of one
   studentâs essay and the last paragraph of a second studentâs essay. The
   Panel concluded that the Student had clearly copied from two other
   essays stating that the similarities were undeniable. The Panel
   therefore concluded that the University had established on a balance of
   probabilities, using clear and convincing evidence, that the Student
   was guilty of academic misconduct contrary to s. B.i.1(d) of the Code
   .Â  The University withdrew the alternative charges.

   On the question of sanction, the Panel noted that plagiarism is a
   serious offence that undermines the relationship of trust, learning,
   and teaching between students and the University.Â  The Panel stated
   that plagiarism warrants a strong penalty to serve as a general
   deterrent to others.Â  The Panel found no evidence of remorse,
   understanding, mitigation or extenuating circumstances to justify a
   lenient sentence in this case and imposed the following sanctions: a
   final grade assignment of zero for the course; a two-year suspension
   from the University; a notation of the sanction on the Studentâs
   academic transcript for a three-year period; and publication by the
   Provost of a notice of decision and sanctions with the Studentâs name
   withheld.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/28397
