Case #551

   DATE: January 7, 2010
   PARTIES: University of Toronto v. M.L.
   Hearing Date(s): August 19, 2009
   Panel Members:
   Jane Pepino, Chair
   Ron Smyth, Faculty Member
   Elena Kuzmin, Student Member
   Appearances:
   Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel for the University
   Lwam Ghebrehariat, DLS for the Student
   Dr. Tamara Jones, Academic Integrity Officer
   Prof. Lenard Whiting, University of Toronto
   Maggie Man, Translator
   Mae-Yu Tan, Assistant Secretary, Governing Council
   The Student

   Trial Division â s.B.i.1(d) of Code â plagiarism â course work copied
   from textbook and online sources â Student discharged his
   representation after commencement of the hearing â representative
   withdraws representation â Studentâs defence was that a T.A. told him
   it was appropriate to copy and that he was not informed about
   plagiarism â finding of guilt â wilful ignorance of the Student â lack
   of remorse, evasiveness, and experience of the Student make a two year
   suspension less effective â grade assignment of zero for course; three
   year suspension; four year transcript notation; denial of âutorontoâ
   email privileges; and a report to the Provost.

   The Student was charged under section B.i.1(d) of the Code , and,
   alternatively, section B.i.3(b) of the Code . The charges related to
   allegations that the Student knowingly submitted a plagiarized
   assignment in one course. The Student plead not guilty to the charges.
   After the hearing commenced the Student indicated that he wished to
   discharge his representation on the grounds that the representative
   from Downtown Legal Services âwas not asking the questions I told him
   toâ. The representative from Downtown Legal Services withdrew his
   representation. The panel found the Student guilty of plagiarism. The
   Panel noted that the Student was an experienced Student and that his
   defence that a TA had told him that it was appropriate to copy and that
   he was not informed about plagiarism âconstitutes a state bordering on
   wilful ignorance.â The Panel noted the Studentâs lack of remorse,
   pattern of evasiveness, and the fact that the Student already possessed
   a Bachelorâs degree, which would make the deterrence value of a two
   year suspension less effective. The Panel ordered: 1) a grade of zero
   in the course, 2) a three year suspension, 3) a 4 year transcript
   notation, 4) a denial of privileges (ie. the use of âutorontoâ as the
   Studentâs email address), and 5) a report to the Provost

   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/13006
