Case No.: 1502
THE UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
IN THE MATTER OF charges of academic dishonesty filed ON January 5, 2023,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters, 2019,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Act, 1971, S.O. 1971, c. 56 as am. S.O. 1978, c. 88

B E T W E E N:

THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
- and H

Z

REASONS FOR DECISION

Hearing Date: May 3, 2023, via Zoom
Members of the Panel:
Sana Halwani, Chair
Dr. Lynda Mainwaring, Faculty Panel Member
Syeda Hasan, Student Panel Member
Appearances:
William Webb, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg Rothstein LLP
Hearing Secretary:
Christopher Lang, Director, Office of Appeals Discipline and Faculty Grievances
Not in Attendance:
H Z

I.

Charges and Procedural History
1. The Trial Division of the Tribunal held a hearing on May 3, 2023, to address the following
charges brought by the University of Toronto (the “University”) against H

Z

(the

“Student”) under the Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters, 2019 (the “Code”):
a. On or about the following dates, you knowingly obtained and/or provided unauthorized
assistance in connection with the following term tests in ECO2201Y1 (the “Course”),
contrary to section B.I.1(b) of the Code:
i. October 23, 2020 in connection with Term Test 1; and
ii. December 4, 2020 in connection with Term Test 2.
b. In the alternative, respectively, on or about the following dates, you knowingly represented
as your own an idea or expression of an idea or work of another in connection with the
following term tests in the Course, contrary to section B.I.1(d) of the Code:
i. October 23, 2020 in connection with Term Test 1; and
ii. December 4, 2020 in connection with Term Test 2.
c.

In the further alternative, respectively, on or about the following dates, you knowingly
engaged in a form of cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or
misrepresentation not otherwise described in the Code in order to obtain academic credit
or other academic advantage of any kind in connection with the following term tests in the
Course, contrary to section B.I.3(b) of the Code:
i. October 23, 2020 in connection with Term Test 1; and
ii. December 4, 2020 in connection with Term Test 2.

2. The Panel was advised at the hearing that the University was not proceeding with the
charges relating to Term Test 2, and therefore that only charges relating to Term Test 1
were at issue.

II.

Notice
3. The Student was not in attendance at the hearing and, as a result, Assistant Discipline
Counsel addressed the issue of notice.

2

4. On review of the evidence, and on considering the Statutory Powers and Procedures Act,
Rules 13, 14, 17 and 21 of the University Tribunal’s Rules of Practice and Procedure, and
the University’s Policy on Official Correspondence with Students, the Panel was satisfied
that notice had been adequately provided to the Student and decided to proceed with the
hearing despite his absence.
5. The evidence of notice included three affidavits as follows:
a. Affidavit of Alexciya Blair, a legal assistant at Paliare Roland Rosenberg Rothstein
LLP, providing evidence of all the efforts to contact the Student about the charges
and the hearing, prior to the hearing date including by email to the Student’s
utoronto account, by phone to the Student’s telephone number listed in the
Repository of Student Information (“ROSI”), and by courier to the Student’s
address listed in ROSI; and
b. Affidavit of Elizabeth Cowper, Department of Linguistics at the University of
Toronto and a Dean's Designate for Academic Integrity with the Student Academic
Integrity office (“SAI”) in the Faculty of Arts and Science, describing the attempts
made to schedule a Dean’s designate meeting in March to June 2022, and
attaching the Student’s academic record;
c. Affidavit of Andrew Wagg, Manager, Incident Response at Information Security,
Information Technology Services at the University, providing evidence of the last
time

someone

accessed

the

email

account

@mail.utoronto.ca, (the email address identified as the email
address of the Student in their ROSI record). The last time someone logged into
this email address was on July 13, 2022, which was after the SAI attempted to
contact the Student.
6. As set out in Rule 21 of the Rules of Practice and Procedure: “Where notice of a virtual
hearing, an in-person hearing, a hybrid hearing, or a written hearing has been given to a
party in accordance with this Part, and the party does not attend at or does not participate
in the hearing, the panel may proceed in the absence of the party or without the party’s
participation and the party is not entitled to any further notice in the proceeding.” This
language was repeated in the Notice of Electronic Hearing emailed to the Student.

3

7. Rule 17 provides that “the Secretary shall provide the University with reasonable notice of
a hearing and shall deliver such notice to the student’s last known ROSI email address.”
8. As set out in Rule 13: “Charges, notices of hearing, disclosure material for use on motions
or hearings, orders, and reasons for decision may be served on a student or sent to a
student: […] by e-mailing a copy of the document to the student’s e-mail address contained
in ROSI, or to the students’ representative, if such representative has confirmed its
authority to accept service, and service shall be effective on the day the document is sent
by e-mail.” Repeated attempts were made to contact the Student at his e-mail address
contained in ROSI, including sending the Notice of Electronic Hearing.
9. There was evidence provided to the Panel that the Student was likely aware of the
allegations that led to the charges. Numerous emails were sent to the Student’s email
address in March to June 2022 attempting to schedule a meeting with the Dean’s
Designate to discuss the allegations. These emails were all sent prior to the last time
someone logged into the Student email address, per Mr. Wagg’s evidence.
10. The evidence also indicates that the Student had not provided his unit number for his
address in ROSI, and no other addresses were provided by the Student in ROSI. Further,
when the Assistant Discipline Counsel called the Student at the cellular number that was
listed in ROSI, he received a message that the phone number was no longer in service.
The Student appears to have taken deliberate steps to avoid communications from the
University.
11. Although the evidence provided did not go so far as to confirm that the Student had
received the Notice of Hearing (because he never responded or acknowledged receipt), it
is clear from the evidence that the Student was given reasonable notice under the Rules
of Practice and Procedure. The University served the Student by email to his official ROSI
email, and attempted to reach the Student by courier and phone. The University took many
steps beyond what is strictly required by the University’s Policy on Official
Correspondence with Students.
12. On this basis, the Panel was of the view that reasonable notice had been provided under
the Rules and was content to proceed with the hearing in the Student’s absence.

4

III.

Summary of Evidence
13. The Student was a student in the Course and in Fall 2020 and Winter 2021.
14. In 2021, SAI received allegations that over 100 students in the Course obtained
unauthorized assistance on several term tests. The Dean's Designate meetings took a
significant amount of time and resources and the University prioritized cases where
students responded or were set to graduate. As of today, nearly all of these cases have
been resolved. The case before the Panel is one of the last such cases to be resolved.
15. The Panel was provided with this evidence to explain the time lag between the offence
and the hearing.
16. The evidence of the University on the charges was presented by way of affidavit from
Professor Jennifer Murdock in the Department of Economics, who has taught the Course
since 2004.
17. As the Student did not attend and was not represented at the hearing, Professor Murdock
was not cross-examined but was made available to the Panel for any questions.
A.

The Course

18. The Course was administered online due to the pandemic. There were five sections in
the Course. Students registered for one of these five sections.
19. Students in the course were required to write four term tests, each worth 12.5% of their
final grade. Each test contained six open-ended questions, with a complete answer
requiring some combination of writing, graphing, and/or quantitative analysis.
20. The term tests were administered online. Students were required to write their answers
on paper, scan or take a photo of each answer, and upload an image for each question to
Crowdmark, the University’s online grading platform. Professor Murdock required students
to upload a separate image for each question because Crowdmark has a feature that
allows instructors to grade question-by-question. This feature on Crowdmark was used to
increase the consistency in grading.
21. The syllabus stated that students were prohibited from collaborating on the term tests:
“[t]here is absolutely no collaboration allowed on Term Tests #1 to #4 or the short writing
assignments. Your submissions must be entirely your own work.” In addition, Professor
5

Murdock posted academic integrity instructions to Quercus for each term test, which
stated that academic integrity is a fundamental value of learning and scholarship at the
University of Toronto and that students were prohibited from collaborating. Students were
required to submit a signed academic integrity statement that stated they agreed to fully
abide by the Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters for each term test. Each term test
also stated that “[t]here is absolutely no collaboration and absolutely no communication
until after we return your marked work to you.”
B.

Term Test 1

22. Term Test 1 was administered online on October 23, 2020. Students had 105 minutes to
write the test and 15 minutes to scan and upload their test. Students from the first three
sections of the course could choose to write their term tests at any time during the early
test window (7:00 a.m. to 1:00 p.m. ET). Students in the other two sections of the course
could choose to write their term tests at any time during the late test window (11:00 a.m.
to 5:00 p.m. ET).
23. Professor Murdock prepared eight different versions of Term Test 1 to deter cheating.
Students were assigned a particular version of the test at random.
24. On October 23, 2020, the Student and a second student (“N.G.”) completed and submitted
version 4 of Term Test 1.
C.

The Investigation

25. In March 2021, a course teaching assistant notified Professor Murdock that several
students wrote similar answers to questions on Term Test 3. Professor Murdock reviewed
these similarities, had concerns that students were collaborating, and decided to
investigate.
26. From March to May 2021, Professor Murdock spent significant time investigating the issue
and found evidence of widespread collaboration. She reviewed every term test that every
student in the course submitted and found that a large number of students wrote similar
answers to some or all of the questions on term tests 1, 2, and 3. Based on similarities
between students’ answers, Professor Murdock concluded that some students appeared
to collaborate in small groups, while others appeared to be part of a larger network or
group of students.
6

27. Professor Murdock suspected that the Student and N.G. collaborated on Term Test 1
because there were striking similarities between their answers to questions 1, 2, 3(a), and
5 in the Test.
28. Professor Murdock provided the Panel with a chart that compared these answers showing
verbatim similarities, verbatim similarities with different syntax, and non-verbatim
conceptual similarities.
29. There were many ways that students could have and did express their answer to the
questions in Term Test 1. Despite the many ways that students could have written their
answers, the answers to the tests of the Student and N.G. were very similar in terms of
word choice, syntax, structure and quantitative analysis. In addition, both students made
the identical or very similar mistakes in answers to a number of questions. Professor
Murdock provided evidence that the degree of similarity between the answers of the
Student and N.G. was “striking and unusual.”
30. On May 10, 2021, Professor Murdock met with N.G. to discuss her concerns that N.G.
had obtained unauthorized assistance on term tests 1, 2, and 4. During that meeting, N.G.
told Professor Murdock that she had a paid tutor, named “Jessica”, to help her on the term
tests, and she knew that Jessica was helping other students in the course in real time
during graded work.
31. On May 10, 2021, Professor Murdock also met with the Student to discuss her concerns
that he had obtained unauthorized assistance.

IV.

Finding on Charges
32. The Student is charged with cheating on Term Test 1 in the Course. As is described
below, the Panel found the Student guilty of this charge.
33. The burden is on the University to prove charges on a balance of probabilities. This means
that the University must prove that it is more likely than not that the student committed the
offence.
34. The Course syllabus in the Course was clear that collaboration during tests was a potential
academic offence. There is no question that the Student knew or ought to have known

7

that such actions would be academic offences. The question for the Panel was therefore
whether the Student did in fact cheat in Term Test 1.
35. Following deliberation and based on the affidavit evidence and the documents in the
University’s Book of Documents (re: Offence), the Panel concluded there was clear and
convincing evidence, on a balance of probabilities, that the Student did commit the offence
with which he was charged.
36. Assistant Discipline Counsel made submissions that where the University leads evidence
that a student’s answer is similar to another student’s answer to prove an academic
offence, the Panel should consider the following factors to evaluate the quality of the
evidence1:
a. The nature of the question, including the number of ways that one could express
an answer to the question, whether the question is new, etc. Here, the evidence
of Professor Murdock is that there were numerous ways to express answers to
many of the questions in Term Test 1.
b. The nature of the similarities, including idiosyncrasies, unusual features, mistakes,
concepts or notations not taught in the course, etc. Here, the students made the
same or very similar errors.
c. The degree of the similarities, ranging from modest to striking similarities. Here
the answers were strikingly similar with respect to structure, word choice, etc.
d. The student’s explanation, if any, for the similarities. Here, we have no explanation
from the Student because the Student has not participated in the proceeding.
e. Any other factors that are relevant in the circumstances, including whether other
students who submitted similar answers have admitted to an offence in connection
with the same piece of academic work. Here, N.G. admitted to obtaining help from

1

See for example: University of Toronto v. G.L. (Case No. 1262, February 22, 2022), at para. 20, aff’d 2022 DAB
1262; University of Toronto v. M.R. (Case No. 1282, December 19, 2022) at paras. 29-31; University of Toronto v.
L.S. (Case No. 841, March 13, 2017), aff’d 2017 DAB 841 at para. 62; University of Toronto v. T.Z. (Case No. 1106,
April 5, 2022) at paras. 19-20; University of Toronto v. J.T.L. (Case No. 1199, January 26, 2022) at paras. 33-34;
University of Toronto v. X.Y. (Case No. 1147, November 11, 2022) at paras. 21, 27; University of Toronto v. H.W.
(Case No. 1179, March 7, 2022) at paras. 19-20; University of Toronto v. Y.C. (Case No. 1372, March 7, 2023) at
paras. 51-52.

8

a paid tutor during Term Test 1. The Panel did not place a great deal of weight on
this hearsay evidence.
37. The Panel may conclude, based on the evidence before it, that the similarities between
two answers were more likely the natural product of the fact that students were writing on
the same topic and relying on the same source material.2 However, where there is no
evidence to support an alternative explanation for the similarities between two students’
answers, it is not for the Panel to imagine or speculate if some other possible explanation
exists.3
38. Further, in cases like these, it is not necessary to prove the exact mechanism by which
the cheating occurred.4
39. Assistant Discipline Counsel raised the issue of whether there was evidence that the
Student had paid for assistance, which can have a bearing on sanction because cases
involving the use of commercial cheating enterprises are treated more severely by the
University. Assistant Discipline Counsel candidly conceded that there was likely not
enough evidence to draw the inference that the Student was using the same paid tutor as
N.G. First, the Student had different answers to questions 4 and 6 on Term Test 1 when
identical questions would have been expected if the same tutor had been used. Second,
N.G. did not provide any additional evidence about whether the Student or any other
Student used the same tutor. Third, there was no other evidence that the Student had
used a paid service.
40. The Panel therefore determined that there is sufficient evidence to conclude that the
Student obtained unauthorized assistance during Term Test 1 but not that the Student
paid for such assistance.
41. Having found the Student guilty of the first charge, the two alternative charges were
withdrawn by the University.

2

University of Toronto v. L.S.at paras. 45-63, aff’d 2017 DAB 841 at para. 62.
University of Toronto v. Z.X. (Case No. 1285, December 5, 2022) at para. 49.
4
University of Toronto v. G.L. at paras. 31-33, aff’d 1262 DAB 2022 at paras. 35-36.
3

9

V.

Finding on Penalty
42. Once the Panel had made a determination on the charges, the University requested the
following penalty for the offences relating Term Test 1:
a. a final grade of zero in ECO220 in Fall 2020 and Winter 2021;
b. a suspension from the University for a period of 2 years from the date of this order;
and
c. a notation of the sanction on the student’s academic record and transcript for a
period of 3 years from the date of this order;
43. The University also requested that this case be reported to the Provost for publication of
a notice of the decision of the Tribunal and the sanction imposed, with the Student’s name
withheld.
44. To support this proposed penalty, Assistant Discipline Counsel made submissions on the
following:
a. Relevant factors in determining the appropriate sanctions;
b. The typical penalty for similar cases; and
c. The date on which the sanction should take effect.
A.

Relevant Factors under Mr. C.

45. Finally, Assistant Discipline Counsel made submissions on the factors to be considered in
penalty as set out in The University of Toronto v. Mr. C. (1976) (Case No.: 1976/77-3).
46. The Student in this case had not participated at any stage of the process. The Student
had therefore not shown any remorse, not presented any character evidence, and not
raised any mitigating or extenuating factors to warrant a more lenient sanction. This failure
to participate is therefore a neutral factor.
47. With respect to the likelihood of repetition of the offence, the Student has no prior
academic offence, and this is therefore a neutral factor.

10

48. With respect to the nature of the offence, the need to deter others, and the detriment to
the University, we echo the words of the Panel in the University of Toronto v. G.Z. (Case
No. 1004, February 26, 2020):
The use of unauthorized aids is a threat to the integrity of the University’s
processes for evaluating students, is profoundly unfair to other students,
and jeopardizes the University’s reputation. These considerations urged
against imposing a milder sanction than those typically applied in similar
cases.
B.

Similar Cases

49. The two-year suspension is also in line with similar cases presented by Assistant
Discipline Counsel. While the Panel is not bound by any of these decisions, they are
helpful in assisting the Tribunal in treating like cases alike.
50. The cases provided to us involved a single count of unauthorized assistance or plagiarism.
In all cases presented, the Student had no priors, and there was no Agreed Statement of
Facts or a Joint Submission on Penalty. To summarize them briefly:
a. All but one case involved a 2-year suspension and a 0 in the relevant course.
b. The one case with a 3-year suspension involved aggravating circumstances,
i.e.,the Student tried to mislead the Panel at the hearing.
51. In addition, the Panel notes that the Provost’s Guidance states that the Provost will request
that the Tribunal suspend a student for two years for any offence involving academic
dishonesty, where there were not mitigating or aggravating circumstances.
52. The two-year penalty proposed by the University was therefore in line with past similar
cases and with the Provost’s Guidance.
53. Finally, the Panel also considered whether the unusual circumstances of the Student
being one of 100 students to be involved in cheating should have any bearing on the
sanction (whether mitigating or aggravating). The Panel concluded that it should not.
There was no evidence that the Student had been involved in organising the cheating
scheme, and so no evidence of aggravating behavior. The was also no evidence of the
fact that the widespread cheating was a mitigating circumstance. Simply, the Student
cheated on a test and had no prior offences; the sanction proposed by the University was
appropriate for that conduct.
11

C.

Start Date of the Sanction

54. The allegations arise from events in May 2020, three years prior to the hearing. As such,
Assistant Discipline Counsel addressed the reasons for the delay in support of the
University’s request that the sanction be imposed from the date of the Order and not be
backdated.
55. This delay arises from a very unusual circumstance – namely, allegations that over 100
students in the Course obtained unauthorized assistance on several term tests – and is
not the result of the University sitting on its hands. Both Professor Murdock and SAI have
spent hundreds of hours over the last two years addressing and meeting with the over 100
students that were alleged to have cheated on the tests. In addition, SAI prioritised –
rightly, in the view of the Panel – students that engaged with the process and/or who were
close to graduation.
56. In this case, the Student did not engage with the process, and stopped attending courses
at the University in the summer of 2021. In the Panel’s view, the Student therefore bears
part of the responsibility for the delay in his case being heard by the Tribunal.
57. In general, sanctions should commence from the date that the sanction is imposed, and
backdating should only be done for a principled reason; to do otherwise would result in a
wide disparity among sanctions.5
58. In S.B., the Panel stated that “there must be a principled reason for such backdating, such
as an early admission of guilt, or similar circumstances which dictate that the student
would suffer unjustified harm as a result of the University's slowness in moving the matter
to a hearing.”6 Here, there was no evidence that the delay had caused prejudice to the
Student. The Panel therefore concluded that there was no basis to warrant backdating
the sanction in this case.
59. Taking all these submissions into consideration, the Panel imposed the requested penalty.

VI.

5
6

Decision of the Panel

University of Toronto v. D.S. (Case No. 451, August 24, 2007) at paras. 53-54.
University of Toronto v. S.B. (Case No. 488, November 14, 2007) at paras. 28-29.

12

60. At the conclusion of the hearing on penalty, the Panel conferred and made the following
order:
a. The hearing may proceed in the absence of the Student;
b. The Student is guilty of one count of unauthorized assistance, contrary to B.I.1(b)
of the Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters;
i. The following sanctions shall be imposed on the Student:
ii. a final grade of zero in ECO220 in Fall 2020 and Winter 2021;
iii. a suspension from the University for a period of 2 years from the date of
this order; and
iv. a notation of the sanction on the student’s academic record and transcript
for a period of 3 years from the date of this order;
c. This case shall be reported to the Provost for publication of a notice of the
decision of the Tribunal and the sanctions imposed, with the name of the student
withheld.

DATED at Toronto, May 29, 2023
Original signed by:
_________________________________
Sana Halwani, Chair
On behalf of the Panel

13

