Case 1502

FILE:

   Case # 1502 (2022-2023)

DATE:

   May 29, 2023

PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v. H.Z. (‚the Student‚)

HEARING DATE(S):

   May 3, 2023, via Zoom

PANEL MEMBERS:

   Sana Halwani, Chair

   Dr. Lynda Mainwaring, Faculty Panel Member

   Syeda Hasan, Student Panel Member

APPEARANCES:

   William Webb, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg
   Rothstein LLP

HEARING SECRETARY:

   Christopher Lang, Director, Office of Appeals, Discipline and Faculty
   of Grievances

   The Student was charged with knowingly obtaining and/or providing
   unauthorized assistance in connection with two term tests in ECO2201Y1
   (‚the Course‚), contrary to s. B.i.1(b) of the Code. In the
   alternative, the Student was charged under s. B.i.1(d) of the Code for
   knowingly representing as their own an idea or expression of an idea or
   work of another in connection with the term tests. In the further
   alternative, the Student was charged with knowingly engaging in a form
   of cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or
   misrepresentation not otherwise described in the Code to obtain
   academic credit or advantage, contrary to s. B.i.3(b) of the Code. The
   Panel was informed at the hearing that the University was not
   proceeding with the charges related to the second term test and only
   the charges pertaining to Term Test 1 were at issue.

   The Student did not attend the hearing and was not represented by
   counsel. The Panel heard evidence that the University had made serious
   efforts to serve the Student with notice, through email and telephone,
   and through courier delivery. The Panel found that reasonable notice of
   the hearing was provided in accordance with the University Tribunal‚s
   Rules of Practice and Procedure and was content to proceed without the
   Student.

   The Student was enrolled in the Course in Fall 2020 and Winter 2021.
   The Course was taught online due to the pandemic. The term tests,
   including Term Test 1, were administered online. The Course syllabus
   stated that students were prohibited from collaborating on the term
   tests. In March 2021, a teaching assistant notified the instructor that
   a phrase kept appearing in student answers for the third term test.
   After detailed investigation, the teaching team found that a large
   number of students had collaborated on some or all of the term tests.
   The Course instructor suspected that the Student and another student
   (‚N.G.‚) collaborated on Term Test 1 due to the striking similarities
   between their answers to several questions on the test. The instructor
   noted that despite the various ways students could have responded to
   the questions, the answers of the Student and N.G. were very similar in
   terms of word choice, syntax, structure, and quantitative analysis. The
   Student and N.G. also made identical or very similar mistakes in
   answers to several questions.

   After deliberation and based on the evidence and the University‚s Book
   of Documents, the Panel found that there was clear evidence, on a
   balance of probabilities, that the Student was guilty under s. B.i.1(b)
   of the Code. The Panel found the Student guilty of the first charge and
   the University withdrew the two alternative charges.

   In determining the appropriate sanctions, the Panel considered the
   Student‚s character and extenuating or mitigating factors. The Panel
   found no evidence for character, remorse, or extenuating circumstance,
   as the Student did not participate in the proceedings. The Panel also
   considered the likelihood of repetition, finding it to be a neutral
   factor as the Student had no prior offences. With respect to the nature
   of the offence, deterrence, and detriment to the University, similar to
   a previous case, the Panel found the use of unauthorized aids to be a
   threat to the University‚s reputation and required sanction. The Panel
   considered the Provost‚s Guidance and prior similar cases. The Panel
   also considered whether the widespread cheating in the Course should
   bear weight on the sanction and found that it should not, as there was
   no evidence of it being an aggravating or mitigating factor. There was
   also no evidence that warranted backdating the sanction in this case.
   Thus, the Panel agreed with the University‚s requested penalty.

   The Panel imposed the following sanctions: a grade assignment of zero
   in the course; a two-year suspension; a three-year notation on the
   Student‚s transcript; and a report to the Provost for publication.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/31203
