Report #346

   DATE: September 27, 2010
   PARTIES: S.S.Â  (the Student) v. UTSC
   Hearing Date(s): August 25, 2010
   Committee Members:
   Tad Brown, Chair
   Professor Ellen Hodnett
   Professor Louise Lemieux-Charles
   Dr. Chris Koenig-Woodyard
   Jeff Peters
   Appearances:
   For the Student Appellant:
   S.S. (the Student)
   For the University of Toronto:
   Professor Mark Schmuckler, Acting Vice-Dean, Undergraduate
   UTSC â deferral of refusal of future registration â medical grounds â
   compassionate grounds â admitted âon conditionâ â previous refusal of
   future registration â previous petition for deferral of refusal of
   future registration granted â granted on the condition that no future
   deferrals be granted â Student Medical Certificate â date of Student
   Medical Certificate â Student Medical Certificate obtained after
   refusal of future registration â insufficient medical evidence â clear
   and consistent communication of expectations â expectations of UTSC â
   appeal dismissed â minority dissent
   Appeal of a decision to deny the Student a deferral of the Registrarâs
   decision to refuse her future registration at UTSC. The Student
   appealed on medical and compassionate grounds and sought a remedy that
   would allow her the opportunity for further registration at UTSC. The
   Student first enrolled at the UTSC having not met normal admission
   requirements. The Student was admitted âon conditionâ, meaning she had
   to achieve a certain GPA. The Student GPA moved below this âon
   conditionâ threshold and was refused future registration. A previous
   petition to have the refusal of future registration deferred was
   granted on compassionate grounds. The Student re-enrolled and once
   again did not maintain the requisite GPA. The Student was then refused
   registration for a second time. The Student appealed on compassionate
   grounds, stating that a close family member had died which affected her
   ability to do well on examinations. The Student did not provide
   documentation in support of this submission. The Student also submitted
   a Student Medical Certificate stating she was suffering from illnesses.
   It was noted by the Committee that the Student did not visit the doctor
   in order to get the Student Medical Certificate until after being
   refused registration. The Committee found there was not sufficient
   evidence to support the Studentâs petition on a medical basis. The
   Committee also found that UTSC was clear and consistent in its
   communications to the Student about the expectations of her and the
   consequences of failing to meet those requirements. The Committee
   further noted the previous granting of a deferral to refuse future
   registration at UTSC on compassionate grounds, which stated that no
   further deferrals would be granted. One member of the Committee
   dissented and would have granted the appeal on compassionate grounds.
   Appeal dismissed.
   [1]View Report

References

   1. file:///media/12592
