THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
THE GOVERNING COUNCIL
Report # 346 of the Academic Appeals Committee
September 27, 2010

To the Academic Board
University of Toronto

Your Committee reports that it held a hearing on Wednesday, August 25, 2010 at which
the following members were present:
Mr. Tad Brown, Chair
Professor Ellen Hodnett
Professor Louise Lemieux-Charles
Dr. Chris Koenig-Woodyard
Mr. Jeff Peters
Secretary: Mr. Christopher Lang, Director, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty
Grievances

Appearances:
For the Student Appellant:
Ms. S.S. (the Student)
For the University of Toronto Scarborough (UTSC):
Professor Mark Schmuckler, Acting Vice-Dean, Undergraduate

I. The Appeal
The Student is appealing a decision of the Subcommittee on Academic Appeals (SAA) at
the University of Toronto Scarborough dated November 18, 2009. The decision of the
SAA dismissed an appeal by the student denying her defe1rnl of the Registrar's decision
to refuse her further registration at the University of Toronto Scarborough. The Student
is appealing on medical and compassionate grounds. The Student is seeking a remedy
that would allow her the opportunity for fmiher registration at the University of Toronto
Scarborough.

II. Facts
The Student first enrolled at the University of Toronto Scarborough in the 2008 Fall
Session in Honours Bachelor of Science. The Student did not meet normal admission
requirements and was admitted "on condition". The Student's offer of admission
contained the following information:

"You are admitted 'on condition'. 1j at the end of the session in which you
complete your third fit!/ credit equivalent at UTSC, you obtain a cumulative grade
point average of 1. 60 or be/fer, the conditional status will be removed and you
will be 'in good standing'.
However, /[you obtain a cumulative grade point average of less than 1.60, you
will be reji1sedji1rther registration.
Review the Academic Regulations in the UTSC Calendar. This condition is
significant. You are expected lo seek advice to help you to meet the condition.
,Wake an appointment with UTSC 's Academic Advising & Career Centre at 416287-7561 or counseling@utsc. utoronto. ca prior to start of classes. "
The Student had completed 2.5 credits at the end of the 2008 Fall Session with a
sessional and cumulative GPA of 1.28. The Student remained 'on condition' as per the
terms of her admission. The Student enrolled in 2.5 credits for the 2009 Winter Session
and completed the term with a sessional GP A of 1.14 and a cumulative GP A of 1.21. She
was refused further registration.
On May 8, 2009, the Student petitioned to have the refusal of further registration deferred
to be allowed to register for further course. In her application, the Student cited the
challenges of having family members trapped in a war zone in her native Sri Lanka. The
University of Toronto Scarborough granted the Student's petition on compassionate
grounds. In the decision granting the Petition, the Student was advised that:

"Another request of this type will not be considered again. YOU i'vJAY
CONTINUE WITH YOUR STUDIES FOR THE 2009 SUi\1.MER SESSION You
remain on academic probation and are returning under extreme conditions and
so are at risk of being REFUSED FURTHER REGISTRATION AT THE END OF
THE 2009 SU,'vJMER SESSION Until such time as you raise your cumulative
GPA to al least 1.6 and return to good standing, you will be required to achieve a
sessional GPA of at least 1. 6 in eve1y session in which you register".
In the decision granting the Petition, the Student was also strongly advised to meet with
her academic advisor and to assess her progress carefully at regular intervals, especially
before deadline dates for withdrawal from courses without academic penalty.
The Student enrolled in 1.5 credits for the 2009 Smmner Session and at the end of the
session her sessional and cumulative GP As were 0.68 and 1.06 respectively. The Student

2

was refused registration for the second time. On September 14, 2009, the Student
petitioned to defer the Registrar's decision to refuse her further registration on medical
and compassionate grounds. This petition was denied.

III. Previous Decision
The Student appealed this decision to the Subcommittee on Academic Appeals (the
"SAA") of the University of Toronto Scarborough on October 22, 2009. In a decision
dated November 18, 2009, the SAA denied the Student's appeal to defer the Registrar's
decision to refuse the Student fmiher registration. The decision was based on the
student's clear understanding of her academic situation and her acknowledgement of her
oppo11unity to escape the situation by withdrawing from the courses and by deferring
examinations.

IV. Decision
In supp011 of her appeal, the Student has stated that a close family member died in Sri
Lanka in early August 2009 which affected her ability to do well on her final exams. The
Student was not able to provide documentation in support of this submission. The
Student also submitted a Student Medical Ce11ificate stating that she was suffering from
dimThea, fatigue and fever in the period of August 11 through August 14, 2009 and in
which the doctor notes that "patient claims illness affected patient's concentration and
energy". It is noted that the Student did not visit the doctor in order to get the Student
Medical Certificate until September 11, 2009.
The Student acknowledged that the University of Toronto Scarborough had clearly and
consistently communicated the requirement that she achieve the sessional requirement of
a 1.60 GP A. The Sh1dent also acknowledged that she did meet with her academic
advisor in the 2009 Summer Session who advised her to withdraw from her courses.
However the Student chose not to follow that advice.
Your Conm1ittee does not find that there is sufficient evidence to supp011 granting this
appeal on a medical basis. The Student visited the doctor's office far too long after her
illness in order to reasonably be able to rely on the Student Medical Ce11ificate.
Your Committee also finds that the University of Toronto Scarborough was clear and
consistent in all of its communications to the Student about the expectations of her and
the consequences of failing to meet those requirements. Your Conm1ittee also notes that
the University of Toronto Scarborough had already granted the Student's first petition for
a deferral of the Registrar's decision to refuse her further registration at the University of
Toronto Scarborough after the 2009 Winter Session on compassionate grounds based on
her family situation in Sri Lanka. Your Co111111ittee also notes that the University of
Toronto Scarborough in granting the first petition clearly indicated that it would not do so
agam.

3

While your Committee is truly sympathetic to the Student's family situation, the majority
of your Committee is of the view that the circumstances of this case do not warrant a
second deferral of refusal to allow fmiher registration.
One member of your Committee dissents and would grant the appeal on compassionate
grounds.
The appeal is dismissed.

4

