Case No.: 905
THE UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
IN THE MATTER OF charges of academic dishonesty filed on December 9,
2016;
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on
Academic Matters, 1995;
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Act, 1971 , S.O. 1971 , c. 56
as amended S.O. 1978, c. 88.

BETWEEN:
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
-AND-

S■

REASONS FOR DECISION
Hearing Date: August 2, 2017
Members of the Panel:
Mr. Andrew Pinto, Barrister and Solicitor, Chair
Professor Louis Florence, Faculty Panel Member
Mr. Chad Jankowski, Student Panel Member
Appearances:
Ms. Tina Lie, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Barristers
Mr. Robert Sniderman, Student's legal representative, Law Student, Downtown
Legal Services
Mr. · - B
, the Student
In Attendance:
Ms. Krista Osbourne, Administrative Clerk and Hearing Secretary, Office of the
Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances
Mr. Brian Alexic, Technology Assistant, Office of the Governing Council
Mr. Nader Hasan, Tribunal Co-Chair (Observer)
Professor Luc De Nil, Vice-Dean, Students, School of Graduate Studies

Preliminary
[1]

The Trial Division of the University Tribunal was convened on August 2,
2017 to consider charges under the University of Toronto Code of
Behaviour on Academic Matters, 1995 (the "Code") laid against the
Student by letter dated December 9, 2016 from the Vice-Provost, Faculty
& Academic Life of the University of Toronto.

[2]

The Student and the University entered into an Agreed Statement of Facts
("ASF") and an Agreed Statement of Facts and Joint Submission on
Penalty ("ASF & JSP"), copies of which are attached to these Reasons as
Appendix "A" and "B" respectively.

Hearing on the Facts
[3]

The charges against the Student were as follows :
1.

On or about August 21 , 2016, you knowingly forged or in any other
way altered or falsified an academic record, and/or uttered ,
circulated or made use of such forged , altered or falsified record ,
namely, a document which purported to be your Complete
Academic History from the University of Toronto, contrary to
Section B.l.3(a) of the Code.

2.

On or about August 21 , 2016, you knowingly forged or in any other
way altered or falsified an academic record , and/or uttered ,
circulated or made use of such forged , altered or falsified record ,
namely, your resume, which included a false report of your grade
point average, contrary to Section B.l.3(a) of the Code.

3.

In the alternative, on or about August 21 , 2016, you knowingly
engaged in a form of cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct,
fraud or misrepresentation not otherwise described in order to
obtain academic credit or other academic advantage of any kind,
contrary to Section B.l.3(b) of the Code.

Particulars of charges
4.

In August 2016, you completed an application for the Hatch
Graduate Scholarship for Sustainable Energy Research
("Application").

5.

On or about August 21 , 2016, in support of your Application , you
submitted a document that you represented to be your Complete

2

Academic History from the University of Toronto. You knew that this
document was forged , altered, and/or falsified . You knew that you
had falsely represented that:

(a)
(b)
(c)

[4]

you received a grade of A in ECE1059H when in fact you
received a final grade of B;
you received a grade of A- in ECE1094H when in fact you
received a final grade of B; and
you received a grade of A in ECE1236 when in fact you
received a final grade of B+.

6.

On or about August 21 , 2016, you knowingly submitted a resume in
support of your Application. In this resume you falsely reported that
you had earned a GPA of 3.8 out of 4.0 at the University of Toronto,
which you knew was false.

7.

You were required to submit evidence or documents to the
University to support your Application . You had an obligation to
provide the University with accurate and truthful information. You
had an obligation not to provide forged or falsified documents in
support of your requests .

The Student, via the ASF, entered a guilty plea to charges 1 and 2.

Decision of the Tribunal on Charges
[5]

Following deliberation, based on the facts set out in the ASF and a review
of the documents contained in a Joint Book of Documents ("JBD"), the
Tribunal accepted the Student's guilty plea on charges 1 and 2. The
University withdrew the third charge which was brought in the alternative.
Consequently, the Student stood convicted on charges 1 and 2.

Penalty
[6]

The matter then continued with a hearing into the appropriate sanction.
As noted above, the University and the Student filed an ASF & JSP
attached to these Reasons as Appendix B. The JSP involved a
suspension from the University for five years and a notation of the
sanction on the Student's academic record and transcript for seven years.

[7]

Discipline counsel presented a number of Tribunal decisions and
submitted that the penalty in the JSP was consistent with the Tribunal 's
jurisprudence concerning falsification of an academic record which is
considered a very serious offence.

3

[8]

Here the Student admitted guilt at the Dean's Designate meeting and
submitted a letter of apology. The Student participated fully in the
academic discipline process by attending the hearing, retaining a legal
representative and submitting an ASF admitting guilt, and an ASF & JSP
regarding penalty.
Discipline counsel agreed that the Student
demonstrated insight into his actions and had expressed remorse. The
Student's thesis supervisor had also provided a letter suggesting that this
"experience has been a transformative moment in [the Student's] life, such
that he has learned a lifelong lesson". The Student had fulfilled all the
requirements of his degree so the likelihood of another offence was low.

[9]

Overall, the University submitted that the circumstances called for a
serious penalty albeit one that still provided the Student with an
opportunity to graduate from the University. The reason why the proposed
suspension was to start from September 30, 2017 and not immediately
was to permit the Student to transition his research work in order not to
disadvantage other members of his research team and the incoming
students.

[10)

The Student's legal representative submitted that the JSP was
appropriate. While the nature of the offence generally resulted in a
recommendation for expulsion , the specific facts required something less
than the ultimate penalty. The Student had no prior discipline history, he
acknowledged guilty early, and cooperated fully in the discipline process.
He was a promising graduate student who, if the JSP was adopted , would
be permitted to graduate in 2022. Until then, he would be forced to reflect
very deeply on his conduct. The Student was genuinely remorseful.

[11]

The panel reviewed the cases presented by the University in its Brief of
Authorities. The Tribunal has consistently held that "the parties ought to
expect that a hearing panel will impose that Oointly submitted] sentence,
unless to do so would be fundamentally contrary to the interests of the
University community and objectively unreasonable or unconscionable"
(University of Toronto and M.A. at para 24 (DAB Case No. 837, December
22, 2016).

[12]

The panel noted that, in University of Toronto and S. D. (Case No. 406
May 1, 2007), the student received a 3 year suspension where he
provided a falsified academic history to an employer and where he had no
prior offences and cooperated with the discipline process via an ASF and
JSP with respect to one charge. Similar to the present case, in S.D. supra,
the student also submitted a letter of apology and had presented a strong
letter of support.

4

[13]

The panel reasoned that, given that the Student had pleaded guilty to two
charges, a 5 year suspension appeared consistent with S.D., supra and
the other cases presented by the University.

Decision of the Tribunal on Charges
[14]

Here, based on the parties' submissions and the case law as presented,
the panel concluded that the penalty proposed in the JSP was not
unreasonable. In all the circumstances, the panel could not find a
principled reason to reject the JSP and was therefore bound to agree with
it.

[15]

In light of the facts of this case, the admission of guilt by the Student, and
the joint submission regarding penalty, the Tribunal accepts the JSP and
imposes the following sanction :

1.

THAT Mr. B
is guilty of two counts of the academic offence of
altering or falsifying an academic record , or circulating such an academic
record , contrary to section B.l.3(a) of the Code of Behaviour on Academic
Matters.

2. THAT the following sanctions shall be imposed on Mr. B

3.

(a)

a suspension from the University for five years commencing
September 30, 2017; and

(b)

a notation of the sanction on his academic record and transcript for
seven years from the day the Tribunal makes its order.

THAT this case shall be reported to the Provost for publication of a notice
of the decision of the Tribunal and the sanction or sanctions imposed, with
the name of the student withheld.

Dated at Toronto, this ( ; (day of November, 2017.

Andrew Pinto, Co-Chair

5

APPENDIX A
UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL

UNIVERSITY
IN THE MATTER OF charges of academlc dishonesty made on December 9, 2016,
AND IN THE MATIER OF the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters, 1995,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Act. 1971, S.O. 1971, c. 56 as amended S.O. 1978, c:. 88

BETWEEN:

University of Toronto
- and -

AGREED STATEMENT OF FACTS

1.

This matter arises out of charges of academic misconduct filed on December 9, 2016 by

the Provost of the University of Toronto (the "Provost") under the Code of Behaviour on
Academic Matters ("Code"). The Provost and

B

have prepared this

Agreed Statement of Facts ("ASF") and a joint book of documents ("JBD•). The Provost and Mr.
~ agree that:

(a)

each document contained in the JBD may be admitted into evidence for all
purposes, includlng for the truth of the document's contents, without further need
to prove the document; and

(b)

if a document Indicates that It was sent or received by someone, that is prima
facie proof that the document was sent and received as indicated.

A.

Charges and guilty plea

2.

Mr. B

admits that he received a copy of the charges tiled by the Provost. The

charges are Included in the JBD at Tab 1.

Scanned by CamScanner

3.

Mr. ~ admits that he received a copy of the notice of hearing In this matter

and that he has received reasonable notice of this hearing. A copy of the notice of hearing Is
Included In the JBD at Tab 2.

4.

Mr. ~ waives the reading of the charges filed against him, and pleads guilty

lo charges #1 and #2.

5.

The Provost agrees that If the Tribunal convicts Mr. ~ on charges #1 and #2,

the Provost will withdraw charge #3.
6.

At all material times, Mr. ~ w a s a student in the Engineering program at the

University of Toronto School of Graduate Studies in the Edward S. Rogers Sr. Department of

Electrical and Computer Engineering

A true copy of Mr. ~ s current academic

record Is Included In the JBD at Tab 3.

7.

On August 21, 2016, Mr. ~ applied for the Hatch Graduate Scholarship for

Sustainable Energy Research In the amount of $10,000 offered by the Faculty of Applied
Science & Engineering (the "Scholarship"). The purpose of the Hatch Scholarship Is as follows:
Purpose: These awards are Intended to fund research and training of world-class
researchers and engineers In the fields of recovery and utilization of energy derived
sustainably from the sun and other sources; specifically In the areas of power generation
from photovoltaic solar cells, wind turbines and hydraulic turbines, systems for the
efficient utilization of thermal and electrical energy derived sustainably and energy
storage by batteries, pumped hydro, molten salts, compressed air, and other means.

8.

The funds Mr. ~ would have received from the Scholarship may not have

Increased his total overall funding. He was guaranteed total Income of $37,530 and the $10,000
from the Scholarship might have replaced 2/3 of his $15,000 student fellowship funding. The
Hatch Scholarship contains the following relevant disclaimer, which anticipates this outcome:

Please note, a successful applicant's other funding may be reduced. Individual policies
and amounts will vary by department. We recommend you consult your graduate office
for more Information on lmpllcatlons for your graduate funding.

2

Scanned by CamScanner

The application form directed applicants to provide:

9.

1. Letter of Recommendation: A letter of recommendation from your Immediate
university supervisor (usually your thesis supervisor) must accompany the application.
2. Short Proposal: Write a short proposal, no longer than one page of text plus any
figures. The proposal should touch on background, objective, work to data, and proposed
work plan. Be sure to Indicate Its relevance to the area of sustainable energy.

3. Curriculum Vitae & Transcripts: Please provide your graduate-level university
transcripts. Photocopies or unofficial coples obtained from university information systems
are acceptable. Please send a copy of your academic CV.

10.

M r . ~ submitted a package of Information In application for the Scholarship.

He submitted a letter of recommendation from his research supervisor, a research proposal, a
resume that listed his GPA as 3.8 out of 4.0 and a document titled "Complete Academic
History,· which purported to be an accurate and complete copy of his academic record as of
August 21, 2016. A copy of the application package submitted by Mr. B - 1 s Included
in the JBD at Tab 5.

11.

When a faculty member reviewed the academic record submitted by M r . ~

the faculty member noticed that It Indicated a higher grade than the faculty member had given to
Mr. ~ in that course.

B.

Meeting with Dean's Designate

12.

On October 17, 2016, Mr. ~ met with Luc De NII, Vice-Dean, Students, and

Dean's Designate for Academic Integrity at the School of Graduate Studies. At the meeting, Mr.

~ admitted that he had knowingly forged and falsified the academic record he
submitted in the application for the Scholarship. In particular Mr. B - altered the

grades in:

(a)

ECE1059H from B to A;

(b)

ECE1094H from B to A-;

(c)

ECE1236H from B+ to A;

3

Scanned by CamScanner

C.

Admissions

13.

With respect to his application for the Scholarship, M r . ~ admits that:

(a)

Acknowledgements

he was required by the University to submit a complete and accurate copy of his
academic record and not to misstate any aspect of his academic record and
achievement;

(b)

he knowingly forged or In any other way altered or falsified the academic record
he submitted and uttered, circulated or made use of that forged or falsified
record, contrary to section B.1.1 (a) of the Code; and

(c)

he knowingly falsified his academic record by misstating his GPA In his resume,
contrary to section B.1.1 (a) of the Code.

14.

Mr. ~ acknowledges that:
(a)

the Provost has advised Mr. B - o f his right to obtain legal counsel and

that he has done so;
(b)

he is signing this ASF freely and voluntarily, knowing of the potential
consequences he faces, and does so with the advice of counsel; and

(c)

that the Provost has made no representations to Mr. ~ regarding
what sanction the Provost will seek at the Tribunal.

Signed on March 2- 0 , 2017.

Signed on March~, 2017.
Robert A. Canta
Assistant Discipline Counsel
University of Toronto
Doc 2053666 v3

4

Scanned by CamScanner
.-. ··-·-·····-···-····- - - - - - - - - - - -

APPENDIX B
THE UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO

IN THE MATTER OF charges of academic dishonesty filed on December 9, 2016,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters, 1995,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Act, 1971, S.O. 1971, c. 56 as am. S.O. 1978, c. 88

BETWEEN:
The University of Toronto
- and -

Agreed Statement of Facts and Joint Submission on Penalty
1.

This hearing arises out of charges of academic misconduct filed by the Provost of the

University of Toronto (the "Provost") under the Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters
("Code"). For the purpose of the sanction phase of the hearing, the Provost and
("Mr. ~ ' ) have prepared this Agreed Statement of Facts and Joint
Submission on Penalty ("JSP").

A.

Joint Submission on Penalty

2.

The Provost and Mr.

submit that, in all the circumstances of the case, the

University Tribunal should impose the following sanctions on Mr. 8 - :
(a)

a suspension from the University for five years commencing September 30,
2017; and

(b)

a notation of the sanction on his academic record and transcript for seven years
from the day the Tribunal makes its order.

3.

The parties agree that this case shall be reported to the Provost for publication of a

notice of the decision of the Tribunal and the sanction imposed with the name of the student
withheld.

B.

Additional Facts

4.

Mr. B

has fully cooperated with the academic discipline process with respect

to this offence.

5.

Mr. ~ states that it will be necessary for him to work in the laboratory to

transition his research work until September 30, 2017, in order not to disadvantage the other
members of his research team and the incoming students.

6.

Mr.

acknowledges that the Provost advised him of his right to obtain legal

counsel and that he obtained such advice.

7.

Mr.

understands that the University Tribunal may depart from the

recommendations contained in this joint submission on penalty and may impose sanctions
against him as set out in the Code.

Signed on July 24, 2017

Signed on July 24, 2017
Robert A. Genta
Assistant Discipline Counsel
University of Toronto

Doc 2222523 v1

This -x ibit is produced

the ......

this

y

LlJ'J'.\ L/£/3i;-f; ................... .

1_ dayof

~gt ,20J::t.:

.......K:..Dm.o.u.(CUL

