Case 905

DATE:

   November 1, 2017

PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v. S.B. (âthe Studentâ)

Hearing Date(s):

   August 2, 2017

Panel Members:

   Mr. Andrew Pinto, Barrister and Solicitor, Chair
   Professor Louis Florence, Faculty Panel Member
   Mr. Chad Jankowski, Student Panel Member

Appearances:

   Ms. Tina Lie, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Barristers
   Mr. Robert Sniderman, Student's legal representative, Law Student,
   Downtown Legal Services
   The Student

In Attendance:

   Ms. Krista Osbourne, Administrative Clerk and Hearing Secretary, Office
   of the Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances
   Mr. Brian Alexic, Technology Assistant, Office of the Governing Council
   Mr. Nader Hasan, Tribunal Co-Chair (Observer)
   Professor Luc De Nil, Vice-Dean, Students, School of Graduate Studies

   The Student was charged with two charges of forging an academic record
   contrary to s. B.i.3(a) of the Code , or in the alternative academic
   misconduct not otherwise described contrary to s. B.i.3(b) of the Code
   .Â  The charges related to a forged academic record and a resume
   reporting a false GPA that the student had submitted in support of his
   application for a scholarship. The parties submitted an Agreed
   Statement of Facts and a Joint Submission on Penalty (JSP). The Panel
   accepted the Studentâs guilty plea on the first two charges, the
   University withdrew the alternative charges.

   In deciding whether to accept the JSP, the Panel referred to University
   of Toronto and M.A. (DAB Case No. 837, December 22, 2016), which
   provides that "the parties ought to expect that a hearing panel will
   impose that [jointly submitted] sentence, unless to do so would be
   fundamentally contrary to the interests of the University community and
   objectively unreasonable or unconscionable". In this case, the Student
   had no prior offences, and had demonstrated remorse by admitting guilt,
   submitting a letter of apology, and participating fully in the academic
   discipline process. The Student had fulfilled all the requirements of
   his degree so the likelihood of another offence was low.Â  The proposed
   two-month delay in the start of the suspension was to permit the
   Student to transition his research work in order not to disadvantage
   other members of his research team and the incoming students.

   The Panel noted similar facts here to the case University of Toronto v
   S. D. (Case No. 406, May 1, 2007), where the Student received a
   three-year suspension for one charge of forgery. Given that there were
   two charges in the present case, the Panel found that the JSP proposed
   by the parties was reasonable, and ordered a suspension from the
   University for five years with a delayed start date to allow the
   Student to transition their research to colleagues; a notation of the
   sanction on his academic record and transcript for seven years from the
   day the Tribunal makes its order; and a report to the Provost for
   publication with the Studentâs name withheld.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/29540
