Case #843

   DATE: August 16, 2016
   PARTIES: University of Toronto v S.L.C.M.
   Hearing Date(s): June 20, 2016
   Panel Members:
   Johanna Braden, Chair
   Ann Tourangeau, Faculty Member
   Vassilia (Julia) Al Akaila, Student Member
   Appearances:
   Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland, Barristers
   Alex Redinger, Student-at-law, Downtown Legal Services
   Kasha Visutskie, Academic Integrity Officer, Faculty of Arts and
   Science
   In Attendance:
   Tracey Gameiro, Associate Director, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty
   Grievances
   Ms. S.L.C.M., the Student
   Trial Division â s. B.i.1(a) â forged documents â Student submitted
   falsified petitions and supporting documents in order to write deferred
   exams in two courses, in each case claiming that a different
   grandparent had died when in fact that was not the case â Agreed
   Statement of Facts â guilty plea â Joint submission on Penalty accepted
   â no prior academic offences â grade assignment of zero in both of the
   affected courses; 4-year suspension; 5-year notation on the Studentâs
   academic record and transcript; case reported to Provost for
   publication
   Student charged with six offences under s. B.i.1(a) and, in the
   alternative, two offences under s. B.i.3(b) of the Code . The charges
   related to allegations that the Student falsified petitions to write
   deferred final examinations in two courses, with each petition
   containing a petition form, a written statement of explanation, and
   supporting documentation. The Student indicated in her petitions that
   the reason she needed to defer her exam in the first Course was to
   attend the funeral of her grandfather, and in the reason in the second
   Course was to attend the funeral of her grandmother.
   The Student pleaded guilty to the six forged documents offences under
   s. B.i.1(a) . The Panel accepted the plea and the University withdrew
   the alternative charges. The Panel accepted the Agreed Statement of
   Facts, which made clear that the Studentâs grandfather and grandmother
   had not died as described and that the Student used and falsified
   information from an online funeral notice to create the documents in
   her petition. The Panel took into account the factors set out in the
   Mr. C case, noting that the Student took responsibility by attending
   the hearing and making admissions of misconduct, that the Student had
   various part-time jobs at the time she engaged in the misconduct. The
   Panel also emphasized its concern about the likelihood of a repetition
   of the offence given that the charges involved not just one but two
   separate incidents of deliberate deception. The Panel also took into
   account the serious nature of the offence, noting that it was a
   deliberate, careful, detailed, and repeated fabrication of documents
   undertaken for the sole purpose of misleading the University and
   gaining academic advantage. The Panel did not rely heavily on evidence
   of the Studentâs additional work responsibilities. The Panel did
   consider that this was the Studentâs first academic offence. The Panel
   accepted the partiesâ Joint Submission on Penalty and imposed a grade
   assignment of zero in each of the affected courses; a 4-year
   suspension; a 5-year notation on the Studentâs academic record and
   transcript; and that the case be reported to the Provost for
   publication.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12915
