Report 261

   DATE:

   January 15, 2002

   PARTIES:

   Ms J.L., the Appellant v. UTSC

   Hearing Date(s):

   January 8, 2002

   Committee Members:

   Assistant Dean Bonnie Goldberg, Acting Chairperson
   Professor Brian Corman
   Professor Gretchen Kerr
   Professor Donna Wells
   Ms Geeta Yadav

   Judicial Affairs Officer:

   Mr. Paul Holmes

   In Attendance:

   Ms Emily Morton, for the appellant, Downtown Legal Services
   Ms J.L., the Appellant
   Associate Dean Ian McDonald for the respondent, UTSC

   Request to defer a one-year suspension. The Student was suspended for
   failing to maintain a minimum GPA. The Student had a previous one-year
   suspension deferred. The Studentâs first petition was based on, and
   granted as a result of, the psychological effects of a congenital
   condition. Following the filing of her appeal of the second petition,
   the Student claimed that she had been diagnosed with an anxiety
   disorder, learned about the correlation between the disorder and her
   poor performance on exams, begun to receive treatment, and made
   arrangements for exam accommodations. The Student claimed that until
   she was diagnosed with the anxiety disorder, she was not aware of the
   severity of her problem, nor of its impact on examinations and that, as
   a result, her suspension should be deferred. The Committee considered
   the Studentâs attempts to deal with the psychological and emotional
   effects of her illness, and the programs and services offered by the
   Faculty to assist her to improve her academic performance, and found
   that although the Student continued to experience academic difficulties
   following her first suspension, she did not seek further help until her
   second suspension. The Committee observed that it had more information
   before it than the Divisional Appeals Committee, but only because the
   Student had sought help, which was what was expected of a student on
   suspension. The Committee found that the Student had not sufficiently
   progressed in her treatment since she could not access services as a
   suspended student and because she was reluctant to seek help from
   external sources. The Committee also considered the effect of granting
   the deferral part way through the term and found that if the Student
   had been allowed to return to school immediately, she would have missed
   most of her introductory lectures and could have felt further
   alienated.Â  Appeal dismissed.
   [1]View Report

References

   1. file:///media/12543
