REPORT NUMBER 255 OF THE ACADEMIC APPEALS COMMITTEE
March 13, 2001
To the Academic Board,
University of Toronto.
Your Committee reports that it held a hearing on Tuesday March 13, 2001, at which the
following were present:
Assistant Dean Bonnie Goldberg, Acting Chairperson
Professor Clare Beghtol
Ms Jenny Carson
Professor Brian Corman
Professor Donna Wells
Ms Susan Girard, Acting Secretary, Academic Appeals Committee
In Attendance:
Mr D. D., the Appellant
Mr Salim Hirji, Downtown Legal Services, for the Appellant
Professor Ian McDonald, Associate Dean, for the University of Toronto at
Scarborough
The student appealed from a decision of the Scarborough Sub-Committee on Academic
Appeals (“Scarborough Sub-Committee), dated July 21, 2000, denying his request to
rewrite the final examination in Macroeconomics ECMBO8Y (“the course”). The
decision was made in response to the student’s petition to the Scarborough Subcommittee
on Standing in which he sought permission to rewrite the examination. The petition was
denied on May 17, 2000.
The student seeks the remedy of being able to rewrite the final examination in the course
and to have his final grade in that course modified accordingly. The student argues that
the Scarborough Sub-committee did not properly consider the medical grounds regarding
the student’s request for a rewrite, and that the Scarborough Sub-Committee erred in
applying the standard test for assessing requests to rewrite examinations.
The student was enrolled in the course in the Winter 2000 semester, during his second
year as a student at the University of Toronto at Scarborough. The course was a full year
course being taught in one semester. The student is pursuing a degree in Economics, and
the course is required for that degree. Completion of the course is also a pre-requisite for
the student’s proposed study abroad program in Germany during 2000-2001. The drop
date for the course was March 3, 2000.
After reading week, the student suffered from acute lower abdominal pain, which was
diagnosed by a doctor at the University of Toronto Health Services on February 25, 2000
as a kidney problem. A medical certificate allowed the student to defer tests on February
24th and 26th due to medical grounds. The student was prescribed painkillers. He
remained under a doctor’s care until the end of March, and was given medication to treat
his condition.

During the period from the onset of the illness to the end of March, the student
maintained his registration in six courses (actually the equivalent of seven courses,
because ECMBO8Y is compressed into one term but remains a full year course). The
student missed a number of term tests and midterms in the course. He did not write
assignments due February 22nd and March 1st, and he did not write tests on February 24th
and March 23rd.
The student returned to the course on a regular basis at the end of March. Classes ended
for the term on March 31st. At the time of his return, he discussed his absence with the
instructor. He was afforded the opportunity to write a make-up examination for missed
work on Friday April 7th, followed by the final examination on Monday April 10th, or to
write the final examination only, which would count for 80% of the student’s final grade.
The student opted to write the final examination only. The student wrote the final
examination on April 10th and received a 45%. His overall grade in the course is 46%.
On May 2nd, 2000 the student filed a petition to the Subcommittee on Standing asking
permission to rewrite the final examination in the course. The student argued that his
illness had prevented his attending classes between February 21st and April 1st, resulting
in little time to study for the final. A medical certificate dated April 19th supported the
petition, and detailed the sub-acute phase of his condition as having occurred between
February 22nd and April 1st. The petition was denied on May 17, 2000 for the reason that
the student’s initial grades on the term work were 56% and 31% respectively, and that the
student “should have considered dropping the course.” It was also noted that the medical
certificate did not cover the date of the final examination. Further it was noted in the
decision that the instructor said that the student was aware of the risk of writing an 80%
final examination.
The student appealed this decision to the Scarborough Sub-Committee and was again
denied permission to rewrite the examination on July 21, 2000. The student had argued
that dropping the course was not an option as it was a prerequisite for the study abroad
program; that the nature of the illness affected his performance over the term; that he did
not have adequate time to prepare for the final examination; and that he began to feel pain
during the examination and could not concentrate. In its reasons for denying the appeal,
the Scarborough Sub-Committee stated that the student was being “selective” in his
request to rewrite the examination in this course, and that petitions to rewrite
examinations “normally compare term work with the examination mark to see whether
there is a discrepancy between the two. His submissions during the term were marginal or
failures. The examination grade is not inconsistent with his term work.”
The Committee has a great deal of sympathy for this student’s plight during the winter
term of 2000. Kidney problems such as those experienced by this student are known to be
extremely painful. We do not dispute that the medical condition impaired the student’s
ability to complete his coursework and write his mid-term examinations. But the
Committee is concerned that when the student first submitted his petition, he did not raise
the issue of having been affected by his illness during his examination, although this is
now at the heart of his appeal. Since the certificate does not indicate that the appellant
was seen at the time of the final examination, it does not meet the usual test for medical
documentation. It is also important to note that the student was able to write his other
examinations on April 28th (but for one deferred examination related to another
unconnected illness), May 1st, 4th and 5th.
Further, the test used by the Scarborough Sub-committee is the appropriate test for the
following reasons. Opportunity to rewrite a final examination is an extraordinary remedy,
reserved for the most serious and unique of situations. The Committee heard evidence
2

from the University attesting to just how rare such rewrites are, and some of the reasons
for granting these requests. In order to effectively and fairly administer a policy that
allows students in extraordinary circumstances to rewrite a final examination, the
University requires an objective assessment of the student’s performance on a final
examination relative to what reasonably may be expected. The University contends, and
we agree, that the best available instrument for doing this is a comparison of term marks
achieved before the onset of adverse circumstances and the final results. Although the
student did not complete the bulk of the assignments or tests in the course, he did not
perform well at the outset. Therefore, the Scarborough Sub-Committee did not err in
applying the usual test.
The Committee agrees with the University’s contention that when a student requests
special consideration in an academic context, the student must have done everything in
his power to ameliorate the problem. What other options were available to the student?
The student could have dropped the course. The student was already ill, and performing
poorly by the March 3rd drop date, yet he chose to continue in the course because he
wanted to study in Germany the next year. This was ill-advised. Similarly, the student
could have petitioned for late withdrawal from the course without academic penalty after
March 3rd when it became apparent that he was very far behind and still ill. Again, he
chose to continue in the course. We also wish to note that the student did not approach his
professor to arrange to make-up the lost work or assignments until the end of March.
Further, he did not want to drop any of his other courses in order to lighten his admittedly
difficult workload in order to concentrate on Macroeconomics. We did not hear evidence
about how clearly the student was counseled about his available options, but we believe
the student bears the greater responsibility for his academic choices.
In summary, the Committee believes that it is not reasonable to conclude that the
student’s performance on the examination was adversely affected by the onset of pain
related to his kidney problems. We are very sympathetic to the severity of the student’s
illness and the distress it caused him. However, it was the severity of the illness that
should have prompted the student to take steps to mitigate its affects on his performance.
In assessing such a serious request, the University requires the clearest possible evidence.
In this case, the medical documents do not meet the usual tests to grant the extraordinary
remedy of rewriting a final examination. The University of Toronto at Scarborough
followed its procedures in order to ensure as fair and equitable outcome as possible, not
just for the appellant but for all its students.
The appeal is dismissed.

March 27, 2001

3

