Case No.: 1523
THE UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
IN THE MATTER OF charges of academic dishonesty made on June 15, 2023,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic
Matters, 2019,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Act, 1971, S.O. 1971, c. 56 as
amended S.O. 1978, c. 88
B E T W E E N:
UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
- and H

Z

REASONS FOR DECISION
Hearing Date: October 27, 2023, via Zoom
Members of the Panel:
Shaun Laubman, Chair
Dr. Maria Rozakis-Adcock, Faculty Panel Member
David Lio, Student Panel Member
Appearances:
Tina Lie, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg Rothstein LLP
Abby Craswell, Representative for the Student, Downtown Legal Services
Hearing Secretary:
Carmelle Salomon-Labbé, Associate Director, Office of Appeals, Discipline and Faculty
Grievances
In Attendance:
H
Z

1. The Trial Division of the University Tribunal heard this matter against H
Z
(the “Student”) on October 27, 2023, by videoconference.
2. The Student was in attendance.
3. The Student faced the following charges:
a. On or about April 13, 2023, you knowingly had another person personate
you at the final examination in ECO359H1S (the “Course”), contrary to
section B.I.1(c) of the Code.
b. In the alternative, on or about April 13, 2023, you knowingly obtained
unauthorized assistance in connection with the final examination in the
Course, contrary to section B.I.1(b) of the Code.
c. In the further alternative, on or about April 13, 2023, you knowingly engaged
in a form of cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or
misrepresentation not otherwise described in the Code in order to obtain
academic credit or other academic advantage of any kind in connection with
the final examination in the Course, contrary to section B.I.3.(b) of the Code.
4. An Agreed Statement of Facts (“ASF”) was presented to the Tribunal for
consideration at the liability phase. The relevant portions of the ASF are:
a. The Student acknowledges that he received a copy of the charges, waives
the reading of the charges, and pleads guilty to all charges;
b. The Provost agrees that if the Tribunal returns a conviction on charge #1,
the Provost will withdraw charges #2 and #3;
c. The Student accepts that he has been provided with reasonable notice of
the hearing in this matter;

d. The Student first registered as a student in the Faculty of Arts & Science at
the University of Toronto in Fall 2019. The Student has earned 20.0 credits;
e. In Winter 2023, the Student enrolled in the Course, which was taught by
Anton Tsoy;
f. The Course syllabus included the following with respect to academic
integrity (at pages 3-4):
Academic integrity Academic integrity is one of the cornerstones of
the University of Toronto. It is critically important both to maintain our
community which honours the values of honesty, trust, respect,
fairness and responsibility and to protect you, the students within this
community, and the value of the degree towards which you are all
working so diligently. According to Section B of the University of
Toronto’s

Code

of

Behaviour

on

Academic

Matters

https://www.academicintegrity.utoronto.ca, which all students are
expected to know and respect, it is an offence for students:
• To obtain unauthorized assistance on any assignment.
• To provide unauthorized assistance to another student. This
includes showing another student completed work (e.g., an
answer on a test).
• To falsify or alter any documentation required by the
University. This, includes, but is not limited to doctor’s notes.
• To use or possess an unauthorized aid in any test or exam
(e.g., a cell phone).
• To continue writing when the time is up in any test or exam.
To submit a medical note to get out of a test when the student
is not actually sick. There are other offenses covered under
the Code, but these are by far the most common. Please
respect these rules and the values which they protect. For

useful tips for avoiding academic misconduct, please visit the
website of the Office of Student Academic Integrity at
https://www.artsci.utoronto.ca/current/academicadvisingand-support/student-academic-integrity
g. The final examination was worth 45% of students’ final grades in the
Course. It was administered in person on April 13, 2023 from 2:00 pm to
5:00 pm. Students had three hours to write the exam. Students were
required to complete the exam on their own.
h. Students were required to write their own examinations. They were required
to provide proof of their identity, as verified through the photographs on their
Student IDs, to the invigilators during the exam.
i.

During the exam, the instructor and exam invigilators noticed several
peculiarities regarding the person who wrote the exam using the Student’s
ID. These included:
i. Prior to the commencement of the exam, during the Chief Presiding
Officer (“CPO”) Gabriel Briex’s announcements warning students
not to read or write anything until the start of the exam, the person
who wrote the exam using the Student’s ID (the “Exam Writer”) was
observed by Anthony Gagnon, another invigilator, actively reading
the exam paper, which was placed on students’ desks before the
start of the exam. The Exam Writer appeared to be holding the
exam paper up at an unusual angle.
ii. During the exam, the CPO noticed a metallic object in the Exam
Writer’s right ear. The CPO questioned the Exam Writer about the
object and was told that it was a hearing aid. The CPO asked to
take a photograph of the “hearing aid” which the Exam Writer
refused, stating that the “aid” could not be removed.

iii. When the Exam Writer handed in his exam paper, the instructor,
Anton Tsoy, noted that he did not resemble the photograph on the
Student’s ID. When the instructor asked the Exam Writer to take a
photograph of him holding the ID, the Exam Writer ran away. The
instructor noted that the Exam Writer who wrote the exam was
skinny and had long hair, whereas the person in the ID photograph
had short hair and was less skinny. The instructor also noted that
the Exam Writer had a button on his shirt, which resembled a button
that he had observed in other cases where students or exam
writers had used a hidden camera during an exam.
j.

In view of the above, the instructor and invigilators suspected that the
Student had someone write the exam for him.

k. The Student denies any knowledge of any objects that the Exam Writer may
have had on him during the exam, including any possible “hearing aid” or
camera.
Meeting with the Dean’s Designate
l.

On May 9, 2023, the Student met with Professor Howard Yee, the Dean’s
Designate for Student Academic Integrity for the Faculty of Arts & Science.
The Student admits that Professor Yee read him the required warnings from
the Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters.

m. At the meeting, the Student admitted that he did not write the final
examination but had someone else write the exam for him. He said that he
was sorry and regretful, and explained that he was not doing well in the
Course and that his grandmother, who he was close to, had passed away
the previous year. She was in China at the time and he felt regret that he
could not return home to be with her. He said that the person who wrote the
exam for him (the Exam Writer) was a friend. His name was Kevin Wang

and he was not a University of Toronto student. The Student denied paying
his friend. He said that they had a good relationship, and he had let Kevin
stay at his apartment previously.
n. The Student confirms that the statements he made to the Dean’s Designate
were true and accurate.
Admissions and acknowledgements
o. The Student admits that:
i. he knew that he was required to write the final exam himself and
he was not permitted to have anyone assist him during the final
exam;
ii. he knowingly had someone personate him and write the final exam
for him;
iii. he is guilty of having another person personate him at the final
exam, contrary to section B.I.1(c) of the Code; and
iv. he is guilty of obtaining unauthorized assistance in connection with
the final exam, contrary to section B.I.1(b) of the Code.
p. The Student acknowledges that the Provost has made no representations
to him regarding what penalty she will seek in this proceeding.
q. The Student acknowledges that he is signing this ASF freely and voluntarily,
knowing of the potential consequences he faces, and does so with the
advice of counsel.
5. Neither the Provost nor the Student presented any further evidence during the
Offence stage of the hearing.

6. Based on the ASF and the Student’s admissions therein, the Tribunal found the
Student guilty of charge 1 – knowingly having another person personate him at the
final exam, contrary to section B.I.1(c) of the Code. In accordance with the ASF,
the Provost withdrew charges 2 and 3.
Penalty
7. At the Penalty phase of the hearing, the Student and Provost submitted a Joint
Submission on Penalty (“JSP”) for the Tribunal’s consideration. The JSP proposed
the following penalty:
a. a final grade of zero in the Course in Winter 2023;
b. the Student will be suspended from the University of Toronto for a period of
5 years from the date of the Tribunal’s order;
c. this sanction will be recorded on the Student’s academic record and
transcript for a period of 10 years from the date of the Tribunal’s order; and
d. the parties agree that it is appropriate for this case to be reported to the
Provost for publication of a notice of the decision of the Tribunal and the
sanction imposed, with the name of the Student withheld.
8. An additional feature of the JSP was the Student’s undertaking that, after the
completion of his suspension, he will not register for any courses at the University
of Toronto and/or apply for admission to any programs at the University of Toronto
(the “Undertaking”).
9. The parties submitted an Agreed Statement of Facts on Penalty (“ASFP”) for the
Tribunal’s consideration, which is reproduced in substantial part below:
Prior offence

a. The Student has committed one prior academic offence that was resolved
through minutes of settlement.
b. In Fall 2019 and Winter 2020, the Student registered in MAT137Y1
(“MAT137”).
c. Students in MAT137 were evaluated on the basis of 10 problem sets, 4 term
tests and a final exam. The 10 problem sets were all submitted online and
were spread across both terms (Fall 2019 and Winter 2020). They were
originally worth a total of 10% of students’ final grades. However, as a result
of the covid19 pandemic and following a class vote, the grading scheme
was changed so that the problem sets would be worth a total of 15% of
students’ grades. Students were allowed to write problem sets with a
partner. Students were required to work independently or with their partner
when writing solutions.
d. On February 27, 2020, the Student submitted Problem Set 8 in MAT137.
The Student submitted the problem set individually.
e. Chegg.com is a subscription based website that allows students to post
problems to the site, which are then answered by so-called “experts”.
Subscribers are also able to access the questions and answers posted by
others on the site.
f. In marking the Student’s answers to Questions 1(a), (b) and (c) of Problem
Set 8, the teaching assistants and instructors determined that there were
substantial similarities between the Student’s answer and the answers to
those questions that had been posted on Chegg.com. They suspected that
the Student had plagiarized or obtained unauthorized assistance from
Chegg.com.

g. On August 18, 2020, the Student met with Professor Francois Pitt, Dean’s
Designate for Academic Integrity regarding the allegation of academic
misconduct in Problem Set 8 in MAT137. During the meeting, the Dean’s
Designate gave the Student the warning he is required to give under the
Code. The Student denied looking at Chegg.com or collaborating with any
other students. He maintained that the answers he had written were his.
h. Given the Student’s denial, the matter was forwarded to the Vice-Provost
for review.
i.

On December 10, 2020, charges were filed against the Student under the
Code in connection with the allegation of academic misconduct in Problem
Set 8 in MAT137.

j.

On January 31, 2021, the charges were resolved the Student. The Student
admitted that he knowingly representing as his own an idea or expression
of an idea or work of another in Problem Set 8 in MAT137, contrary to
section B.I.1(d) of the Code and signed minutes of settlement.

k. As set out in the minutes of settlement, in light of the Student’s admission,
the matter was referred back to the Faculty of Arts and Science and the
Faculty of Arts and Science imposed a sanction of:
i. a grade of zero on all problem sets (worth 15%) in MAT137; and
ii. a transcript annotation until December 31, 2021.
The Student’s circumstances
l.

The Student has advised the University of the following:
i. He is an international student. He was very close to his
grandmother, who was living in China. In the fall of 2022, the

Student’s grandmother passed way. The Student felt very guilty for
not being with his grandmother during this time.
ii. His education was very important to his grandmother and the
Student felt pressure to complete his studies and to graduate. He
was worried about failing the ECO359H1 course, which would have
the effect of delaying his graduation.
iii. He understands that what he did was wrong and is remorseful for
his conduct.
iv. Since June 2023, the Student has been under the care of a
psychiatrist.
v. Having completed 20.0 credits, he does not anticipate needing to
complete any further courses in order to graduate.
Acknowledgements
m. The Student acknowledges that he is signing this ASFP freely and
voluntarily, knowing of the potential consequences he faces, that he has
been given the opportunity to seek the advice of counsel before doing so,
and that he has obtained such advice.
10. The Provost presented a chart summarizing past decisions with varying degrees
of similar circumstances to provide the Tribunal with an indication of the range of
sentences that have been meted out for the offence of personation, including
cases where the student had prior convictions.
11. The Provost’s submissions focussed on the deference to be shown to JSP in light
of the University of Toronto and M.A. decision, (Case No. 837, December 22,
2016). The Tribunal was satisfied that the agreed upon sanction was within the
range of appropriate penalties given the nature of the offence and the Student’s

past conviction. Therefore, there was no reason to depart from the JSP because
of a concern that it would be contrary to the public interest or would bring the
administration of justice into disrepute.
12. Even without the JSP, the 5-year suspension would likely have been the
appropriate penalty to impose given the nature of the offence and the aggravating
and extenuating factors present in the case. The 10-year notation on the Student’s
transcript was on the higher end of the range for the cases summarized in the chart
prepared by the Provost, however, it was agreed upon by the parties and the
Tribunal did not see cause to interfere with that agreement.
13. As stated in the University of Toronto and Z.T. decision, (Case No. 758, December
4, 2015 (Sanction)), at para. 6, personation is a very serious offence. It can be
difficult to catch and strikes at the heart of academic integrity by undermining the
evaluation process and fairness to other students.
14. On the other hand, there were mitigating factors in this case, including the
Student’s early admission of guilt and cooperation in the discipline process. The
Student was dealing with the death of his grandmother at the time of the final exam
in the Course. As well, there was evidence of mental health issues, although it was
not established that those issues were present at the time that the offence was
committed.
15. The Student had completed the requisite credits to graduate but is now prevented
from doing so until the completion of his suspension. That delay is a significant
penalty and will hopefully provide the Student with time to consider the
consequences of his decisions.
16. One final note regarding the Undertaking. The Tribunal asked if it was being asked
to rely on the Undertaking since it was referenced in the JSP but was not a term in
the proposed form of Order. The Provost confirmed that it was not asking to have
the Undertaking reflected in the Order or enforced by the Tribunal.

17. In the Tribunal’s opinion this was the appropriate decision. The Undertaking did
not form any part of the Tribunal’s decision. The Code does not provide for a
penalty like the Undertaking and we do not believe we would have the jurisdiction
to impose such a penalty. Whether the Undertaking is enforceable is not an issue
we are asked to determine.
18. In accordance with the JSP, the following penalty is imposed on the Student:
a. a final grade of zero in the Course in Winter 2023;
b. the Student will be suspended from the University of Toronto for a period of
5 years from the date of the Tribunal’s order;
c. this sanction will be recorded on the Student’s academic record and
transcript for a period of 10 years from the date of the Tribunal’s order; and
d. this case is to be reported to the Provost for publication of a notice of the
decision of the Tribunal and the sanction imposed, with the name of the
Student withheld.

Dated at Toronto, this 7th day of February, 2024

Original signed by:
Shaun Laubman
On behalf of the Panel

