Case #01-02-04

   DATE: March 24, 2002
   PARTIES: University of Toronto v. Mr. S.
   Hearing Date(s): February 27, 2002
   Panel Members:
   Raj Anand, Co-Chair
   Deep Grewal, Student member
   Rajka Soric, Faculty member
   Appearances:
   Alex Henderson, for the Student
   Lily I. Harmer, for the University
   In attendance:
   Mr. S.
   I.M., Associate Dean, UTSC
   Trial Division - s. B.i.3(a) of Code â forged academic records -
   admission application containing forged University transcript and
   forged reference/evaluation letters - Agreed Statement of Facts -
   academic record containing 42 changes â guilty plea - pervasive scheme
   of dishonest conduct - quality and details of performance
   misrepresented â expulsion recommended in similar cases â see case of
   #96-97-05 and case of #97-98-04 â first offence but involving three
   acts â mitigating facts of admission when confronted, guilty pleas and
   finality of expulsion and impact on a young student eligible to
   graduate - likelihood of repetition difficult to assess -Â  detriment
   to the University and general deterrence - Universityâs submission on
   penalty accepted - recommendation that the Student be expelled as per
   s. C.ii.(b)(i) of Code; and permanent notation on academic record
   Student charged with three offences under s. B.i.3(a) of the Code. The
   charges related to allegations that the Student submitted an admission
   application to a College of Optometry that contained a forged
   University transcript and two forged reference/evaluation letters
   purporting to be from University professors. The parties submitted an
   Agreed Statement of Facts. The forged transcript contained 42 changes
   to the Studentâs academic record. The Student pleaded guilty to the
   charges. The Panel accepted the Studentâs guilty plea. The Panel
   considered previous Tribunal decisions and found that the case
   represented one of the most pervasive schemes of dishonest conduct it
   had seen. The Panel found that the Studentâs planned, deliberate and
   extensive re-writing of his academic record and fabrication of two
   reference letters radically misrepresented the quality and details of
   his performance at the University. The Panel found that the only two
   similar Tribunal cases were case of #96-97-05 and case of #97-98-04,
   and that in both cases the Tribunal imposed a recommendation of
   expulsion, as well as notation and reporting. The Panel found that the
   acts displayed a significant element of deceit. The Panel found that
   while the acts where a first offence, there were three acts, which were
   time-consuming, conscious and extensive projects. The Panel found that
   the mitigating circumstances were the Studentâs admission when first
   confronted; his guilty pleas before the Tribunal; and the Panelâs
   stated concern about the finality of expulsion and its impact on a
   student who was about to graduate at age 20.Â  The Panel found that it
   was difficult to assess the likelihood of repetition because the
   planning and effort evidenced suggested a willingness to threaten the
   evaluation process and the integrity of the University. The Panel found
   that the most important considerations were the detriment to the
   University and general deterrence because the University evaluation
   system was vulnerable to acts of deception, and had suffered enormously
   in the case, and because a message should be conveyed. The Panel
   accepted the Universityâs submission on penalty and imposed a
   recommendation to the President, further to s. C.ii.(b)(i) of the Code,
   that the Student be expelled from the University; and that a report be
   issued to the Provost.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/28424
