UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
TRIAL DIVISION

Members of the Panel:
Michael Hines, Co-Chair
•Sara Ageorlo, Student Panel Member
•Graham Trope, Faculty Panel Member
IN THE MATTER of the University of Toronto Act, 1971, S.O. 1971, c. 56, as amended;
AND IN THE MATTER of the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic
Matters, 1995;
AND IN THE MATTER of disciplinary charges against M.Z.
No one appearing - for M.Z.
Robert A. Genta and Michael Nicholson - for the University

1.

The Trial Division of the University Tribunal was convened on September 26,
2007 to consider charges under the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on
Academic Matters, 1995 (the "Code") laid against the Student by letter dated
May 8, 2007 from Professor Edith Hillan, Vice-Provost, Academic.

2.

The Vice-Provost's letter advised the Student that she had been charged with
four offences concerning two essays that she had submitted to fill the course
requirements of PHL 351 and PHL 342. Specifically, in respect of each essay
she was charged with plagiarism under section 8.1.1 (d) and academic dishonesty
contrary to section B.1.3(b) of the Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters, 1995
("Code").

3.

The matter proceeded before the Tribunal on September 26, 2007. The student
did not attend. The Assistant Discipline Counsel for the University of Toronto
advised the Panel that he had reached an Agreed Statement of Facts with the
student concerning the matters in question, and that she was content that the
hearing proceed in her absence based upon the agreed-upon document. The
Agreed Statement of Facts is reproduced immediately below.

-2Exhibit 3:

UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
And
M.Z.

AGREED STATEMENT OF FACTS

1.

The University of Toronto admitted the student to the University's Bachelor
of Arts and Science program at the St. George campus in the Fall of 2002.
A copy of the student's academic record as of October 16, 2006 is attached
to the Agreed Statement of Facts at Tab A.

2.

in the Fall of 2006, the student was enrolled in six half courses, including
PHL351 H1 (Philosophy of Language) and PHL342H1 (Minds and
Machines). The University has alleged that the student committed an
academic offence in both Philosophy of Language and Minds and

Machines.

Philosophy of Language
3.

The student enrolled in Philosophy of Language in Fall 2006. lt was a third
year course in the Department of Philosophy which was taught by Professor
Niko Scharer.

4.

Philosophy of Language examined the relationship between ianguage and
mind that leads philosophers to reflect upon meaning and truth, as well as
language as a means of both communication and action. A copy of the
course outline for Philosophy of Language is attached to this ,A,greed
Statement of Facts at Tab 8.

5.

The course requirements included an essay which was worth 40% of the
final mark in Philosophy of Language.

6.

On or about April 17, 2006, the student submitted her essay entitled "On
Theory of Description". A copy of the student's essay is attached to this
Agreed Statement of facts at Tab C.

7.

After Professor Scharer challenged the student regarding the lack of
references in On Theory of Description, the student stated that she had
handed in an incomplete version of the essay. On or about April 27, 2006,
the student submitted a revised version of her essay, which contained
citations and references that were not present in the essay she had first
submitted on April 17, 2006. According to the student, the citations and
references had been omitted from the first essay through inadvertence as a
result of accident and/or error. A copy of the essay submitted by the
student on April 27, 2006 is at Tab D.

-38.

The student did not write On Theory of DescripUon Instead, she copied
substantial segments from a website that she did not reference or otherwise
acknowledge.
The relevant pages from the website are attached to this
Agreed Statement of Facts at Tab E.

9.

Attached to this Agreed Statement of Facts at Tab F is a copy of On Theory
of Description, which has been highlighted in yellow. The words that are
highlighted were taken verbatim from the websites.

10. The student admits that she did no meaningful academic work in respect of
On Theory of OescripUon. Specifically, the student admits that on or about
April 17, 2006, she knowingly represented as her own, an idea, an
expression of an idea, and the work of another in On Theory of Description
which she submitted to fulfill the course requirements of Philosophy of
Language, contrary to s. B.l.1(d) of the Code.
11. The student admits that she is guilty of Charge #1 contained in the charges
dated May 8, 2007 filed by the University, a copy of which is attached to this
Agreed Statement of Facts at Tab G.

Minds and Machines
12.

In the Fall of 2006, the student enrolled in Minds and Machines, which was
a third year philosophy course taught by Professor Evan Thompson.

13.

Minds and Machines examined the mind in relation to its mental processes
and explored such topic areas as philosophical foundations of artificial
intelligence theory; the computational theory of the mind; functionalism vs.
reductionism and the problems of meaning in the philosophy of mind. A
copy of the course outline for Minds and Machines is attached to this
Agreed Statement of Facts at Tab H.

14.

In order to fulfill the course requirements, students were required to write
quizzes and submit papers, including a final paper which was worth 20% of
the final mark in Minds and Machines.

15.

On or about April 17, 2006, the student submitted a paper entitled "Artificial
Life vs. Artificial Intelligence". A copy of the student's paper is attached to
this Agreed Statement of facts at Tab I.

16. The student did not write Artificial Ufe vs. Artificial intelligence. Instead, she
copied \t nearly in its entirety from online sources that she did not reference
or otherwise acknowledge.
The relevant pages from the websites are
attached to this Agreed Statement of Facts at Tab J.
17. Attached to this Agreed Statement of Facts at Tab K is a copy of Artificial
Life vs. Artificial Intelligence, which has been highlighted in yellow. The
words that are highlighted were taken verbatim from the websites.
18. The student admits that she did no meaningful academic work on Artificial
Life vs. Artificial Intelligence. Specifically, the student admits that on or
about Aprii 17, 2006, she knowingly represented as her own, an idea, an
expression of an idea, and the work of another in Artjficial Life vs. Artificial

-4-

Intelligence, which she submitted to fulfill the course requirements of Minds
and Machines, contrary to s. B.l.1(d) of the Code.

19. The student admits that she is guilty of Charge #3 contained in the charges
dated May 8, 2007 filed by the University (at Tab G to this Agreed
Statement of Facts).

Conclusion
20.

If she or a duly authorized agent appear before the University Tribunal, the
student wiH plead guilty to charge #1 and #3 of the charges filed by the
University of Toronto.

21

The student acknowledges that the University of Toronto has advised her to
obtain independent legal advice before signing this Agreed Statement of
Facts and that she has either done so or deliberately waived that right.

Signed in Hong Kong on August 15, 2007

"M.Z."
M.Z.

[signaturel
VVitness

Signed in Toronto on September 15, 2007
"Robert A. Genta"
Robert A. Genta

5.

On the basis of this Agreed Statement of Facts, the Panel reached a finding that
the student was guilty of plagiarism under charges #1 and #3 as listed in the
Notice of Hearing. On consent, charges #2 and #4 concerning academic
dishonesty were withdrawn.

-56.

The Panel was advised further that the student had also agreed to a Joint
Submission on Penalty. That Joint Submission is now reproduced immediately
below.
UNiVER.S!TY OF TORONTO
and
M.Z.

JOINT SUBMISSION ON PENAL TY

1.

The University of Toronto and M.Z. submit to the Tribunal that the
appropriate penalty in all of the circumstances is:
a. The student be suspended from attendance at the University of
Toronto for a period of three years from the date of this hearing;
b. assignment of a grade of zero in each of PHL351 H1 and PHL342H1
for the 2006 Winter term; and
c. notation on the student's transcript to the effect that she was
sanctioned for academic misconduct for a period of three years from
the date of this hearing.

2.

The University of Toronto and the student submit that the Tribunal should
report this case to the Provost who may publish a notice of the decision of
the Tribunal and the sanction or sanctions imposed with the student's name
with he id.

-63.

The student acknowledges that the University of Toronto has advised her to
retain independent !egal counsel before signing this Joint Submission on
Penalty and that she has either done so or deliberately waived that right
Signed in Hong Kong on August 1st, 2007.
"M.Z."
M.Z.

\f\/itness
Signed in Toronto on September 26th, 2007.
"Robert A. Genta"
Robert A. Centa
Assistant Discipline Counsel,
University of Toronto
7.

As reflected in paragraph 1 of the Joint Submission, the parties reached an
agreement on the appropriate penalty in all of the circumstances of the case.
The Panel reviewed this agreement and concluded that it did, indeed, reflect an
appropriate penalty.

8.

Accordingly, the Panel hereby imposes the following sanctions, namely that the
student:
(a)

be suspended from attendance at the University of Toronto for a period of
three years, with the suspension to run from September 26, 2007 to
September 26, 201 O;

(b)

shall be assigned a grade of zero in each of PHL351 H1 and PHL342H1
for the 2006 'Ninter term; and

(c)

shall have her transcript bear a notation that she was sanctioned for
academic misconduct for a period of three years until September 26,

2010.
The Panel further recommends that this case be reported to the Provost who
may publish a notice of the decision of the Tribunai and the sanction or sanctions
imposed with the student's name withheld.

-7-

9.

I certify that this is the decision of the Panel:

DATED at Toronto this

21</A.. day of July, 2009.

Michael A Hines

