Case 658

DATE:

   July 5, 2012

PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v. N.G.

HEARING DATE:

   June 21, 2012

Panel Members:

   Ms. Rodica David, Chair
   Dr. Joel Kirsh, Faculty Member
   Ms. Emily Holland, Student Member

Appearances:

   Ms. Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland
   Barristers
   Ms. Mary Phan, Legal Case Worker, Counsel for the Student, Downtown
   Legal Services

In Attendance:

   Ms. Lucy Gaspini, Academic Affairs Officer, University of Toronto
   Mississauga
   Ms. Natalie Ramtahal, Coordinator, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty
   Grievances

   The Student was charged with six counts of academic misconduct under s.
   B.i.1(a) of the Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters, 1995 (the â Code
   â) on the basis that she knowingly forged, altered or falsified
   documents (specifically, medical certificates) to obtain deferrals for
   writing final examinations in two courses at the University.

   The parties submitted an Agreed Statement of Facts (ASF) and a Joint
   Submission on Penalty (JSP). The agreed facts were that the Student had
   registered as a student at the University in Fall 2007. In 2011, the
   Student petitioned for permission to write deferred examinations in two
   of her courses, which petitions were granted. The Student failed to
   write deferred examinations in either of the courses. The University
   then requested evidence of the Studentâs illness to support the reasons
   for missing her exams. The Student did not respond to this request. The
   Student subsequently submitted two formal online petition requests for
   a second deferral in each of the courses, both petitions indicating
   medical sickness as the reason for the requests. These petitions were
   refused on the basis that they had been submitted outside the
   designated deadline. The Student then submitted a medical certificate
   in support of her petitions. Upon investigation, the University
   discovered that the medical certificate was not genuine. The Student
   admitted that she had made up the certificate by obtaining the address
   stamp on line.

   The Tribunal was satisfied that the facts in the ASF discharged the
   burden on the University to prove the offences by clear and convincing
   evidence. It unanimously found the Student guilty of the four charges
   upon which the University proceeded.

   The Parties submitted a JSP in support of a final grade of zero in the
   two courses, a five-year suspension, a notation of the sanction on the
   Studentâs academic record and transcript from the date of the order
   until the earlier of her graduation from the University or June 30,
   2018 and that the case be reported to the Provost for publication of a
   notice of the Tribunalâs decision and the sanction imposed, with the
   name of the Student withheld.

   In considering the appropriate sanction, the Tribunal noted two
   previous offences committed by the Student: the submission of a false
   quiz in one case and a false essay in the other. The Tribunal also
   noted the Studentâs challenging personal circumstances; that she was a
   22 year old single parent of two young children, working two jobs and
   under significant financial pressure. The Tribunal found that the
   Student had shown a pattern of forgery and falsification as a means of
   obtaining credits toward her degree and that the previous sanctions she
   had received had no deterrent effect on her. The Tribunal took the view
   that the Student had numerous legitimate options open to her for
   dealing with her challenging personal circumstances, including seeking
   counselling at the University, applying for financial assistance,
   withdrawing from the programme or becoming a part-time student. While
   the Tribunal found that the Studentâs circumstances were not an excuse
   for her behaviour, it was satisfied that they did carry some weight in
   determining the appropriate penalty. The Tribunal stated that the
   Universityâs lack of intervention after the Studentâs initial offences
   was a mitigating factor, noting that the University should consider
   that it has a duty to give proactive assistance to students in distress
   rather than simply imposing penalties on such students. Additional
   mitigating factors included that the Student acknowledged her
   wrongdoing at a meeting with the Dean, signed two ASFs and the JSP and
   pleaded guilty.

   While the Tribunal considered that a recommendation for expulsion might
   have been more appropriate than the five-year suspension proposed in
   the JSP, it noted the very stringent test for rejecting a JSP set out
   in the case of Regina v. Tsicos . To reject a JSP, the Tribunal must
   find that the recommended penalty is contrary to the public interest or
   will bring the administration of justice into disrepute. Due to the
   high deference the JSP must be given, the Tribunal accepted the JSP.

   Following the hearing, the Student sent an email to the two lay members
   of the Tribunal. The Tribunal noted in an addendum to its report that
   once a hearing is concluded, it might be open to a student to bring a
   motion to reopen the case in certain circumstances. These are: if any
   facts came to light which could not have been known with reasonable
   diligence at the time of the hearing, if the facts sought to be adduced
   would have a significant bearing on the outcome and if it does not
   prejudice the University. No such motion was brought in this case and
   the Tribunal members did not therefore read the email.

   The Tribunal imposed the following sanctions: a final grade of zero on
   both courses; suspension for a period of five years, to end June 30,
   2017; notation of the sanction on the Studentâs academic record and
   transcript from the date of the order until the earlier of her
   graduation from the University or June 30, 2018; and publication by the
   Provost of a notice of the decision and sanctions imposed with the
   Studentâs name withheld.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12808
