THE UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO

IN THE MATTER of charges of academic dishonesty made on April 2, 20 12
AND [N THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code qf Behaviour on Academic Mallers,
1995,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University o.{Toronto Act, 1971, S.O. 1971, c. 56 as amended
S.O. 1978, c. 88

BETWEEN:
UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO (the "University")

- and~ G . (the "Student")

Hearing Date: June 21, 2012
Panel Members:

Ms. Rodica David, Barrister and Solicitor, Chair
Dr. Joel Kirsh, Faculty of Medicine, Faculty Panel Member
Ms. Emily Holland, Student Panel Member
Appearances:

Ms. Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel for University, Paliare Roland Banisters
Ms. Mary Phan, Legal Case Worker, Downtown Legal Services
In Attendance:

Ms. Lucy Gaspini, Academic Affairs Officer, University of Toronto Mississauga
Ms. Natalie Ramtahal, Coordinator, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances

2

The Charges

I.

The student was charged with 6 offences under the University of Toronto, Code of
Behaviour on Academic Matters ("Code") relating to her falsifying and forging
documents to obtain deferrals for writing final examinations in 2 courses.

2.

The student and the University signed and filed an Agreed Statement of Facts (Exhibit 2)
on the circumstances. In the circumstances, the University withdrew 2 of the charges and
proceeded on the following four charges:
1. On or about September 1, 2011, you knoll'inglyforged or in any other ll'ay altered
or.fcils/fied a document or evidence required by the University of Toronto, or
ul/ered, circulated and made use of any such forged, altered orfals/fied
document, namely a Petition that you submilled to obtain a deferred exam in
PSY395H5S, contrary to section B.I. 1(a) of the Code.
2. On or about September 1, 2011, you knowingly forged or in any other way altered
orfals/fied a document or evidence required by the University of Toronto, or
ul/ered, circulated and made use of any such forged, altered orfals/fied
document, namely a University of Toronto Medical Certificate which you
submitted in support ofa petition for a d~ferred exam in PSY395H5S, contrn1y to
section B.1.1. (a) oft he Code.
4

On or about September 1, 2011, you knoll'ingly forged or in any other ll'ay altered
orfals!fied a document or evidence required by the University o_fToronto, or
uttered, circulated and made use o.f any such forged, altered orfals/fied
document, namely a Petition that you submilled to obtain a d~ferred exam in
STA22 l H5S, contrW)' to section B.1.1 (a) o.f the Code.

5

On or about September 1, 2011, you knoll'inglyforged or in any other way altered
orfals/fied a document or evidence required by the University o_f'Toronto, or
ul/ered, circulated and made use o.f any such forged, altered orfals//ied
document, namely a University o_fToronto 1\fedica/ Cert/fica/e which you
submitted in support o.f a petition for a deferred exam in STA22 l H5S, contrCII)' to
section B.1.1.(a) o_fthe Code.

3

The Background

3.

Ms. (9 first registered as a sludent at the University of Toronto in Fall 2007 at the
University of Toronto Mississauga. As of fone 14, 2012, Ms.
had earned 19.0
credits with a cumulative grade point average of 1.76.

4.

In 2011 Winter Ms.
enrolled in PSY395H5: Hormones and Behaviom, a 0.5 credit
course. The final exam was scheduled to be written on April 8, 2011 ("PSY Final
Exam"). It was wo1th 40% of the course mark. Ms. <111 did not write the PSY Final
Exam at that time.

5.

Ms. CII did not write the mid-term test in PSY395H5. Without a mark for the final exam
her mark in PSY395H5 was 26.36/100.

6.

On or about April 11, 2011, Ms. GI submitted an online petition for a first deferral of
the PSY Final Exam ("PSY First Petition"). Her petition request was granted, and she
was given permission to write a deferred exam in PSY395H5 during the week of April
26-30, 2011.

7.

In 201 1 Winter Ms. C9 was also enrolled in STA221H5: The Practice of Statistics II,
also a 0.5 credit course. The final exam was scheduled to be written on April 13, 2011
("ST A Final Exam''). It was worth 50% of the course mark. Ms. GI did not write the
STA Final Exam at that time.

8.

Ms.
had not written either of the term tests in STA22 l HS which were wo11h 20%
each, and had eamed marks of2.75/10 in her assignments submitted in the course. Ms.
(9 was given an indulgence by the course instructor who agreed to reallocate the 40
marks for the two term tests to Ms. Git's final exam, so that it represented 90% of her
mark in STA221H5. Without a final exam mark, therefore, Ms. Gf's mark in
STA221H5 was 2.75/l 00.

9.

On or about April 24, 201 1, Ms. (9 submitted an online petition for a first deferral of
the STA Final Exam ("STA First Petition"). She did not give a reason for her request,
nor did she attach any supporting documentation. Her petition request was granted, and
she was given permission to write a defen-ed exam in STA22 I H5 during the week of
April 26-30, 201 1.

GI

GI

ca

ca did not write a deferred exam in either of PSY395H5 or STA221 H5 in April,

l 0. Ms.
2011.

4

ca

l 1. On May 27, 20 l l, Ms.
received two emails from the Assistant Registrar, Academic
Standards & Examinations, to follow up on outstanding documentation from her ApriJ
examinalions. The email noted that Ms.
had never provided evidence of her il lness
to support the reasons for missing her exams, and requested that she submit supporting
evidence of her illness to the Office of the Registrar by June l.

ca

ca

12. Ms.
ignored these emails and did not provide any supporting documentation to the
University
Circumstances of the Offences
13. On or about August 30, 2011, Ms.

ca attended in person at the Office of the Registrar to

ask about obtaining a second deferral of her PSY Final Exam. She then submitted two
formal online petition requests in the evening of August 31, 20 l l: one for a second
deferral of her PSY Final Exam ("Second PSY Petition"), and the other for a second
deferral of her STA Final Exam ("Second STA Petition"), each indicating medical
sickness as the reason for her request. She did not attach any documentation to support
her request. These Petitions are at Tabs 10 and 11 of the Joint Book of Documents
("JBD',), marked as Exhibit I.

C9's

14. Ms.
Second PSY Petition and Second STA Petition (collectively "Second
Petitions',) were refused on September I, 2011, on the basis that the deadline to submit a
petition for a deferred exam is one week after the end of the final exmnination period in
the Winter 2011 term.
15. Ms. (9 gave the following implausible explanation for the delay:

" ... [her] petitions had not gone through. When I called the Office of Reg. I spoke
to True who told me that the issue may have been because I had used a 1vlac to
submit the petition. 1 will be dropping the Medical Certificate, that the doctor
wrote on one day (for bo1h dates that 1 saw him), however the original ;s not
available as that 1 had submitted lo the Office Drop box in April so only a
photocopy was amilable ... ".
16. Clearly her explanation that she could only tender a copy of the medical certificate was
intended to fo1tify the authenticity of the medical ce1tificate which otherwise might be
questioned if the original was not provided.

<:a

17. Ms.
then dropped off a copy of a University of Toronto Medical Certificate at the
Office of the Registrar on September I, 2011 ("Medical Certificate") in suppo11 of both
the PSY Second Petition and the STA Second Petition. It indicated that a physician by

5

the name of J. McBaird had provided health care services to Ms. (9 on April 26 and 28,
2011, that the nahll'e and timeline of the problem and its treatment were: "l week,
antibiotics", and that the student was prevented from writing exams due to "freq.
Urination + pain". The Medical Certificate contained an address stamp for "Central Park
Medcial [sic] Cenler Walk-In" at an illegible address, with a 905 phone number, and "J.
McBaird" \.Vith a CPSO number 92602. The Medical Certificate was dated April 28,
201 l. A copy of the Medical Ce1iificate is included in the JBD at Tab 16.
18. On September 2, 2011, Ms. (9 sent an email repeating her explanation for providing a
copy of the medical ce1tificate, obviously concerned as to whether it had been accepted.
19. The University then was put to the effo1t and expense of conducting an investigation,
whlch revealed that the College of Physicians and Surgeons ("CPSO") registration
number on the copy of the medical cetiificate that Ms. C9 provided to the University,
was that of another physician and that there was no record under the name of the
physician who allegedly signed the medical certificate.
20. At a Dean's meeting on January 19, 2012 Ms. (9 admitted that she had made up the
Medical Certificate by obtaining the address stamp online.
The Verdict

21. The above facts, all of which were contained in the Agreed Statement of Facts satisfy the
burden on the University to prove the offences by clear and convincing evidence.
22. The Tribunal was therefore unanimous in finding Ms. <JI guilty of the four charges on
which the University proceeded as set out in paragraph 2 of these reasons for decision.
The Sanction

23. The parties signed an Agreed Statement of Facts on Sanction, Exhibit 3 ("ASFS") as well

as a Joint Submission on Penalty Exhibit 4. ("JSP")
Joint Submission on Penalty

24. The JSP proposes the following penalty:
a) a final grade ofzero ;n PSY395H5 and STA221 HS for the 2011 Winter
term;

6

b) a suspensionji路om the University to commence July 1, 2012 and to end
June 30, 2017;
c) a notation of the sanction on her academic record and transcriptji路om the
date ofthe Order until !he earlier ofher graduationfi路om the University or
June 30, 2018.

d) That !his case be reported to the Provost.for publication ofa notice ofthe
decision ofthe Tribunal and the sanction or sanctions imposed in the
University newspapers, with the name ofthe student withheld.
Two Previous Offences

25.

In the winter and summer of 2008, not long after she had enrolled in the University, she
committed two separate offences by submitting a false quiz in one course and a false
essay in another course.

26. For these two previous offences, she received relatively light sanctions, namely:
1. a mark of O for the course and a notation on her transcript of academic
misconduct for 2 years from June 18, 2008 to June 17, 20 l 0.

ca

2. Ms.
was given a mark of Ofor the course, a 12 month suspension from the
University from January 1, 2009 to December 31, 2009, and a notat ion on her
transcript from January I, 2009 to December 31, 2010.
27. Although Ms. C9 did not testify, paragraph 9 of the ASFS that if she were to testify Ms.
(9 would explain that she is a 22-year-old single parent of two young children who was
in the process of separating from her paitner at the time of the offence. She faces
significant financial pressures, and receives no financial support from her family or from
her former partner. Ms.
\Vas working at two jobs at the time of the offence, and
hopes in future to use her degree from the University to obtain one welJ-paying job to
petmit her to spend more time with her family.

ca

Criteria in Dete1路mining Appropriate Sanction

28. Ms. (9 has shown a pattern of using forgery and falsification as a means of obtaining
credits towards her degree. She has two previous convictions, and just weeks after the
suspension for her two previous convictions had ended, Ms.
committed the offences
of which she is found guilty today. These previous suspensions had no deterrent effect
on her. The likelihood of repetition is therefore high.

ca

7

29. The University has been very lenient with Ms. (9 in an effort to enable her to obtain a
degree:
I . The penalties on the two previous offences were lenienl.

2. In the statistics course she was offered the opp01iunity to make up for her lack of
term work by increasing the weight of the final exam.
3. She had already received one defenaJ for both courses without giving any reason
whatsoever in her Petitions for deferral.
30. As a young single mother with 2 young children, Ms. (9 found herself in very
challenging circumstances. However, she had numerous legitimate options for dealing
with her dilemma:
I, She could have sought counseling. The University offers a variety of counseling
services, academic, health and financial. These services are available at both the
University of Toronto Mississauga and the St. George campus at no cost to the
student.
2. She could have applied for financial assistance.
3. She could have withdrawn from the programme at any tjme, and resumed her
studies when her personal circumstances improved.

4. She could have become a part-time student.
31 . Instead she chose the route of dishonesty and deceit.
32. Many students have and will not doubt continue to have serious life challenges; yet they
follow the rules. Ms. (9s circumstances, while very unfortunate, do not provide an
excuse for her behavior. However, they do call'y some weight in determining the
appropriate penalty.

33. The offences are of a grave and serious nature. The University prides itself on its
reputation of honesty, integrity and high academic standards. A degree from this
University is highly regarded both by the academic and business community. It is
impo1ia11t that these standards not be jeopardized. It is therefore incumbent on the
TribunaJ to preserve these standards and ensure that others are detened from engaging in
conduct of the nature of Ms. (9s actions.

8

34. The Tribunal has considered that a recommendation for expulsion m.ight have been more
appropriate than five years suspension.
35. However, \Ve must take into accounl that Ms. (9 acknowledged her wrongdoing at the
Dean's meeting, attended at the hearing, signed two Agreed Statements of Fact and the
Joint Submission on Penalty, and pleaded guilty.
36. An additional mitigating factor related to sanction is the University's lack (beyond

sanctions) of intervention after the initial offences in 2008, or when it was clear that Ms.
~'s academic performance was at risk in 2011.
a) The University owes a duty to its students, beyond simply being a provider of a catalog
of courses and degrees, to provide guidance and remediation where necessary when
students' academic trajectories diverge from the expected or desired course; there was
ample opporhmity prior to the offences of 2011 for intervention(s) that might have
prevented the offences entirely.
b) Counsel for the University offered unopposed testimony that Ms. (9 committed her
second academic offence in 2008, within mere weeks of having been sanctioned for her
first academic offence of that year. However, the sanction letter of November 17, 2008 is
silent on any connection between these two events. Beyond the escalation of the penalty
imposed, there is no evidence that any steps were taken in 2008 to identify the
contributing factors to Ms.
repeated academic offences, or to recommend (or
compel) Ms. (9 to take measures as mentioned above (para 30).

GIi's

c) The Tribunal heard from the University that there is no established practice of referring
students in similar circumstances to services that might assist them in avoiding future
difficulties.

GIi's

d) In 2011, despite clear indications that Ms.
coursework was inadequate, she was
offered an overweighting of her final exam in STA22 l HS rather than a recommendation
to withdraw from the course or seek academic counseling.
37. The University should consider that it has a duty to give proactive assistance to students
in distress, such as Ms. (9, rather than simply penalizing such students.
The Weight of the Joint Recommendation on Penalty

38. In the 2006 case of Regina v. Tsicos, the Ontario Cou1t of Appeal held that the test for
rejecting a joint submission is a very stringent one: this Tribunal must find that the

9

recommended penalty is "contrary to the public interest or will bring the administration
of justice into disrepute". The JSP must be given high deference. This principle was
applied in a decision of this Tribunal in The University a n d ~ 39. In the absence of a JSP, this Tribunal would have recommended expulsion, despite the
mitigating factors. However, the test for disregarding the Joint Submission is so high that
the facts of this case cannot be said to meet that threshold.

The Penalty
40. This Tribunal therefore accepts the Joint Submission and imposes the sanctions set out in
paragraph 24 of these Reasons for Decision, with the dates to begin the date of this
decision.
Addendum

41. A few days following the completion of the hearing, Ms. C9 sent an email directly to the
two lay members of the Tribunal. This email was directed to Christopher Lang, Director,
Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances who passed it onto the Tribunal Chair.
Counsel for the University objected to any consideration by the Tribunal of this email.
42. Ms. GI was given a full and fair hearing with every possible oppo11unity to present her
evidence and submissions. ln the Verdict phase, she clearly stated that she did not want
any legal representation, despite being given the oppo1iunity by the Tribunal to seek
representation. In the Sanction phase, she was represented very well by a student from the
Downtown Legal Services.
43. Once a hearing is concluded, it might have been open to her to bring a motion to the
Tribunal to reopen the case if any facts came to light that could not have been known
with reasonable diligence at the time of the heating, if the facts sought to be adduced
would have a significant bearing on the outcome and if it does not prejudice the
University. If she could have satisfied these tests, then the Tribunal would have the
discretion to reopen the hearing and permit both pa11ies to present their positions. Ms.
GI did not bring any such motion, nor did she request to reopen the hearing.
44. lt is entirely inappropriate for her to try to reargue her case in an email. The members of
the Tl'ibunal therefore did not read Ms. Gill's email and these reasons, in large pat1
completed prior to her email, have not been changed in any way related to her email.

10

Dated at Toronto, this 5th day of July, 20 12.

Ms.~R()clica David, Cci.-chair

