Case No.: 02/03-2

UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
TRIAL DIVISION
Members of the Panel:
Julie K. Hannaford, Co-Chair
Allison Guy, student member, School of Graduate Studies
Dennis Magill, faculty member, Faculty of Arts and Science
IN THE MATTER of the University of Toronto Act, 1971, S.O. 1971, c. 56, as
amended;
AND IN THE MATTER of the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on
Academic Matters, 1995;
AND IN THE MATTER of disciplinary charges against Mr. N.K.
Shaun Laubman and Nicole Redgate, Downtown Legal Services, for Mr. N.K.
Lily I. Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel, for the University of Toronto
Appearances:
Arti Dhand, Assistant Professor, Faculty of Arts and Science
Ian McDonald, Associate Dean, University of Toronto at Scarborough
Mr. N.K., accused
Namita Rajpal, student, University of Toronto
Bipin Vyas, Hindu Priest
Mrs. M.K., mother of the accused
Shantheni Ratnavel, undergraduate student, University of Toronto at Scarborough
Lenard Whiting, tutor, University of Toronto
BACKGROUND
[1]
A hearing of the Trial Division of the University Tribunal was convened at 5:30
p.m. on Monday, March 31, 2003, in the Council Chamber, Simcoe Hall, to consider the
following charge laid against Mr. N.K. under the Code of Behaviour on Academic
Matters, 1995, [the “Code”] by the Vice-President and Provost, Professor Shirley
Neuman:

In the Matter of Disciplinary Charges Against Mr. N.K. (Case No. 02/03–2)

1.

THAT on or about March 20, 2002, you committed plagiarism by knowingly
representing as your own any idea or expression of an idea or work of another in a
form of academic work that you submitted contrary to Section B.I.1(d) of the
Code. In particular, you plagiarized sections of “The Beloved Goddess of Hindu
Culture”, an essay that you submitted in course RLG205Y1Y.

[2]
Mr. N.K. pled not guilty to the charge at the commencement of the hearing. The
Tribunal then heard evidence from the University’s witnesses: Arti Dhand, the instructor
of the course in question and Ian McDonald, the Dean’s designate for the University of
Toronto at Scarborough (“UTSC”). Mr. N.K. then gave evidence, following which the
Tribunal adjourned for the evening, as there were several further witnesses to be heard.
[3]
The Tribunal reconvened on Tuesday, April 01, 2003 at 5:00 p.m. in the Council
Chamber, Simcoe Hall. Several defense witnesses were called at this time including:
Namita Rajpal, a friend and fellow student in RLG205Y1Y; Mr. Bipin Vyas, a Priest at
the Hindu temple attended by Mr. N.K.; Mrs. N.K., the mother of the accused; Shantheni
Ratnavel, a friend and fellow student at UTSC; and Mr. Lenard Whiting, Mr. N.K.’s
instructor in a choral music course taken at UTSC. The Panel reached a decision on the
verdict, which was communicated orally at the hearing on April 1, 2003.
[4]
The University’s position was that on March 20, 2002, Mr. N.K. submitted a
plagiarized essay for grading in the course RLG205Y1Y, a Hindu religion course offered
at the St. George campus. The assignment was worth twenty-five percent of the final
course grade and was the second of two research term papers. It was common ground
that the paper entitled “The Beloved Devi Goddess of Hindu Culture” (Exhibit 2) was
substantially the same as a paper found on the Internet entitled “The Power of the
Feminine” by Frank Morales (Exhibit 3). Moreover, it was undisputed that the impugned
paper, Exhibit 2, had Mr. N.K.’s name and student number on the front page. Finally, it
was undisputed that no other paper was submitted for grading, with respect to the second
research term paper, bearing Mr. N.K.’s name.
[5]
The issue in dispute was whether or not Mr. N.K. created Exhibit 2 and submitted
it for grading. The student submitted that he was not the author of Exhibit 2. He
suggested that someone else might have created Exhibit 2 in an effort to discredit him.
He explained that on or about March 18, 2002 his computer crashed and he irretrievably
lost the paper that he had written. He determined that since it was his understanding that
no extensions would be granted except for medical reasons, that there was no point in
handing in a paper at all. Evidence was led that suggested that Mr. N.K. did not attend
the class on March 20, 2002 when the papers were submitted to the instructor, Professor
Dhand.
[6]
After considering the evidence, the Panel convicted Mr. N.K. on the sole charge
laid by the provost.

- Page 2 of 4 -

In the Matter of Disciplinary Charges Against Mr. N.K. (Case No. 02/03–2)
[7]
The Panel then heard submissions on sanction from the parties. Discipline
counsel submitted that the following sanctions would be appropriate: assignment of a
grade of zero in the course RLG205Y1Y; suspension from the University for a period of
two years; a record of the sanction to remain on the student’s transcript for a period of
three years; and, publication of the offence in the University papers with the student’s
name withheld.
[8]
The student’s representative submitted that the following sanctions would be fair
in the circumstances: a zero on the essay in question (the effect of which be a failure in
the course); a sixteen month suspension; and, a record of the sanction to remain on the
student’s transcript for a period of sixteen months.
REASONS FOR SANCTION
(Delivered Orally)
[9]
The Panel was affected by the fact that a prior event had occurred. The Panel
considered carefully the timing of the prior sanction which, we noted from Exhibit 9, was
imposed in December of 2001, some eight to ten weeks prior to the commission of the
offence that was at issue in this hearing.
[10] The Panel was not moved by any considerations with regard to Mr. N.K.’s level
of study. It was submitted that because he was in his third year the sanctions ought to be
different from what they would be if he were in his first year.
[11] The Panel was mindful of the considerations set out in [Case 1976-07-03],
namely; the need for deterrence, maintenance of the integrity of the University and the
integrity of the degree; the likelihood of a repetition of the offence; as well the nature of
the offence.
[12] The Panel came to the conclusion that a grade of zero should be assigned for the
course and not just for the paper. The Panel was mindful that this notation would remain
on the student’s transcript forever and that it is a significant penalty. It is a matter that
would warrant further investigation and questioning by all but the most negligent of
employers.
[13] The Panel was of the view that the imposition of a zero for the course is a serious
penalty. For that reason the majority of the Panel was of the view that there should be a
suspension imposed for a period of sixteen months immediately following the conclusion
of courses this year. The notation of that suspension shall run concurrently with the
suspension, namely for sixteen months. The Panel also recommends that there be a
publication as requested by the University (to which the student did not object).

- Page 3 of 4 -

In the Matter of Disciplinary Charges Against Mr. N.K. (Case No. 02/03–2)

[14]

In summary, the Panel imposed the following sanctions:
1.

A grade of zero in the course RLG205Y1Y;

2.

A sixteen-month suspension to commence immediately following the
conclusion of courses this year1;

3.

A sixteen month notation recording the suspension to run concurrently
with the suspension; and,

4.

That this case be reported to the Provost who may publish a notice of the
decision of the Tribunal and the sanctions imposed in the University
newspapers, with the name of the student withheld.

I certify that this is the decision of the Panel:

May 8, 2003
Date

Julie K. Hannaford
Julie K. Hannaford
Co-Chair

24853 v4
Public

1

The Panel confirmed that it was their intent to permit Mr. N.K. to convocate, if he is otherwise eligible, at
the November 2004 convocation.

- Page 4 of 4 -

