Case #02-03-02

   DATE: May 8, 2003
   PARTIES: University of Toronto v. Mr. N.K.
   Hearing Date(s): March 31 and April 1, 2003
   Panel Members:
   Julie K. Hannaford, Co-Chair
   Allison Guy, student member
   Dennis Magill, faculty member
   Appearances:
   Shaun Laubman and Nicole Redgate, Downtown Legal Services, for Mr. N.K.
   Lily I. Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel, for the University of
   Toronto
   Arti Dhand, Assistant Professor, Faculty of Arts and Science
   Ian McDonald, Associate Dean, University of Toronto at Scarborough
   Mr. N.K., accused
   Namita Rajpal, student, University of Toronto
   Bipin Vyas, Hindu Priest
   Mrs. M.K., mother of the accused
   Shantheni Ratnavel, undergraduate student, University of Toronto at
   Scarborough
   Lenard Whiting, tutor, University of Toronto
   Trial Division - s. B.i.1(d) of Code â plagiarism â essay plagiarized
   from internet - paper created and submitted in effort to discredit
   Student â finding of guilt â prior academic offence - previous sanction
   ten weeks before commission of offence â academic status not accounted
   for - grade assignment of zero for course a serious penalty â
   suspension length set to accommodate eligibility for convocation -
   grade assignment of zero for course; sixteen-month suspension;
   sixteen-month notation on transcript; and report issued to Provost
   Student charged under s. B.i.1(d) of the Code. The charges related to
   allegations that the Student submitted a plagiarized essay. The Student
   pleaded not guilty to the charges. It was not in dispute that the paper
   was substantially the same as a paper found on the internet. The
   Student claimed that he was not the author of the paper and that
   someone else might have created and submitted it in an effort to
   discredit him. The Panel considered the evidence and found the Student
   guilty of the charge under s. B.i.1(d) of the Code. The Student had
   been sanctioned for a prior offence eight to ten weeks prior to the
   commission of the offence at issue. The Panel found that no
   considerations with regard to the Studentâs level of study should be
   accounted for. The Panel found that a grade assignment of zero for the
   course should be assigned as the notation would remain on the Studentâs
   transcript forever and would be a significant penalty. The Panel found
   that because the imposition of a zero for the course was a serious
   penalty there should be a sixteen-month suspension so that the Student
   would be permitted to convocate, if he was otherwise eligible, in the
   fall of the following year. The Panel imposed a grade of zero in the
   course; a sixteen-month suspension; a sixteen-month notation on the
   Studentâs academic record and transcript; and that a report be issued
   to the Provost.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12988
