Case #918

   DATE: March 28, 2017
   PARTIES: University of Toronto v. Z.Z. ("the Student")

   Hearing Date(s): March 9, 2017

   Panel Members:
   Mr. Paul Michell, Chair
   Professor Maria Rozakis-Adcock, Faculty Panel Member
   Amanda Nash, Student Panel Member

   Appearances:
   Mr. Robert Centa, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland,
   Barristers
   Ms. Lucy Gaspini, Dean's Designate, Manager, Academic Integrity &
   Affairs, University of Toronto, Mississauga
   Ms. Elizabeth Kurz, Law Student, Downtown Legal Services, for the
   Student

   In Attendance:
   The Student
   Ms. Krista Osborne, Administrative Assistant, Office of Appeals,
   Discipline and Faculty Grievances

   Trial Division - s. B.i.1(d) and s. B.i.1(b) of Code - plagiarism -
   course work purchased from commercial provider of essays - guilty plea
   - Agreed Statement of Facts - Joint Submission on Penalty accepted -
   presumptive penalty of expulsion for purchased essays - assignment of
   zero in the course; five-year suspension; notation on academic record
   and transcript for five years; and report to Provost

   The Student was charged with two charges of plagiarism contrary to s.
   B.i.1(d) of the Code and two charges of obtaining unauthorized
   assistance contrary to s. B.i.1(b) of the Code , or in the alternative,
   academic dishonesty contrary to s. B.i.3(b) of the Code . The charges
   related to allegations that the Student had purchased two assignments
   from a commercial provider of academic essays and submitted them for
   course credit. The Parties agreed on the facts relating to the
   offences. The Student admitted to committing the offences and pled
   guilty to one charge of plagiarism and one charge of unauthorized
   assistance. The University withdrew the other charges. The Panel
   accepted the Student's guilty plea.

   The parties submitted a Joint Submission on Penalty (JSP) of a grade of
   zero in the course; a five-year suspension; a five-year notation on the
   record and transcript; and a report to the Provost. The Panel was
   provided with supplementary submissions on how the JSP fell within the
   range of sanctions in the case law. The Panel was referred to cases
   that held that purchasing academic work and submitting it for credit
   was amongst the most egregious offences a student can commit because
   purchasing academic work is difficult to detect and it provides clear
   evidence of intention, deliberation, and knowing deception along with a
   commercial element that is very distant from the core values of the
   University ( University of Toronto v S.C., N.R.H., and M.K.K. cases No.
   596, 597, 598, November 23, 2011). These cases suggest that a
   presumptive sanction is an expulsion, which can be adjusted based on
   recognized factors. Where expulsion is not the result in a particular
   case, then only in the rarest of circumstances would anything less than
   a five-year suspension be appropriate. The Panel found that mitigating
   circumstances in this case were: it was the Student's first offence,
   the Student immediately admitted to the offences when confronted by his
   Professor and cooperated with the discipline process; the Student
   showed remorse; without the Student's cooperation, the dishonesty would
   have been very difficult to prove; and the Student provided the Provost
   with the names of the individuals who had sold him the essays.

   The Panel was also referred to University of Toronto v M.A . (December
   22, 2016, Case No. 837) that set out that a JSP can only be set aside
   in narrow circumstances where: (1) giving effect to the JSP would be
   contrary to the public interest or bring the administration of justice
   into disrepute; (2) the JSP is fundamentally offensive to the
   entrenched set of values and behaviours which members of the University
   are expected to uphold; and (3) the JSP is truly "unreasonable or
   unconscionable". The Panel characterized departing from the JSP as a
   stringent test, and though the Panel may have imposed a different
   penalty, the circumstances did not fall within the narrow ones that
   justified departing from the parties' JSP. Applying these principles to
   the present case, the Panel accepted the parties' JSP. The Student was
   sanctioned to a grade of zero in the course, a five-year suspension; a
   five-year notation on the Student's record and transcript; and a report
   to the Provost.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/13037
