Report 376

DATE:

   October 14, 2014

PARTIES:

   Ms. M.B. (the Student) v. the Department of Leadership, Adult and
   Higher Education, OISE, and School of Graduate Studies

Hearing Date(s):

   September 22, 2014

Committee Members:

   Professor Andrew Green, Chair
   Professor Avrum Gotlieb
   Mr. Andrew Girgis

Secretary:

   Mr. Christopher Lang, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances

Appearances:

For the Student Appellant:

   Ms. M.B., the Appellant (âthe Studentâ)

For the Department of Leadership, Adult and Higher Education, OISE, and
School of Graduate Studies:

   Mr. Robert Centa, Counsel
   Professor A. Hildyard
   Professor T. Chambers
   Professor Luc de Nil, SGS

   Request for re-instatement to the program, along with personal remedies
   and Departmental policy changes. The Student failed her comprehensive
   PhD examination three times, and her registration was subsequently
   terminated. The Student appealed the termination to the Graduate
   Academic Appeals Board (GAAB), requesting a range of relief including
   development of policies at OISE, training of staff and faculty,
   revision to her status as a student, reinstatement to the program or
   transfer to another program, and waiver of accrued penalties and fines.
   The GAAB found that it lacked jurisdiction to grant many of the
   remedies requested, and concluded that the only issues within its
   jurisdiction were whether the decision to terminate the Student should
   be upheld and whether any recommendations should be made regarding
   student fees. The GAAB allowed the Student to continue the appeal
   through the Graduate Department Academic Appeals Committee (GDAAC)
   pursuant to SGS policies. The GDAAC dismissed the appeal. The Student
   then appealed again to the GAAB, which dismissed the appeal. The GAAB
   rejected the Studentâs assertion that the Department had not adequately
   supervised and prepared the Student for the exams.

   The Student then appealed to the Academic Appeals Committee. The
   Student requested personal remedies (including reinstatement to the
   program, reactivation of funding, a recommendation to expedite
   convocation, consideration for awards and grants, a declaration that
   she was suitable for candidacy, expedited ethical review, removal of
   adverse notations from her transcript, and a written apology from the
   advisory committee), departmental remedies (including that the
   Department establish a committee on equity and accessibility, the
   creation of a post-doctoral fellowship, and that she be the first
   recipient of the fellowship), and SGS remedies (involving the creation
   of a staff and incoming student training program).

   The Committee dismissed the appeal on its merits and lack of
   jurisdiction. With respect to the Committeeâs jurisdiction, its powers
   to grant a remedy encompassed only the request by the Student for
   reinstatement to the program and to remove notations about the
   termination from the Studentâs transcript. The Committeeâs powers did
   not extend to any of the other remedies requested by the Student; the
   Committee is limited to making orders of an academic nature and
   considering whether academic regulations have been applied correctly,
   consistently, and fairly. The Committee agreed with the GAAB that the
   Student was provided with adequate supervision and preparation by the
   Department, noting that the only inconsistency in the application of
   the Departmentâs policies was the provision of a third attempt at the
   comprehensive exam instead of the usual two, which was to the Studentâs
   benefit. With respect to the Studentâs request to have the advantage of
   any new policies put in place after her termination, the Committee
   stated that its function is to examine the application of policies
   existing at the time of the initial decision, also noting that new
   policies may shed light on any unfairness in the application of the
   existing policies and therefore in some circumstances may be relevant
   to an appeal. The Committee found that the Departmentâs policies did
   not change in a manner that demonstrated any unfairness to the Student
   or that would have led to any benefit to the Student. Appeal dismissed.

   The Committee recommended that the SGS and the Department make
   processes around decisions such as termination and related appeals as
   clear as possible.
   [1]View Report

References

   1. file:///media/12621
