Case 524

DATE:

   May 1, 2009

PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v. the Student

Hearing Date(s):

   February 2, 2009

Panel Members:

   Ms. Lisa Brownstone, Chair
   Professor Richard B. Day, Faculty Panel Member
   Mr. Mir Sadek Ali, Student Panel Member

Appearances:

   Mr. Robert Centa, Assistant Discipline Counsel
   Dr. Kristi Gourlay, Manager, Office of Student Academic Integrity
   Mr. Steve Frankel, Student Legal Representative
   The Student

   The Student was charged under s. B.i.1(d) and alternatively, under s.
   B.i.3(b) of the Code. The charges related to allegations that the
   Student knowingly submitted a plagiarized essay in one course.Â  The
   matter proceeded on an Agreed Statement of Facts. The Student admitted
   that almost all of the pages of the essay were taken directly from
   unacknowledged internet sources and he pleaded guilty to the charge
   under ss. B.i.1(d). On the basis of the Agreed Statement of Facts, the
   Panel accepted the plea. The parties submitted an Agreed Statement of
   Facts & Joint Submission on Penalty. The Student has previously been
   sanctioned for committing two academic offences. The Student claimed
   that he was affected by his fatherâs illness. The Panel observed that
   if it accepted the Joint Submission on Penalty, part of the Student's
   suspension would run concurrently with the suspension imposed at the
   Divisional level, resulting in a combined 4-year and 4-month
   suspension. The Panel considered the aggravating fact that the offence
   was the Studentâs third involving academic dishonesty and the
   mitigating facts that there was an admission, a guilty plea and
   co-operation by the Student, and found that the agreed-upon sanction
   was within an appropriate range of sanction in the circumstances. The
   Panel imposed a final grade of zero in the course; a three-year,
   seven-month suspension; a five-year, seven-month notation on the
   Student's academic record and transcript; and that a report be issued
   to the Provost.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/13005
