UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
UNIVERSITYTRIBUNAL
TRIAL DIVISION
IN THE MATTER OF charges of academic dishonesty made on May 14, 20 IO;
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University o/Toronlo Code of Behaviour on Academic
Matters, 1995;
AND IN THE MATTER OF the Univers//y o/Toronlo Ac!, 1971, S.O. 1971, c. 56, as
amended S.O. 1978, c. 88;

BETWEEN:
THE UNIVERSITYOF TORONTO
-AND-

Y

.0

Hearing Date: July 22, 2010

Members of the Panel:
Mr. Ronald G. Slaght, Bal'l'ister and Solicitor, Chair
Professor Gabriele D'Eleuterio, Institute for Aerospace Studies, Faci1lty Panel Member
Ms. Denise Cooney, Student Panel Member
Appearances:

Mr, Robeli Centa, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Barristers
Ms. Betty-Ann Campbell, Law Clerk, Paliare Roland Barristers
In Attendance:

Professor John Browne, Dean's Designate, Faculty of Arts and Science
Mr. Christopher Lang, Director, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances, Office of
the Governing Council
Not in Attendance:

Ms. Y

0 , the Student

-2RULING ON THE NOTICE OF HEARING AND THE ISSUE OF SERVICE:

[1] The Panel has now considered the matter, The Provost's submissions, and reviewed
the materials provided to us by the University. In the circumstances present here
we are satisfied that the University has met it's obligation to provide notice or
reasonable notice to Ms. 0 .
[2] There are a number of factors that lead us to that conclusion, none of which, taken
on their own, might be sufficient, but in combination we are satisfied that Ms. 0
likely did have actual notice of this proceeding 01· that we can make a finding that
we are satisfied she had reasonable oppmtunities to do so.
(3] Briefly, these factors include the e-mail which was sent to her, pursuant to the
University's policy, which is certainly some evidence that she ought to have known
that she could receive the Notice materials by e-mail, and that they were sent by email.
[4] There is also the evidence of the courier package, which in itself may not be
without its wmts, including some issue as to whether there is a real signature there,
but it was delivered to the address that she put in her ROSI materials, and there is
evidence in the package that somebody put a name there signifying receipt by her.
[5]

As well we think it of some significance that she did register for summer courses
and then those disappeared from the landscape, some indication that she was
around and did know that, as somebody said, something was afoot.

[6) Also, in these cases my view is that something can be taken from the history of
attempts to correspond and contact a student over time, which, if, when one looks
at the numbers of them here, if Ms. 0 had wished to engage with the university,
she certainly had many oppo1tunities to do so, which leads us to the conclusion she
may well have been purposefully not responding to any number of these attempts to
provide her with notice.
[7] So, on that aspect we are satisfied. We are also satisfied that the content of the
Notice complies with both the Code and with the SPPA requirements.
[8] The third element of notice is whether the length of time that the University was
intending to provide, one month between Notice and the hearing, is sufficient. In
this case that becomes something of a non-issue, because obviously there was no
response from her whatsoever, and therefore there is nothing for us to draw in the
way of any inference that she did not have enough time. Whatever position the
University might have taken, if she'd come here tonight and said, 'I've only been
provided with one month's notice,' this Panel would in all likelihood have given her
an adjourrnnent. But in these circumstances that's not an issue.
[9] So taking it all together, we are satisfied that the University has met its notice
requirements, and we can proceed to the merits, in the absence of Ms. 0 ,.

-3-

FINDING OF GUILT:
[ l OJ The Panel is satisfied that the University has made out its case and that Ms. 0 has
committed the offences set out in Charges l and 2, found in the Code at paragraph
(b)(l)(l), (d), and (f) respectively. There is abundant evidence. On Charge l
pmticularly we have the evidence of Professor Poole, who has given direct
evidence that Ms. 0 's paper is mostly a duplication, but in some cases a
paraphrnse, of what we find to be somewhat surprising but nonetheless the case of
Professor Poole's very own paper. So we have direct evidence from this witness
identifying both the plagiarism and the plagiarized source.
[11] Similarly with respect to Charge number 2, Professor Poole has given evidence,
and we can read for ourselves in a comparative sense, that a passage, for example,
on page 5 of Ms. 0 i's paper is a direct lifting of a passage on page 21 of Professor
Poole's paper and credited by her to a Joungwon, A.K., rather than Professor Poole.
This makes out the case of a false reference. Again, the evidence for that is the
direct evidence of Professor Poole.
[ 12] We also have other evidence from Ms. Campbell that shows there was a consistent
substitution of words found in Professor Poole's paper with synonyms for those
words found in a piece of software, Microsoft Thesaurus, which Ms. Campbell was
able to lay before us, and from which we draw the inference that Ms. 0
substituted synonyms for words in Professor Poole's paper in an effort to make the
paper read differently than the original source from which it was plagiarized.
[13] So without elaboration, we are satisfied on that basis that these charges are made
out, Charge number 3 will be withdrawn, and Ms. 0 will stand convicted of
charges l and 2.

SANCTION/ORDER:
[ 14] The Panel is satisfied that the appropriate sanction in this case is the one that has
been contended for by University counsel. We will impose the following
sanctions:
i.

Ms. 0 shall receive a final grade of zero in the course EAS 333HI:
Modernism and Colonial Korea;

ii.

Ms, 0 shall be suspended from the University from July 22, 20 I0, until
July 21, 2012;

iii.

the sanction shall be recorded on Ms. 0 's academic record and transcript
from the date of the Order until July 21, 2012;

-4iv.

This case shall be reported to the Provost for publication of a notice of the
decision of the Tribunal and the sanction or sanction imposed in the
University newspapers, with Ms. 0 's name withheld.

[ 15] In some ways, as we said in our reasons on the merits, this is a strange case, but the
principles that have emerged from the cases over the years are certainly clear, that a
commission of a first offence of plagiarism usually carries with it a suspension of at
least two years. In this case there is nothing in these facts that would lead us to
impose a sanction of less than that. It might have been arguable that a sanction of
more than that could have resulted, but at the same time we have no evidence from
Ms.O
[ 16) There is certainly no evidence of mitigation, no evidence of character, no
explanation from the student as to how she expected this act of plagiarism to go
uncovered. And we also know from Professor Poole that she, both orally and in her
syllabus, reviewed what plagiarism is, its consequences in this course, so there's no
doubt that the student had full warning about this, although the circumstances
remain bizarre, plagiarism from the work of the very Professor teaching the course.
[17] So taking everything together, we believe that the two-year sanction is certainly
appropriate in this case, and that is the penalty we now impose.

Dated at Toronto, thi§is,~te of November.

