Case #592

   DATE: November 10, 2010
   PARTIES: University of Toronto v. Y.O.
   Hearing Date(s): July 22, 2010
   Panel Members:
   Mr. Ronald Slaght, Chair
   Prof. Gabriele DâEleuterio, Faculty Member
   Ms. Denise Cooney, Student Member
   Appearances:
   Mr. Robert Centa, Assistant Discipline Counsel for the University
   Ms. Betty-Anne Campbell, Paliare Roland Barristers
   In Attendance:
   Prof. John Browne, Dean's Designate
   Mr. Christopher Lang, Director, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty
   Grievances
   Trial Division â s. B.i.1.(d) of Code â plagiarism â paper plagiarized
   from the course instructor's very own paper â hearing not attended â
   reasonable notice provided â Panel would have allowed an adjournment
   had the Student appeared - finding of guilt based on evidence â the
   usual sanction for commission of a first offence of plagiarism is a
   two-year suspensionÂ  â no evidence of mitigation or character; no
   explanation from Student â grade assignment of zero for Course;
   two-year suspension; two-year notation on transcript; report to Provost
   Student charged under s. B.i.1(d) of the Code. The charges related to
   the allegations that the Student submitted a paper plagiarized from the
   course instructor's very own paper. The Student did not attend the
   hearing. The Panel stated that a combination of factors in this case
   allowed it to conclude that reasonable notice has been provided: the
   e-mails sent to the Student, the signature of receipt of the courier
   package sent to the Student, and the registration and deregistration in
   summer courses by the Student. The Panel also stated that had the
   Student appeared before the Panel and said that one month's notice was
   not enough, the Panel would have allowed an adjournment. The Panel
   found the Student guilty under s.B.i.1(d). The Panel acknowledged that
   it was established that the usual sanction for commission of a first
   offence of plagiarism was a two-year suspension. In this case, there
   was no evidence of mitigation or character and no explanation from the
   Student that might allow the Panel to deviate from the usual sanction.
   Thus, the Panel imposed a grade assignment of zero in the course, a
   two-year suspension; a two-year notation on the Studentâs transcript;
   and a report be issued to the Provost.

   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12759
