Case No.: 911
THE UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
IN THE MATTER OF charges of academic dishonesty made on January 6, 2017,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic
Matters, 1995,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Act, 1971, S.O. 1971, c. 56 as
amended S.O. 1978, c. 88
B E T W E E N:
UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
- and Y

S

1111 -

REASONS FOR DECISION
Hearing Date: August 3, 2017
Members of the Panel:
Mr. Shaun Laubman, Lawyer, Chair
Professor Richard B. Day, Faculty Panel Member
Ms. Sophie Barnett, Student Panel Member
Appearances:
Ms. Tina Lie, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Barristers
In Attendance:
Ms. Krista Osbourne, Administrative Clerk and Hearing Secretary, Office of the Appeals,
Discipline and Faculty Grievances, University of Toronto
Mr. David Jones, Technology Assistant, Information Commons
Professor Esme Fuller-Thomson, Factor-Inwentash, Faculty of Social Work
Professor Luc De Nil, Vice-Dean, Students, School of Graduate Studies

--

Not in Attendance:
Ms. Y
S
, the Student

2

1. The Trial Division of the University Tribunal heard this matter on August 3, 2017.
2. The Student was charged as follows:
a. In or around August 2015, you knowingly represented as your own an idea
or expression of an idea or work of another in a draft introduction that you
submitted to Professor Esme Fuller-Thomson, contrary to section B.I.1(d)
of the Code.
b. In the alternative, in or around August 2015, you knowingly obtained
unauthorized assistance in connection with a draft introduction that you
submitted to Professor Esme Fuller-Thomson, contrary to section B.I.1(b)
of the Code.
c. In the further alternative, in or around August 2015, you knowingly engaged
in a form of cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or
misrepresentation not otherwise described in the Code in order to obtain
academic credit or other academic advantage of any kind in connection with
a draft introduction that you submitted to Professor Esme Fuller-Thomson,
contrary to section B.I.3(b) of the Code. (collectively the “Charges”)
PROCEEDING IN THE STUDENT’S ABSENCE
3. The Student did not attend the proceeding. As a result, as a preliminary matter, the
Tribunal had to decide whether to proceed in the Student’s absence.
4. The University presented evidence of the considerable efforts that were made to notify
the Student of the Charges and the Hearing date and time. The efforts included:
a. Serving the Charges by email on January 6, 2017 to the email address listed
on the Student’s ROSI account;

3

b. Serving a disclosure package and another copy of the Charges on March
2, 2017, by email and by courier to the address listed in the Student’s ROSI
account;
c. Sending multiple emails to the Student’s utoronto email account and two
other personal accounts that had been used by the Student and her spouse.
The emails were for the purposes of scheduling the Hearing; and
d. Attempting to reach the Student by phone at the number listed in her ROSI
account.
5. Notably, the University’s evidence showed that a courier package that included the
Charges and Notice of Hearing was sent to the Student’s address in Israel and signed
for by a person with the same first initial and last name as the Student. Also, the
University established that the Student’s utoronto email account was last accessed on
July 16, 2017. This was after numerous emails regarding the Charges and the
Hearing had been sent by the University to that email account.
6. The Student elected not to respond to any of these communications.
7. Based on the evidence presented, the Tribunal was satisfied that the University had
discharged its obligation to provide proper notice to the Student regarding the Charges
against her and the Hearing scheduled for August 3, 2017. Therefore, the Tribunal
determined that it would proceed with the Hearing in the Student’s absence.
UNIVERSITY’S EVIDENCE ON THE CHARGES
8. The Student enrolled in the University’s School of Graduate Studies in the Fall of 2014
to do a Ph.D. focussing on Type One diabetes and mental health risk.
9. The Student asked Professor Fuller-Thomson (the “Professor”) to be her thesis
supervisor. They knew one another from when the Student was enrolled in the
Master’s program.

4

10. Once the Student graduated with a Master’s degree in 2005, she and the Professor
worked together and published a joint paper on mental health issues and arthritis in
2009.
11. After completing her first year of the Ph.D. program, the Student worked as a research
assistant for the Professor. At the time, the Professor was working with another
academic on a research paper related to parental incarceration and diabetes. The
objective was to ultimately have the paper published.
12. In the summer of 2015, the Professor asked the Student to draft an introduction for
the proposed paper. The Student submitted the draft work to the Professor in August
2015.
13. The project then stalled and nothing happened with the draft introduction until early
2016.
14. By February 2016, work on the proposed research paper began again. The Professor
submitted the two and a half page draft introduction that the Student had prepared to
Turnitin – the program used by the University to check for and prevent plagiarism.
15. The Turnitin results showed that the introduction was heavily drawn from source
material. For the most part, citations were provided to the source material, however,
there were two issues with how the work was referenced. First, much of the text was
copied verbatim from source material. The source material was properly cited in the
draft but quotation marks were not placed around the text to show that it was directly
copied. Second, in a number of instances, the Student did not cite the primary source
of the material but instead cited the secondary sources that were cited in the primary
source. For example, instead of citing the source that the text was copied from, the
Student had cited the reference that was provided for that text in the source.
16. The issue, in both the Professor’s and the University’s views, was that the Student, a
Ph.D. candidate, would have known how to properly reference sources given her
years of academic training. That the Student failed to use quotation marks and did
not cite the primary source in all instances was “disturbing” according to the Professor.

5

17. Both the Professor and the University also stressed the serious consequences that
could have resulted to the Professor’s professional reputation had the plagiarism in
the draft introduction not been caught.
18. After discovering the plagiarism, the Professor immediately brought it to the Student’s
attention and expressed her disappointment.

In her response, the Student was

apologetic and wrote “I obviously have no basic understanding of how to work and
what simple matters of plagiarism and copywrite are.” [sic] The Student expressed
doubts about whether she was qualified to continue in the Ph.D. program.
19. In her evidence at the Hearing, the Professor said she was initially unsure how to deal
with the issue. She said she was unsure whether the Student had committed an
academic offence since the work was done in Student’s capacity as a research
assistant and was not submitted for academic credit. However, after giving it some
thought, the Professor determined that she was uncomfortable continuing to supervise
the Student’s work and she wanted to ensure that some form of note or caution was
placed in the Student’s file about the incident.
20. The Professor informed the School of Graduate Studies (“SGS”), where a decision
was made that the Student’s work did constitute an academic offence under the Code
of Behaviour on Academic Matters (the “Code”) and the matter should be pursued
further.
21. On July 7, 2016, SGS wrote to the Student to schedule a Dean’s meeting to discuss
the incident.
22. The Student responded and advised that she was dealing with a serious medical
issue. She then withdrew from the Ph.D. program, effective August 4, 2016.
23. Despite further attempts by the University to schedule a Dean’s meeting, no such
meeting occurred.
24. The University now seeks a conviction pursuant to the Code for plagiarism.

6

JURISDICTION
25. As a preliminary matter, the Tribunal has to decide whether it has jurisdiction to convict
the Student. The issue is, plainly, whether the Code applies with respect to a draft
introduction submitted by a research assistant for use in a paper being prepared for
publication.
26. The University submits that it does. The Tribunal agrees.
27. The first question that must be answered is whether the Code can apply when the
work at issue was done by the student in the role of a research assistant.
28. The University relied on the decision of In the matter of the University of Toronto and
A.A. (Case No. 528, January 14, 2009). That case involved charges against a student
who was working as a teaching assistant. While working as a teaching assistant, the
student inflated the mark for an exam written by his brother. The student was charged
under the Code. He challenged the jurisdiction of the University Tribunal and argued
that the impugned conduct should be addressed by a labour arbitrator under the
collective agreement that governed his work as a teaching assistant. He argued that
the Code did not apply because the charges did not relate to his conduct as a student
at the University.
29. The Tribunal in A.A. supra, determined that it had jurisdiction over the charges in that
case. In analyzing the extent to which the Code applied when the student’s conduct
did not arise when they were acting qua student, the Tribunal held:
Mr. [A] is a student of the University of Toronto because he is enrolled in
a course of study. By enrolling in the university, a student agrees to abide
by the rules that apply to members of the university community including
the rules about academic integrity found in the Code. Mr. [A] is a student
of the university whether or not he is actually attending a class or studying
for an exam because being a student of the university is his status and is
not a position, like teaching assistant, that he fills from time to time. He
was therefore still a student even when he was working as a teaching

7

assistant. In fact, he could not have worked as a teaching assistant
unless he was a student. As a result of Mr. [A]’s status as a student, he
is bound to his obligations to the university community at all times
including those times when he is working as a teaching assistant. Those
obligations include a commitment to academic integrity.
30. The decision in A.A., supra is informative for this case. There is no doubt that the
Student falls under the definition of “student” in the Code. Moreover, as was the case
in A.A., she could not have been a research assistant unless she was a student at the
University.
31. The next issue with respect to jurisdiction is whether the draft introduction that the
Student prepared is covered by the Code.
32. This is not a typical case, where the work at issue was an assignment or exam
submitted for academic credit. However, the relevant provisions of the Code also
apply to “any other form of academic work”. Therefore, for the Code to apply, the
Student’s draft introduction must fit under the definition of “academic work” in the
Code.
33. The Tribunal is satisfied that the Student’s draft work does fit within the broad definition
of “academic work”. The wording of the definition makes clear the intent to cover a
broad range of work product.
34. Therefore, since the Student’s conduct qua research assistant does fall under the
Code and the draft introduction does constitute “academic work”, the Tribunal does
have jurisdiction with respect to the Charges.
DECISION ON THE CHARGES
35. The Tribunal is satisfied on the evidence presented by the University that the Charge
of plagiarism pursuant to section B.I.1(d) of the Code was made out. With a conviction
on the first Charge, the University did not seek convictions on the remaining two
Charges.

8

36. While there was some evidence, found in her emails to the Professor when the
allegation of plagiarism was first raised, that the Student may not have understood
that what she submitted was plagiarism, this is no defence.
37. The Code expressly applies an objective standard for offences that depend on the
student “knowingly” committing the offence. Therefore, even if the Student did not
actually know that she was committing the offence of plagiarism, she ought to have
known that her citation style was deficient.
38. The evidence that the Student may not have appreciated that her form of citation was
not acceptable is more relevant to the issue of the appropriate penalty than it is to
whether she was guilty of the Charges.
39. Similarly, while the University acknowledged that some of the impugned text, in
particular where the Student had properly cited a reference but failed to use quotation
marks, was a less serious form of plagiarism, this does not impact on the issue of
liability. Again, this consideration is more relevant to the issue of the appropriate
penalty.
40. For all of these reasons, the Tribunal found that the Student is guilty of the first Charge
pursuant to section B.I.1(d) of the Code.

PENALTY
41. The University sought the following sanctions against the Student:
a. A suspension of 3 years;
b. A notation on her academic record for 4 years; and
c. That this case be reported to the Provost, with the Student’s name withheld,
for publication .
42. In support of its proposed sanctions, the University relied on the following factors:

9

a. The Student had committed a prior offence in the Fall of 2014. The Tribunal
was provided with a letter dated April 1, 2015 from Professor Luc De Nil
(who gave evidence at the Hearing) confirming that the Student had
admitted to the offence of using an unauthorized aid in the form of
unauthorized collaboration on an assignment with two other doctoral
students. The sanctions of a grade of zero for the assignment and a written
reprimand in the Student’s file were imposed;
b. In connection with the prior offence, the Student was warned in writing that
“if you commit a second offence while you are a student at the University of
Toronto, it will be treated much more severely.”
c. Plagiarism must be treated as a serious offence;
d. The plagiarism at issue had the potential to impact on the Professor’s
reputation and career if it had gone undetected. This was an aggravating
factor in the University’s submissions; and
e. There was no direct character evidence or evidence of extenuating
circumstances due to the Student’s lack of participation.
43. The University also submitted that a 3 year suspension had become the standard for
a second offence in plagiarism cases. It provided the Tribunal with a number of cases
where a suspension of 3 years or more for plagiarism was imposed.
44. The Tribunal accepts that plagiarism is a most serious offence and that general
deterrence is one of the criteria that the Tribunal must have in mind when fashioning
a sanction that is appropriate and reasonable.
45. It is well-established that the Tribunal must consider a range of factors when fixing the
appropriate sanction in a given case. In the case of Mr. C (Case No.: 1976/77-3,
November 5, 1976), Sopinka Q.C. described the factors that a tribunal must consider
when determining the appropriate penalty. These factors have been consistently
adopted by tribunals over the years:

10

a. The character of the person charged;
b. The likelihood of a repetition of the offence;
c. The nature of the offence committed;
d. Any extenuating circumstances surrounding the commission of the offence;
e. The detriment to the University occasioned by the offence; and
f. The need to deter others from committing a similar offence.
46. The Tribunal is also guided by the language from the decision in University of Toronto
and B.S. (Case 697, January 17, 2014) in which the tribunal recognized that it was to
approach “the issue of an appropriate sanction without fettering its discretion based
on any ‘starting point’ or ‘minimum’ penalty in such cases and must fashion a sanction
based on the individual circumstances of this case.” In other words, imposing an
appropriate penalty is a matter of exercising discretion and applying the factors from
Mr. C, supra to the facts of a particular case. As described by the Discipline Appeal
Board in D.S. (Case 451, August 24, 2007), “[t]here is no matrix, formula, or chart, in
which a Tribunal can determine that one particular act, must receive one particular
sanction.”
47. That guidance is particularly instructive in this case, which involved unique facts and
an act of plagiarism that was not readily comparable to the acts in the cases relied
upon by the University.
48. Taking into consideration the direction from cases such as Mr. C, B.S. and D.S., as
well as the University’s submissions and the evidence and circumstances of this case,
the Tribunal weighed the following factors:
a. Plagiarism is well-recognized as a serious offence and deserving of a strong
sanction. However, this case is not one of the more egregious examples of
plagiarism. The evidence was unclear as to whether the Student actually
knew that her style of referencing amounted to plagiarism. If she did intend

11

to plagiarise then it was a particularly poor form of plagiarism given that, for
the most part, the Student referenced the source material but failed to
include quotation marks or she referenced the underlying source instead of
the primary source that she drew from.

The University quite rightly

acknowledged that the plagiarism in this case was less serious than
instances when no source at all is referenced;
b. The Student’s immediate reaction when the Professor raised her concerns
and accused her of plagiarism was to apologize profusely and admit that
she perhaps was not qualified for the Ph.D. program as she did not
understand the requirements and expectations;
c. The Student had a prior offence. This is an aggravating factor that the
Tribunal took into account but did not find that it tipped the balance
significantly. Little evidence regarding the prior offence was presented at
the Hearing other than it did not involve plagiarism and the Student
apparently admitted to it and was sanctioned at an early stage. She was
also warned about the consequences being more serious in the event of a
second offence;
d. The University emphasized the fact that the plagiarism at issue could have
detrimentally impacted the Professor had it not been identified and had the
draft introduction been included in the final paper without editing or
reference checking. The Tribunal does consider this an aggravating factor
albeit one that is muted somewhat by the fact the evidence was unclear as
to whether the Student had actual knowledge and the submission was a
first draft so further editing and reference checking would have been
expected;
e. The Student withdrew from the Ph.D. program. There was some evidence
that she did so due to severe health issues although this evidence was
indirect and not subject to testing;

12

f. The only character evidence that the Tribunal had was the Professor’s
evidence that she considered the Student to be a “strong student” from the
period when she received her Master’s degree. This was not a factor in the
Tribunal’s decision; and
g. The Student’s withdrawal from the Ph.D. program would remain on her
academic record permanently. In theory, she could re-apply to enter the
Ph.D. program but any such application would be treated as a new
application. The Tribunal views the likelihood of the Student re-applying for
the Ph.D. program as low in the circumstances. Similarly, the likelihood of
the Student repeating the offence is low since her studies have been
discontinued.
49. Having regard to all of the circumstances, the Tribunal determined that the appropriate
sanction is a 2 year suspension, a 3 year notation on the Student’s academic record
and publication by the Provost.
50. This is a serious penalty that accounts for the fact that the Student has been found
guilty of plagiarism and this is her second offence, even though the first one was
unrelated. It also represents a significant increase in severity from the sanction
imposed on the Student following her first offence.
51. By the same token, the Tribunal did not feel that it would be appropriate to have the
sanction match those cases where there was clear evidence of an intention to deceive
by a student.
52. Therefore, the Tribunal ordered the following:
a. THAT the Student is guilty of one count of knowingly representing as her
own an idea or expression of an idea or work of another in any academic
examination or term test or in connection with any other form of academic
work, contrary to section B.I.1(d) of the Code.
b. THAT the following sanctions shall be imposed on the Student:

13

i. a suspension from the University of Toronto from the day the Tribunal
makes its order for two years, from August 3, 2017 to August 2, 2019;
ii. a notation of the sanction on her academic record and transcript from
the day the Tribunal makes its order for three years, from August 3,
2017 to August 2, 2020.
c. THAT this case be reported to the Provost, with the Student's name
withheld, for publication of a notice of the decision of the Tribunal and the
sanctions imposed.

Dated at Toronto, this

~

Z day of November, 2017

Shaun Laubman, Co-Chair

--

