Case 911

DATE:

   November 2, 2017

PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v. Y.S. (âthe Studentâ)

Hearing Date(s):

   August 3, 2017

Panel Members:

   Mr. Shaun Laubman, Lawyer, Chair
   Professor Richard B. Day, Faculty Panel Member
   Ms. Sophie Barnett, Student Panel Member

Appearances:

   Ms. Tina Lie, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Barristers

In Attendance:

   Ms. Krista Osbourne, Administrative Clerk and Hearing Secretary, Office
   of the Appeals,
   Discipline and Faculty Grievances, University of Toronto
   Mr. David Jones, Technology Assistant, Information Commons
   Professor Esme Fuller-Thomson, Factor-Inwentash, Faculty of Social Work
   Professor Luc De Nil, Vice-Dean, Students, School of Graduate Studies

Not in Attendance:

   The Student
   The Student was charged with plagiarism contrary to s. B.i.1(d) of the
   Code , or in the alternative one charge of unauthorized assistance
   contrary to s. B.i.1(b) of the Code , or in the further alternative,
   one charge of academic misconduct not otherwise described contrary to
   s. B.i.3(b) of the Code .Â  The charges related to written work that
   the Student had produced as a research assistant which included
   insufficient citations. Specifically, the Student had failed to put
   quotation marks around text to show that it was directly copied and she
   often failed to cite the primary sources for the material but instead
   cited the secondary sources that had been cited in the primary source.
   The Panel found that reasonable notice of the proceeding had been given
   to the Student and that the hearing could proceed in the Studentâs
   absence based on evidence that a courier package that included the
   Charges and Notice of Hearing was sent to the Studentâs address in
   Israel and signed for by a person with the same first initial and last
   name as the Student. As well, the University established that the
   Studentâs email account was accessed recently, after numerous emails
   regarding the Charges and the Hearing had been sent by the University
   to that email account.
   The Panel addressed two jurisdictional issues: (1) whether the Panel
   had jurisdiction over the Student when she was employed as a research
   assistant; and (2) whether the Code applied to work prepared as a
   research assistant for a faculty member. With regards to the first
   issue, the Panel referred to the case University of Toronto v. A.A.
   (Case No. 528, January 14, 2009) and found that the Panel had
   jurisdiction over the Studentâs conduct as a research assistant because
   being a student at the University is a status, and that being a
   research assistant requires that status of being a student. As a
   student, she was bound by her obligations to the university community,
   including the commitment to academic integrity contained in the Code.
   As for the second issue, the Panel acknowledged that it was not a
   typical case where the Code was being applied to an assignment or an
   exam but that the relevant provisions of the Code include language that
   it can apply to âany other form of academic workâ and that the work
   performed as a research assistant fit within that broad definition.
   Though there was some evidence that the Student may not have understood
   what she submitted constituted plagiarism, the Panel found that even if
   the Student did not actually know that she was committing the offence
   of plagiarism, as a Ph.D. student, she ought to have known that her
   citation style was deficient. Upon the Panel finding the Student guilty
   of plagiarism, the University withdrew the alternative charges.
   In determining a sanction, the Panel referred to the Mr. C factors
   (Case No.: 1976/77-3, November 5, 1976), particularly: (1) that the
   plagiarism in this case was less serious than instances when no source
   at all is referenced; (2) the Student apologized for her actions and
   admitted that she was perhaps not qualified to continue in the Ph.D.
   program; (3) the Student had a prior offence and was warned about the
   consequences being more serious for a second offence; (4) the
   plagiarism in this case would have directly affected the Professor had
   it not been identified â an aggravating factor that is muted by the
   idea that this was a first draft and further editing and checking of
   the work by the Professor was expected; and (5) the Student withdrew
   from the Ph.D. program, which would remain on her academic permanently
   and make her chances of re-offending low.Â  That the Student was a
   âstrong studentâ was not a factor in the Panelâs decision.Â  Taken
   together, the Panel found that the lack of intention to deceive on the
   part of the Student coupled with the seriousness of the offence of
   plagiarism warranted a penalty of a suspension for two years from the
   University; a notation on the Studentâs transcript and record for three
   years; and a report to the Provost.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/13042
