Case #674

   DATE: January 25, 2013
   PARTIES: University of Toronto v. S.A.
   Hearing Date(s): December 17, 2012
   Panel Members:
   Ms. Roslyn Tsao, Chair
   Prof. Kathi Wilson, Faculty Member
   Ms. Maria Wei, Student Member
   Appearances:
   Mr. Robert Centa, Assistant Discipline Counsel for the University
   In Attendance:
   Dr. Kristi Gourlay, Manager, Office of Academic Integrity
   Ms. Betty-Ann Campbell, Law Clerk
   Ms.Â Natalie Ramtahal, Coordinator, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty
   Grievances

   Trial Division â s. B.i.1(a) of the Code â forged documents â altered
   medical certificate âforged document submitted in support of petition
   for late withdrawal without academic penalty â Student did not attend
   hearing â notice provided in accord with Rule 3 of the Rules of
   Practice and Procedure â finding of guilt â first offence â expulsion
   not appropriateâ Student acknowledged guilt in letter to Registrar â
   Student authorized University to speak with doctor â grade assignment
   of zero in two courses petitioned; five-year suspension; five-year
   notation on transcript; report to Provost for publication.

   Student charged with three offences under s. B.i.1(a) and in the
   alternative three offences under s. B.i.3(b) of the Code . The charges
   related to an allegation that the Student submitted a petition for late
   withdrawal to the Committee on Standing that included forged documents.
   The Student obtained a âStudent Medical Certificateâ from her doctor.
   The doctor confirmed that a Certificate was provided to the student and
   stamped with a true version of his clinic stamp. The doctor stated his
   original note had been changed, and almost the entire Certificate,
   except his name and date, seemed different from the note he wrote.
   After charges were laid, the Student provided a hand written letter to
   the Registrar of her college wherein she admitted to altering the
   Certificate. The Student indicated that she was remorseful and had been
   suffering from clinical depression and borderline anemia due to an
   abortion. The Student stated that medical records from her family
   doctor would be forthcoming to confirm. No letter from the Studentâs
   family doctor, nor any further medical records were produced. The
   Student did not attend the hearing, but the Panel was satisfied notice
   requirements were met and therefore proceeded. The Panel drew an
   adverse inference from the Studentâs failure to attend and deliver
   medical evidence promised in the Studentâs letter to the Registrar. The
   Panel found the student guilty of one count of forgery under s.
   B.i.1(a) and two counts of academic dishonesty under s. B.i.3(b) of the
   Code . The Student had no prior record of academic dishonesty. The
   Panel imposed a final grade of zero in the two courses for which she
   sought late withdrawal, a five-year suspension, a five-year notation on
   the Studentâs transcript, and that the case be reported to the Provost
   for publication in the University newspapers. The Panel determined that
   expulsion was not appropriate in the circumstances, as the Student
   authorized the University to make direct inquiries of her doctor, and
   had acknowledged some degree of guilt in the letter to her Registrar.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12797
