IVERSITY TRIBUNAL
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORO TO
THE M TIER OF charges of academic dishonesty made on July 10 2012

AND

TBE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters, 1995,

AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Act, 1971,

.0. 1971, c. 56 as amended S.O.

1978,c.88
BETWEEN:
U IVERSITY OF TORONTO (the "University")

- and~

~ialllll ~

(the'' tudent'')

Hearing Date: Dec mber 17, 2012
Panel M mber :
s. R lyn . T ao Barrister and Solicitor, Chair
Professor Kathi Wilson, Faculty Panel Member
Ms. Maria Wei tudent Panel Member
Appearances:

Mr. Robe11 Centa, Assistant Discipline Counsel for University, Paliare Roland Barristers
In Attemhmce:
Dr. Kristi Gourlay, Manager of Office of Academic Integrity, Faculty of Arts and c1ence
Ms. Betty-Ann Campbell Law Clerk, Paliare Roland Barristers
M . atalie Ramtahal, Coordinator, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Ori vances
Not in Attendance:
M . - ~ the Student

-2-

Reasons for Decision
Delivered by Ms. Roslyn M. Tsao

1.

The Trial division of the Tribunal heard this matter on December 17, 2012. The
Student was charged on July 10, 2012 of the following:
1.
On or about April 12, 2012, you knowingly forged or in any
other way altered or falsified a document or evidence required by the
University of Toronto, or uttered, circulated or made use of any such
forged, altered or falsified document, namely, a Petition to the
Committee on Standing of the Faculty of Arts and Science
("Committee") at the University of Toronto seeking academic
accommodations or relief, contrary to Section B.I. l(a) of the Code.

2.
On or about April 12, 2012, you knowingly falsified evidence
required by the University of Toronto, namely, a Personal Statement,
which you submitted to the Committee in support of your request for
academic accommodation, contrary to Section B.I.l(a) of the Code.
3.
On or about April 12, 2012, you knowingly forged or in any
other way altered or falsified a document or evidence required by the
University of Toronto, or uttered, circulated or made use of any such
forged, altered or falsified document, namely, a University of Toronto
Student Medical Certificate, dated March 15, 2012, which you submitted
in support of your request for academic accommodations, contrary to
Section B.I. l (a) of the Code.
4.
In the alternative to each of the charges above, you knowingly
engaged in a form of cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct,
fraud or misrepresentation not otherwise described in order to obtain
academic credit or other academic advantage of any kind by submitting
falsified or forged documents to the University of Toronto in support of
various forms of academic accommodation or relief, contrary to Section
B.I.3(b) of the Code.

Absence of Student from Hearing

2. The Student did not attend at the Hearing. The Tribunal waited 30 minutes after the
scheduled commencement of the Hearing to allow for the Student to appear.
3.

The University presented evidence to the Tribunal with respect to the steps undertaken
to communicate with the Student, advise her of the charges, provide notice of the
Hearing and disclosure of the materials. In particular, the Charges and Notice of

-3Hearing were served in accordance with Rule 3 of the Rules of Practice and Procedure
("RPP'') by:
(a) sending a copy of the documents by courier to the Student's mailing address
contained in her ROSI records; and
(b)

e-mailing a copy of the documents to the student's e-mail address contained
in ROSI.

4.

The emails which were sent to the Student did not "bounce back" or generate any
responding error messages. In addition, on May 20, 2012, the Student had sent an
email to Ms. Susan Calanza, Assistant Faculty Registrar, Faculty of Arts and Sciences
from the email address used by the University to subsequently send the Charges and
Notice of Hearing.

5.

After the Charges were emailed to the Student on July 10, 2012, the Student also
delivered a handwritten letter on July 16th to Sally Walker of New College,
acknowledging the offence and apologizing. However, there has been no further
communication from the Student, even in response to the Notice of Hearing.

6.

Accordingly, the Tribunal is satisfied that the Notice of Hearing (including the
Warning) dated November 15, 2012 for the hearing of December 17, 2012, and the
Charges were served by courier and e-mail to the Student's ROSI mailing and e-mail
addresses.

7.

Accordingly, the Hearing may proceed in the absence of the Student.

Facts of the Case
8.

The University tendered three witnesses: Ms. Susan Calanza, Dr. Kristi Gourlay and
Ms. Sally Walker.

9.

Ms. Calanza is the Assistant Faculty Registrar, Faculty of Arts and Sciences at the
University of Toronto. She, among other things, reviews students' petitions to the
Committee on Standing and checks their supporting documentation and the student's
statement that are submitted with the petition.

10.

On or about April 20, 2012, the Student submitted a petition requesting late withdrawal
without academic penalty in two courses, SLA 238H1S and SLA 103HlS on the basis
of "illness". The Student's petition form contained the following statement that the
Student attested to by signing:
"I have provided accurate and complete information on this form and with my
petition. I have also read, understood and will abide by the petition instructions
that were attached to this form ... "

-411.

With her petition, the Student also submitted her required signed "statement" dated
April 12, 2012 in support of her petition and a "Student Medical Certificate" dated
March 15, 2012 (the "Certificate"). The Certificate is a form with questions that is to
be completed by the Student's physician.

12.

The answers in the Certificate were completed in handwriting and purportedly by a Dr.
Kamruz Zaman.

13.

Ms. Calanza was suspicious of the authenticity of the Certificate as the CPSO number
for the doctor was 6 digits when such numbers are only 5 digits in length. Naturally,
Ms. Calanza assumed that a physician would not err in writing his own CPSO number.

14.

On April 24, 2012, Ms. Calanza contacted Dr. Zaman seeking verification of the
Certificate. Mr. Zaman subsequently responded and advised that "my original note has
been changed/traced. .I don't have a copy, but patient did see me on March 15, 2012".

15.

Ms. Calanza tried to reach the Student to discuss the matter but when she was unable to
reach her, she referred the matter to the Office of Student Academic Integrity ("OSAI").

16.

On May 23, 2012, there was a meeting with the Student, Dr. Gourlay (Manager of
OSAI) and Ms. Calanza at a Dean's meeting to discuss the matter.

17.

Subsequent to that meeting, on May 29, 2012, Dr. Gourlay made further written
inquiries of Dr. Zaman (with the Student's signed authorization). Dr. Zaman confirmed
that he had written a note for the Student on March 15, 2012 (but had no copy), that he
had sent the Student for blood work but had not, as suggested by the Student, written a
prescription for Cipralex nor discussed any iron deficiency with her. Dr. Zaman stated
that a fee was paid to the clinic for the note. Dr. Zaman further stated that almost the
entire Certificate, except his name and date, seemed to be different from the note he
wrote. Dr. Zaman did, however, confirm that the stamp on the Certificate was a true
version of his clinic stamp.

18.

Ms. Sally Walker, the Registrar and Assistant Principal of New College, met with the
Student in April, 2012 and again in early July, 2012 to discuss the status of the inquiries
relating to the Certificate.

19.

On July 10, 2012, the Charges were drawn and emailed to the Student.

20.

On July 16, 2012, the Student dropped off a handwritten letter to Ms. Walker which
stated:
"I, ... have realised (sic) the consequences of my actions and would like to
apologize ... for submitting an inappropriate medical certificate to drop my 2
courses. I had filled out the contents of the letter but the doctor was well aware
what the note was intended for and he had stamped and signed it. He was in a

-5rush to get the note filled out and that was why I did not even end up paying the
obligatory $20 fee that I had to pay to attain the letter. I apologize for not
making this confession earlier because I was scared and afraid; as well as
being emotionally traumatized by a series of events that had happened to me
throughout my entire academic year. I was undergoing clinical depression and
borderline anemia due to an abortion ... My medical records will be given
ASAP. My family doctor and hospital has required me to wait an extra week
because of the hospital mandatory waiting time. I apologize once again for the
inconvenience caused to the faculty and the grivence (sic) that I had (sic)
made ... I truly apologize for the mistake I had made. I was under plenty of
pressure to lie to the council because of my cultural and family background as
well as taking the ill-councel (sic) of others. However, I do take full
responsibility for my actions and I'm truly sorry. I just wish I could get one last
chance. Thank you and I hope you could all forgive me ... (emphasis added)

21.

The Tribunal notes that the Student did not provide any other medical records, despite
her letter and that the Student apparently had a "family doctor" at some recent point but
provided no note/letter from that doctor. Accordingly, the Tribunal draws an adverse
inference from the Student's failure to attend and deliver any medical evidence in
support of her stated medical issues set out in her handwritten letter of July 16th •

22.

Nothing further has been heard from the Student since that handwritten letter.

Decision of the Tribunal

23. Based on the foregoing facts and documents filed, the Tribunal finds the Student guilty of
the following:
(a) 1 count of knowingly forging a document or falsifying a document, namely
the Medical Certificate which accompanied her petition contrary to section
B.I.1(a) of the Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters; and
(b) 2 counts of academic dishonesty contrary to section B.I.3(b) of the Code
relating to the Student's statement submitted with her petition and the
submission of the petition.
Penalty

25.

The University requested final grades of zero in both courses, a suspension and a
recommendation for expulsion.

26.

The Tribunal was not presented with any sworn evidence of mitigating factors on
behalf of the Student and the Student's July 16th letter, where any mitigating factors
might have been raised, should be given no weight. The Student had no prior record of
academic dishonesty.

-6-

27.

The ribunaJ bas found that the Student knowingly forg d a document and committed 2
con urr nt offences of academic dishonesty. These are rious offenc sand th
foll wing p nalty is appropriate in all the circumstanc

28. The tud nt will r ceive final grade of zero in the

238Hl and

Al03 HIS;

29.

The tudent will be immediately suspended from th Univer ity for a p riod of five (5)
y ar and th sanction hall be recorded on the Stud nt' a ad mi record and transcript
for a period of five (5) years; and

30.

The circumstances do not, in the view of this Panel warrant a r commendation of
expulsion. The Student did authorize the University to make direct inquiries of Dr.
Zaman and acknowledged some degree of guilt in her 1 tt r of July 16, 2012, though
after the fac l.

31.

The ribunal shall report this decision to the Provost for publication of a Notice of this
d cision and th sanction in the University newspaper with the tudent's name
withheld.

An Ord r with the p nalty was signed by the Panel at th hearing.

Dated at Toronto thls 25th day of January, 2013.

