Case 634

   [1]Case 634 - Sanction
   [2]Case 634 - Appeal

DATES:

   December 14, 2011 (Guilt), March 22, 2012 (Sanction)

PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v. M.K.

Hearing Date(s):

   November 23, 2011

Panel Members:

   Ms. Roslyn Tsao, Chair
   Prof. Annette Sanger, Faculty Member
   Ms. Amy Gullage, Student Member

Appearances:

   Mr. Robert Centa, Assistant Discipline Counsel for the University
   Dr. Michael Ratcliffe,Â Faculty of Medicine
   Dr. James Carlyle, Faculty of Medicine
   Mr. M.K., the Student

In Attendance:

   Ms. Jane Alderdice, Director of Quality Assessment and Governance
   Prof. Berry Smith, Dean's Designate
   Mr. Christopher Lang, Director, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty
   Grievances

   Student charged under s. B.i.1(f) of the Code . The charges related to
   allegations that the Student falsified his research results (âProblem
   Slides) being used toward his Ph.D. work. The Panel considered and
   rejected the Studentâs argument that he was guilty of sloppiness and
   inattention but not of knowingly committing the offence. The Panel
   found the Studentâs shifting explanations to be concerning. The Panel
   stated that the Studentâs submission, that he was not using the Problem
   Slides to make his research paper appear successful as the Problem
   Slides showed an unsuccessful result anyway, to be an ex-post
   rationalization without any credible foundation. The Panel found that
   one of the slides was absolutely presented to demonstrate positive
   research finding. The Student pleaded a âdouble jeopardyâ defence. He
   had previously been cautioned in writing by the Chair of his previous
   lab about the same concerns which are subjects of this hearing even
   though the Chair exonerated the Student and his previous supervisor
   from data fabrication or falsification. The Panel rejected the double
   jeopardy argument, reasoning that the academic dishonesty rules were
   not somehow relaxed if one re-submitted offending material even if the
   material was the subject of an investigation in the past. On the
   contrary, the fact that the Student was cautioned previously supported
   a finding that the Student ought reasonably to have known that the
   offence was committed based on the extended definition of âknowinglyâ
   in the Code. The Panel found the Student guilty under s. B.i.1(f) .
   Regarding penalty, the Panel ordered the University to provide its
   submission to the Student/Tribunal within 30 days of the Decision and
   the Student to provide his reply submission within 30 days. After
   receiving the submissions, the Panel stated that the deliberate
   falsification of research results by the Student in a Ph. D. program
   was a serious and inexcusable offence. The Panel also stated that the
   Student lacked insight into his actions and their effect on the
   Universityâs reputation. The Panel found the Studentâs submission of
   allegations of intimidation by his supervisor as a mitigating
   circumstance to be an aggravating factor at this stage as no response
   could have been made to rebut the allegation. The Panel imposed a grade
   assignment of zero in the course; a five-year suspension; and a
   recommendation that the Student be expelled.
   [3]View Case

References

   1. http://live-the-office-of-the-governing-council.pantheonsite.io/media/12804
   2. http://live-the-office-of-the-governing-council.pantheonsite.io/media/12809
   3. file:///media/12803
