Case 436

   DATE:

   July 8, 2024

   PARTIES:

   S.G. ("the Student"). v. Leslie Dan Faculty of Pharmacy

   HEARING DATE:

   March 22, 2024

   COMMITTEE MEMBERS:

   Dr. Erika Murray, Chair
   Dr. K. Sonu Gaind, Faculty Governor
   Annabelle Dravid, Student Governor

   HEARING SECRETARY:

   Nadia Bruno, Special Projects Officer, Office of Appeals, Discipline
   and Faculty Grievances

   APPEARANCES:

   FOR THE STUDENT APPELLANT:

   The Student

   FOR THE LESLIE DAN FACULTY OF PHARMACY:

   Dr. Jamie Kellar, Associate Dean, Academic

   The Student appealed the decision of the Faculty of Pharmacy‚s
   Committee of Appeals (the ‚Faculty Committee‚) decision to not grant
   the remedies sought by the Student, namely, promotion to Year 2 of
   their Doctor of Pharmacy Program (the ‚Program‚) or to write twelve
   supplemental examinations for failed Year 1 courses. The decision
   stemmed from the Faculty‚s assessment of the Student‚s performance In
   Year 1 of the Program, in which the Student failed twelve of thirteen
   courses, and failed to complete the summer experiential rotation due to
   a lack of professional competencies to work with the public. The
   Faculty made special accommodation offering the Student to write four
   supplemental exams, despite the Student‚s low annual GPA (the
   ‚Proposal‚). The Student had neither accepted nor rejected the Faculty
   Proposal. On appeal before the Academic Appeals Committee (the ‚AAC‚)
   the Student requested Aegrotat standing and reinstatement to the
   Program at the Year 2 level.

   In their first year of studies, the Student earned a failing grade in
   twelve of their thirteen courses, and passed only a single course with
   the lowest passing grade possible. Following the end of the second
   semester, the Registrar notified the Student that, consistent with the
   Faculty‚s policies, the Student was required to re-take all Year 1
   courses.

   The Student submitted a petition requesting to progress to Year 2, and
   to participate in the Year 1 experiential rotation, despite their
   failing grades, citing extenuating circumstances. This petition was
   denied. The Student then sought permission to write twelve supplemental
   exams for the Failed Courses or special consideration to ‚clear‚
   courses without taking a supplemental examination. The Faculty denied
   the petitions, and the Student appealed to the Faculty Committee which
   unanimously denied the Appeal citing the Faculty‚s obligation to
   graduate students who are academically capable and competent in their
   field.

   The AAC considered whether the Faculty Committee‚s decision was
   unreasonable or unfair, having regard the facts and the Faculty‚s
   policies. The AAC concluded that the Decision was reasonable and
   followed the Faculty‚s policies. In particular, the AAC noted that
   while the Pharmacy Faculty Calendar provided the possibility to write
   supplemental examinations, it did not allow students to write more than
   2.0 credits worth of supplemental examinations. It further specified
   that ‚the petition process was not a means to salvage courses and/or
   the academic record‚.

   The AAC further concluded that the Faculty Committee‚s decision was
   fair and consistent with its policies when it granted the Student
   special consideration to write 2.0 credits worth of supplemental
   examinations in view of the Student‚s extenuating circumstances. Where
   the Faculty deviated from its policies, it did so in an effort to
   accommodate the Student‚s difficulties and support the Student‚s
   long-term success in the program.

   The AAC noted that the pharmacy program is a national accredited
   program that must meet accreditation standards, with a duty to the
   public to ensure that its students meet all educational outcomes. The
   Faculty met its regulatory obligations by refusing to allow the Student
   to progress to Year 2.

   The Committee concluded that the Student‚s appeal was baseless,
   contrary to both the Faculty‚s policies and the best interest of the
   public. The Appeal was dismissed.
   [1]View Report

References

   1. file:///media/31805
