Report #345

   DATE: September 22, 2010
   PARTIES: R.K.A,Â  (the Student) v. University of Toronto, Faculty of
   Applied Science and Engineering
   Hearing Date(s): June 22, 2010
   Committee Members:
   Tad Brown, Chair
   Professor Varouj Aivazian
   Professor Christina Kramer
   Professor Ito Peng
   Margaret Kim
   Appearances:
   For the Student Appellant:
   R.K.A. (the Student)
   Joshua Chan, DLS for the Student
   For the University of Toronto, Faculty of Applied Science and
   Engineering:
   Professor Tom Coyle
   Barbara McCann, Faculty Registrar
   Adam Fox
   University of Toronto, Faculty of Applied Science and Engineering â
   aegrotat standing â no dispute regarding medical grounds â procedural
   grounds â request for aegrotat standing â request for standing to write
   deferred examination â request denied â assessed mark â reassessment
   formula â see case #308 â mechanistic nature of the formula â
   University refusal to accept alternate remediesÂ  â no previous missed
   examinations â not possible to determine whether an assessed grade
   under a formula is a true indicator of a studentâs grade â appeal
   allowed
   Appeal of a decision to deny the Student aegrotat standing in a course
   on medical and procedural grounds. The Student had fallen ill the day
   of the final exam in the Course. The Student submitted a Petition of
   Final Examination requesting aegrotat or standing to write a deferred
   final examination. The Committee on Examinations delivered a written
   decision granting accommodation in the form of an assessed mark. The
   Student appealed for aegrotat standing and was subsequently denied. The
   Committee found that a deferred supplemental examination would have
   been the most appropriate remedy if it had been granted at the time of
   the initial appeal. The Committee found it would have provided the most
   accurate and fair assessment of the Studentâs ability in the Course.
   The Committee noted a previous case (case #308) of the Academic Appeals
   Committee in which a previous committee expressed discomfort with the
   mechanistic nature of assessing grades by a formula when a student is
   unable to perform due to reasons beyond their control. The Committee
   found the Studentâs case to be another example of a rigid application
   of the Faculty of Applied Science and Engineeringâs practice of
   providing accommodation in the form of assessed grades. The Committee
   expressed displeasure with the Facultyâs near total refusal to consider
   alternate remedies that were more appropriate. The Committee noted the
   Student had never before missed a final examination and had put
   significant and timely effort into requesting the opportunity to write
   a deferred supplemental examination. The Committee noted the Faculty
   had already indicated its belief that the Student knew the material
   well enough to pass the Course through the application of an assessed
   mark. The Committee noted that without the opportunity to write a
   supplemental examination, it was not possible to determine whether the
   assessed grade was a true indicator of the Studentâs ability to perform
   in the Course. The Committee held that by granting aegrotat standing in
   the course, the Student would retain the pass which had already been
   granted but would have the mark removed so as not to affect the
   Studentâs GPA. The Committee granted aegrotat status in the Course.
   Appeal allowed.
   [1]View Report

References

   1. file:///media/12671
