THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
THE GOVERNING COUNCIL
Repoti #345 of the Academic Appeals Committee
September 22, 2010

To the Academic Board
University of Toronto

Your Committee reports that it held a hearing on Tuesday June 22, 20 IO at which the
following members were present:
Mr. Tad Brown, Chair
Professor Varouj Aivazian
Professor Christina Kramer
Professor Ito Peng
Ms Margaret Kim
Secretary: Christopher Lang, Director, Appeals, Discipline, and Faculty Grievances
Appearances:
For the Student Appellant:
lvlr. R.K.A (the Student)
His counsel from Downtown Legal Services, Mr. Joshua Chan

For the Faculty of Applied Science and Engineering:
Professor Torn Coyle
Ms. Barbara McCarrn, Faculty Registrar
Mr. Adam Fox

I. Tile Appeal
The Student is appealing the decision of the Faculty of Applied Science and
Engineering's Academic Appeals Board ("AAB") dated August 17, 2009. The Student is
seeking a remedy that would allow him to be granted aegrotat s1anding in ECE422Hl
(the "Course") on medical and procedural grounds.

1

II. Facts
The Student enrolled in the Edward S. Rogers Sr. Depm1ment of Electrical and Comp\lter
Engineering in the Faculty of Applied Science and Engineering in the fall of 2004. In the
Winter 2009 session, the Student enrolled in ECE422Hl. The Student missed the first
quiz due to illness and the Faculty granted a petition to redistribute his course marks such
that the midterm examination and second quiz were allocated 25% and 15%, respectively
to his final grade. The Student did poorly on the midterm. The Student became
extremely sick and was unable to write the final exam in the Comse on April 22, 2009.
The Student went to his family doctor on the day of the exam and was diagnosed with
severe gastroenteritis and prescribed medicine. The prescribed medicine helped alleviate
the Student's diarrhea and vomiting enough that he was able to write the final exam in
another comse the next day.

III, Previous Decision
On May 5, 2009 the Student submitted a Petition of Final Examination to the Faculty's
Committee on Examinations requesting aegrotat standing in ECE422Hl or, alternatively,
for standing to ,wite a deferred final examination in the Comse. On May 26, 2009 the
Committee on Examinations delivered a written decision granting accommodation in the
form of an assessed mark for the Course. No reasons were provided for the decision. On
May 26, 2009 the Student met with the Faculty Undergraduate Academic Counselor and
Program Manager to discuss the decision, The Student was informed that it was not the
Faculty's standard practice to arrange for deferred examinations and that, ifhe was
granted that option, he would not be able to sit the exam until the course was offered
again the following year. The Faculty Undergraduate Academic Counselor suggested
that if the Student was not satisfied with the assessed grade, he could appeal for aegrotat
standing in the Course.
On May 29, 2009, the Student submitted a Petition for Special Consideration to the
Faculty's Ombuds Committee requesting an appeal of the Committee on Examinations'
decision and that he be granted aegrotat standing in the Comse. On July I, 2009 the
Faculty's Ombuds Committee was replaced by the Faculty Academic Appeals Board.
The Faculty Academic Appeals Board delivered a written decision on August 17, 2009
which upheld the decision of the Committee on Examinations without reasons:
"While the Academic Appeals Board acknowledges your request for special
consideration and is sympathetic towards your difficult circumstances, the Board decided
to uphold the Committee on Examinations' earlier decision and recommends no change
be made to your academic record."
On May 29, 2009, the Student also submitted his application to the ECE Graduate Studies
Program at the University of Toronto for admission in Fall 2009. On June 12, 2009 the
Student graduated from the University of Toronto with a Bachelor of Science degree.
The Student's Cumulative Grade Point Average upon graduation was 2.62. The assessed
mark of 59% in the Comse resulted in his 2009 Annual GPA being 2.93 (B-). If the

2

Student's appeal had been successfol, his 2009 Annual GPA would be 3.07 (B) if
calculated by replacing the assessed mark of 59% in the Course with aegrotat stah1s. On
June 18, 2009 the Student was denied admittance to the ECE Graduate Stt1dies Program.
The Admission Requirement wcbpagc on the University ofToronto's Grad School
website states that an appropriate four-year bachelor's degree with a final year average of
at least mid B is required for consideration for Graduate School.
IV. Decision

There is no dispute that the Student had a valid medical reason for not being able to write
his final exam in the Course.
The issue for determination is what is the fair and reasonable remedy in this situation and
did the Faculty apply their policy fairly and consistently. It is the unanimous view of the
Committee that a supplemental examination would have been the most appropriate
remedy if it had been granted at the time of the initial appeal. It would have provided the
most accurate and fair assessment of the Student's ability in the Course. Your
Committee also noted a previous report #308 of the Academic Appeals Committee of the
Governing Council dated January 23, 2006 which commented on the Faculty's practice
on missed examinations:
" The Committee wishes to state its discomfort with the mechanistic nature of
assessing grades by formula when a student is unable to perform due to reasons beyond
his control. The Committee is troubled that the Faculty of Engineering persists in using
an approach tlrnt provides accommodation in the form of assessed or inferred
examinations rather than supplemental examinations. However, whether or not we agree
with the Faculty policy is immaterial to the fact that the Faculty applied its policy fairly
and properly."
This case appears to be another example ofa rigid application of the Faculty's practice of
providing accommodation in the form of assessed grades. Your Committee is displeased
with the Faculty's near total refosal to consider alternate remedies that are more
appropriate to the particular circumstances. Indeed the Faculty indicated in this hearing
that it is currently reviewing this practice. Your Committee strongly encourages the
Faculty to do so.
However, given the time delay for writing a supplemental examination and that the
Student has been graduated for over a year, the Student has dropped the request for the
remedy of the opportunity to write a supplemental examination and now requests only
that he be granted aegrotat status in the Course. Your C01mnittee agrees that it would
impose an undue burden on the Sh1dent at this stage to review the entire course in
preparation for a supplemental examination,
The Committee agrees that the Faculty applied its practices consistently. However, as
there were no reasons stated in the w1·itten decision of the AAB and the Faculty's
presentation at this appeal was very limited, it is difficult to asce11ain to what degree, if

3

any, the individual circumstances of the Student were considered in assessing the option
of a remedy of aegrotat standing in the Course. The Faculty indicated that the aegrotat
standing was usually limited to situations where a student has missed 3 or more exams
and had previously demonstrated an understanding of the course material. The Faculty
also stated that an aegrotat standing was permitted in certain circumstances where it is not
proper to require the student to retake the course or the assessed material is inadequate.
The Sh1dent submitted that he usually did much better on his final examinations and that,
given his poor performance on the midterm in the Comse, he had spent 14 days of study
in preparation for the final examination. It is impossible for the Committee to assess
these claims. However it was noted that the Student had never before missed a final
examination. It was also noted that the Student not only wrote his other exams in this
session regardless of his recovering medical condition but also put significant and timely
effort into requesting the oppo1iunity to write a supplemental examination in the Course.
Again the Committee believes that the most appropriate remedy would have been a
supplemental examination. However given the circumstances of this case including the
Student's graduation in June 2009 and the time delay since the taking of the Course, the
Committee unanimously believes that the just remedy is an aegrotat standing.
The Faculty has already indicated its belief that the Student knew the material well
enough to pass the Course through the application of an assessed mark. Without the
opportunity to ,,~·ite a supplemental examination, it is not possible to determine whether
the assessed grade is a true indication of the Student's ability to perform in the Comse.
By granting an aegrotat standing in the Course, the Student retains the pass which has
ah'eady been granted by the Faculty but removes the mark such that the Course will have
no effect on the Student's final annual GPA or Cumulative Grade Point Average.
The appeal is allowed and the Sh1dent is granted aegrotat status in the Comse.

4

