Case 1039

   DATE: May 6, 2020

   PARTIES: University of Toronto v. Z.D. (âthe Studentâ)

   HEARING DATE(S): March 12, 2020

   Panel Members:
   Ms. Erin Dann, Chair
   Professor Richard Day, Faculty Panel Member
   Mr. David Allens, Student Panel Member

   Appearances:
   Ms. Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg
   Rothstein LLP
   Ms. Renuka Koipillai, Downtown Legal Services, Representative of the
   Student
   Ms. Meg Cormack, Downtown Legal Services, Caseworker
   The Student

   In Attendance:
   Mr. Christopher Lang, Director, Office of the Appeals, Discipline and
   Faculty Grievances, University of Toronto

   The Student was charged withâ¯sevenÂ countsâ¯of academic misconduct
   under s. B.i.3(a) of theâ¯Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters,
   1995â¯(the âCodeâ) on the basis thatÂ sheÂ knowingly used or possessed
   unauthorized aids or obtained unauthorized assistance during several
   exams by accessing the internet and performing Google searches.Â She
   was enrolled in several courses in which tests were conducted
   onlineÂ using Canvas software on the Quercus learning management system
   (âQuercus Systemâ).Â This systemÂ logs a studentâs activity while they
   are engaged in writing a test or exam online.Â Â Students were
   notÂ allowedÂ to use any aidsÂ during the tests, nor were
   theyÂ permitted to access any online or outside
   assistance.Â Furthermore, the tests and exams contained a statement
   warning that the exam was proctored and electronically monitored, and
   that the use of any written or electronic material was not permitted.
   Reference to academic conduct and offences with a link to theÂ Code of
   Behaviour on Academic MattersÂ was also included on the tests.

   TheÂ Student attended the hearing and was
   represented.Â TheÂ UniversityÂ and the StudentÂ submitted anÂ Agreed
   Statement of Facts (âASFâ)Â andÂ Joint Book of Documents (âJBDâ). The
   facts admitted in the ASF related toÂ six charges.

   In May 2019, the StudentÂ provided aÂ written statement to the
   BoardÂ of Examiners, in which she accepted responsibility for her
   actions. The Board referred the matter in keeping with theÂ Code of
   Behaviour on Academic Matters.Â She also took responsibility for her
   actions of academic misconductÂ duringÂ aÂ subsequentÂ meeting with the
   Vice-Dean, Partnerships, Faculty of Medicine. SheÂ stated that she
   regretted her actionsÂ and apologized.Â The Student wasÂ suspended
   fromÂ herÂ program pending completion of theÂ TribunalÂ process.

   RegardingÂ theÂ proposedÂ sanctions,Â theÂ PanelÂ explainedÂ thatÂ in
   many casesÂ it statedÂ thatÂ absent exceptional circumstances, panels
   are expected to accept and implement joint statements on penalty.Â It
   referencedÂ theÂ Discipline Appeals Board decision inÂ The University
   of Toronto and M. A.Â (Case No. 837, December 22, 2016),Â where the
   BoardÂ stated thatÂ a joint submission on penalty âmay be rejected by a
   panel only in circumstances where to give effect to it would be
   contrary to the public interest or would bring the administration of
   justice into disreputeâ (para 25).Â TheÂ PanelÂ concluded thatÂ the
   joint submissionÂ wasÂ reasonableÂ and appropriate.Â It considered the
   following factors: the nature of the offences; the detriment to the
   University occasioned by the offences;Â the need to deter other
   students from acting in a similar manner;Â the character of the
   Student;Â and the circumstances surrounding the commission of the
   offence.Â WhileÂ acknowledgingÂ the seriousness of the offences
   andÂ noting that they had taken place repeatedly over several months,
   theÂ PanelÂ also considered mitigating factors, namelyÂ (1)Â thatÂ the
   Student had no prior history of academicÂ at the University,Â (2)Â that
   she hadÂ admitted guiltÂ duringÂ an early
   opportunityÂ andÂ (3)Â thatÂ sheÂ hadÂ cooperated throughout the
   process, including entering into the ASF and JSP.Â According to
   theÂ Panel, theseÂ actionsÂ and her testimonyÂ demonstratedÂ insight
   and remorse.

   TheÂ PanelÂ agreedÂ with the rationale as per the JSPÂ to backdate the
   commencement of the sanction.Â In making this decision,
   theÂ PanelÂ consideredÂ Â theÂ Studentâs admission, which occurredÂ at
   an early stage;Â Â the fact thatÂ sheÂ hadÂ not contributed to any
   delay in resolving theÂ chargeÂ and,Â Â the nature ofÂ her program.

   TheÂ PanelÂ imposed the following sanctions:Â grade assignmentÂ of
   zeroÂ in four courses; suspensionÂ from the University of Toronto from
   May 23, 2019 to August 31, 2022;Â Â notation on academic record and
   transcript from the day theÂ PanelÂ makes itsÂ Order to August 31, 2024
   or her graduation fromÂ her program, whichever occurs
   first;Â reportÂ to the Provost for publication of a notice of the
   decisionÂ andÂ sanctions imposed, with the name of theÂ Student
   withheld.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/29289
