Report #336

   DATE: July 23, 2009
   PARTIES: Z.K.,Â  (the Student) v. University of Toronto School of
   Graduate Studies
   Hearing Date(s): May 28, 2009
   Committee Members:
   Tad Brown, Chair
   Ken Davy
   Professor Ronald Kluger
   Professor Chris Koenig-Woodyard
   Professor Elizabeth M. Smyth
   Appearances:
   For the Student Appellant:
   Z.K. (the Student)
   William Reid, Counsel for the Student
   For the University of Toronto School of Graduate Studies:
   Robert Centa, Counsel for the University
   Professor Leonard Brooks
   Professor Martha Dunlop
   Hans Harding
   Professor Berry Smith
   University of Toronto School of Graduate Studies â terminate Student
   from program â failure of courseÂ  â medical injury â back injury â
   deferred examination â examination rewrite â co-op program â
   insufficient time to prepare for supplemental exam â timely notice of
   format of exam â failure to provide suitable guidance â reasonable
   decision based on evidenceÂ  â reasonable and fair in the
   circumstancesÂ  â appeal dismissed
   Appeal of a decision to terminate the Student from the Master of
   Management and Professional Accounting Program. The termination was
   based on the requirement of the Program that any student who fails more
   than two courses will automatically be asked to withdraw from the
   program. In particular at issue was the treatment of the third course
   in which the Student did not receive a passing grade. The Student was
   previously involved in an accident and injured his back. The Student
   wrote one examination and was granted a deferral for another
   examination. The Student later appealed on the basis of their medical
   condition to rewrite the final examination he had written during the
   time of illness. The deferred examination was not to be available until
   the next academic term during which the Student was to have entered the
   co-op portion of the Program. The Student requested the writing of the
   deferred examination be further deferred until after the co-op period
   had been completed because of the workload. The deferral was granted.
   The Student found out that the two examinations, the rewrite and the
   deferred examination, were to be written in the same period. The
   Student asked for a further deferral and was granted it. The Student
   failed the rewritten examination. The Student submitted that he was not
   given sufficient time to prepare for the supplemental exam, that the
   Student did not receive timely notice of the format of the examination,
   that he was unfairly disadvantaged because of the structure of the
   rewritten examination, and that the course instructor failed to provide
   him with suitable guidance was denied by the Committee. The Committee
   found the decision of the Graduate Academic Appeals Board was correct
   in rejecting the Studentâs request and was reasonable based on the
   evidence presented. The Committee found notice given to the Student was
   reasonable and that there was no requirement that students be provided
   an examination model. The Committee found the examination covered
   course material. The Committee further found the rescheduling of the
   exam was done within guidelines. The Committee held that the decision
   to terminate the Student from his program was reasonable and fair in
   the circumstances. Appeal dismissed.
   [1]View Report

References

   1. file:///media/12586
