Case No. 1107
THE DISCIPLINE APPEALS BOARD
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO

IN THE MATTER of charges of academic dishonesty made on October 22, 2020
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic
Matters, 1995 (the "Code")
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Act, 1971, S.O. 1971, c. 56 as
amended S.O. 1978, c. 88
B E T W E E N:
D

B
Appellant
- and -

UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
Respondent
REASONS FOR DECISION
Appeal Hearing Date: July 21, 2021, via Zoom
Members of the Discipline Appeals Board Panel:
Ms. Roslyn M. Tsao, Chair
Professor Allan Kaplan, Faculty Panel Member
Ms. Samantha Chang, Student Panel Member
Appearances:
Mr. Robert Centa, Assistant Discipline Counsel for University, Paliare Roland Rosenberg
Rothstein LLP
The Student

Hearing Secretary:
Mr. Christopher Lang, Director, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances, University of
Toronto

-2-

Delivered by Ms. Roslyn M. Tsao

PROCEDURAL BACKGROUND
1.

The Discipline Appeals Board of the Tribunal heard the Student's appeal in this matter on
July 21, 2021.

2.

On October 22, 2020, the Student was charged with the following academic offence (in
addition to an alternative charge under Section B.I.3(b) of the Code):
(a) On or about March 18, 2019, the Student knowingly represented as his own, an
idea or expression of an idea and/or work of another in an essay titled "Waste
Management: Comparing Mexico City, Mexico to Beijing City, China" ("Essay")
that was submitted for academic credit in POL346Y6Y 2018(9) (the "Course"),
contrary to section B.I.1(d) of the Code.

3.

On January 11, 2021, the Student, who did not appear at the hearing, was convicted of the
above offence (and the alternative charge was withdrawn) and the Panel imposed the
following penalty:
(a)

a final grade of zero in the Course;

(b)

a suspension from the University for two years (from January 11, 2021);

(c)

a notation of the sanction on the Student's academic record for three years
(from January 11, 2021); and

(d)

a report of the decision and sanctions to be provided to the Provost for
publication, with the name of the Student withheld.

4.

The Panel's Order dated January 11, 2021 (the "Order"), with written reasons to follow,
setting out the finding and penalty, was emailed to the Student on or after January 12, 2021.

5.

On January 27, 2021, the Student delivered his Notice of Appeal (the "NOA").

-36.

The Panel's Reasons for Decision dated March 19, 2021 ("Reasons") were released on or
shortly after that date.

7.

The hearing date for the Student's Appeal was, thereafter, set for the hearing date of July
21, 2021.

THE STUDENT'S APPEAL
8.

The Student delivered an NOA dated January 27, 2021 (following receipt of the Order)
within the requisite time. The Student delivered Written Submissions for Appeal dated
April 23, 2021 ("Written Submissions") (following receipt of the Reasons).

9.

The Student's NOA and Written Submissions were brief1 yet consistent with regard to the
following submissions on appeal:
(a)

That it was improper to proceed with the original hearing in the Student's
absence;

(b)

That the University is required to establish that the Student received notice
of the hearing "beyond a reasonable doubt";

(c)

That the sanction imposed on the Student, if the finding of guilt is upheld,
is unreasonable; and

(d)

That the appropriate remedy on appeal is to set aside the Panel's Order and
order a new hearing.

10.

For the reasons below, we dismiss the Student's appeal as to conviction and penalty and
confirm that the Order for suspension commence on January 11, 2021 as the Student
indicated that he withdrew from his courses in the Winter 2021 (January – April 2021)
term and has not taken courses since that time.

1

The Student advised that he had spoken about his appeal with Downtown Legal Services.

-4RELEVANT FACTS
11.

The Student was enrolled in the Course, a third-year course, in the 2018 – 2019 academic
year. Professor Sara Hughes2 was an Assistant Professor at the time at the University and
taught the Student in the Course.

12.

The Student, as were all students in the Course, referred to the syllabus and other resources
relating to academic honesty and strategies to avoid plagiarism.

13.

The assignment in question was a research paper worth 25% of the final grade (the
"Essay"). The Student submitted his Essay on March 21, 2019 through Turnitin.

14.

The Essay gave rise to Turnitin results which raised some concern. Professor Hughes
conducted a review of the Essay and concluded that the Student had "included verbatim
and nearly verbatim text in his [Essay] without appropriate attribution."3

15.

Professor Hughes met with the Student on April 1, 2019 about her concerns about the Essay
and, following such meeting, "forwarded the case to the Chair of the Department of
Political Science for further action."4

16.

The matter was referred to the Tribunal and Charges dated October 22, 2020 ("Charges")
were issued by the University against the Student.

17.

The Charges were sent by email to the Student to his utoronto address ("ROSI email"), as
set out in his University of Toronto Repository of Student Information ("ROSI").

18.

On November 19, 2020, the Office of Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances
("ADFG") emailed a Direction to Assistant Discipline Counsel and the Student advising
that the Tribunal Chair proposed to hold the hearing electronically on January 11, 2021 at

2

Professor Hughes' Affidavit of December 23, 2020 ("Professor Hughes Affidavit") was evidence before the Panel.
Paragraph 13 of Professor Hughes' Affidavit
4
Paragraph 14 of Professor Hughes' Affidavit
3

-51:45 p.m and giving the Student the opportunity to comment on or before November 26,
2020. There was no response from the Student.
19.

Accordingly, on November 26, 2020, the Tribunal Chair confirmed that the hearing was
proceeding on the afore-mentioned date and setting out a deadline of January 4, 2021 for
delivery of the University's materials and this was emailed to Student.

20.

On December 7, 2020, the ADFG emailed the formal Notice of Electronic Hearing for
January 11, 2021 at 1:45 pm to the Student.

21.

Service by email to the Student's ROSI email of the foregoing Directions and Notices were
confirmed at the hearing by way of filed Affidavits of Service with attached emails
showing the Student's ROSI email and his ROSI record setting out his ROSI email.

22.

In addition, the Affidavit of Andrew Wagg of December 4, 2020 was before the Tribunal.
Andrew Wagg is an Incident Report Architect at Information Security, Information
Technology Services at the University of Toronto. Mr. Wagg affirmed that the ROSI email
account was accessed as recently as December 2, 2020.

LEGAL ANALYSIS – GROUNDS OF APPEAL
ISSUE:

That it was improper to proceed with the original hearing in the Student's absence

SUB-ISSUE: That the University is required to establish that the Student received notice of the
hearing "beyond a reasonable doubt"
23.

The Student did not appear at the January 11th hearing and the Panel considered the
following in determining that the Student had reasonable notice of the Charges and Hearing
particulars:
(a)

Rule 9(c) of the Tribunal's Rules of Practice and Procedure permits service
of any document by way of email addressed to the student's ROSI email;

(b)

The University's Policy on Official Correspondence with Students provides
that students are responsible for maintaining a current email account on

-6ROSI and that students are expected to monitor and retrieve their emails on
a "frequent and consistent basis"5; and
(c)

The Affidavits of Service, coupled with Mr. Wagg's Affidavit, provided
evidence of service by email to the Student's ROSI email.

24.

We do not find that the Panel made any error in concluding that the University had
discharged its onus to demonstrate that the Student had reasonable notice of the Hearing
and that the Panel could, therefore, proceed in the Student's absence.

25.

We would go further and note that the Student was enrolled in courses at the University in
the Fall 2020 Term and into the Winter 2021 Term, when the various communications from
the ADFG Office were being emailed to him.

26.

The Student does not indicate in his unsworn NOA or Written Submissions that he did not
open the emails in question nor that he was not aware of the actual Hearing date. In his
Written Submissions, the Student admits that he "should have checked my University of
Toronto email more frequently…" and then claims, nevertheless, that the onus is on the
University to prove beyond a reasonable doubt that "I accessed or read any of the emails
that were sent to my UofT email account regarding the hearing".

27.

We reject the Student's argument on appeal that the University had an onus to demonstrate
that the Student had actual notice of the emails sent to him. As the Panel correctly noted,
the onus is on the University to demonstrate that the Student had reasonable notice on a
civil standard of proof, being on a balance of probabilities.

28.

It is telling that the Student opened his January 11, 2021 email with the Tribunal's Order
on guilt and penalty on or about January 11, 2021 and was able to file his Appeal well
within the deadline on January 27, 2021.

5

University of Toronto Policy on Official Correspondence with Students, September 1, 2006

-729.

During the appeal hearing, the Student initially indicated that he did not see any of the
University's appeal material (i.e., Appeal Book, Factum, Book of Authorities also sent by
email to the Student) delivered in advance of the appeal hearing. Later during the hearing,
it became evident that the Student must have reviewed the University's fresh evidence
(being a more recent Affidavit of Mr. Wagg) which had also been emailed to him within
the same period. In particular, the Student referred to seeing a list of dates in the material,
which listing was only found in the more recent affidavit.

30.

These latter two observations cause us to question whether the Student is perhaps being
less than forthright about his selective acknowledgment of emails from the University to
date.

31.

In any event, the Student provided no evidence, by way of sworn Affidavit, or otherwise
that refuted the evidence before us, on appeal, that related to the notice issue or otherwise.

32.

The University sought to introduce fresh evidence in the form of an Affidavit of Mr. Wagg
detailing the logins into the Student's ROSI email account, though did not actively pursue
this relief. We would not have allowed the fresh evidence largely because the Student
introduced no new evidence which might have warranted such fresh evidence in response.
In other words, we did not require fresh evidence to arrive at our conclusions about
reasonable notice as the record below suffices.

33.

Once satisfied that reasonable notice has been given to the Student, the Panel had
jurisdiction to proceed in the absence of the Student. We find no error with that finding.

34.

Although the Student refers to "unfairness" because he was not present at the hearing, this
is not the test for procedural fairness. The fairness standard relates to having reasonable
notice of the adjudication and, thereby, having the opportunity to attend and be heard.

ISSUE:
35.

That the sanction imposed on the Student, if the finding of guilt is upheld, is
unreasonable

We have reviewed the Reasons regarding sanction and the authorities provided to the
Panel. We find that the sanction ordered was appropriately consistent with penalties

-8imposed in similar cases, even in the case of first offences. Consistency and predictability
are valid goals in encouraging general deterrence.
36.

The Student was a third-year student at the time of the offence and can be presumed to
have been well aware of the nature and components of plagiarism.

37.

Although we are not prohibited from permitting an appellant student from seeking to
introduce fresh evidence with regard to sanction, we do not feel this to be a situation of
"special circumstances" to grant such opportunity to adduce fresh evidence where the
Student had reasonable notice of the hearing and failed to attend.6

38.

The Student advised that he had withdrawn from his courses in the Winter 2021 Term upon
receiving the Order even though the filing of his appeal stayed the operation of the Order
pending this decision.

39.

As the Student has been effectively acting as if suspended from the University since the
January 11, 2021 Order, we feel it appropriate to affirm the Order, including the
commencement date of the suspension from January 11, 2021. The University requested
that the two-year suspension be reinstated from the date of our decision. We feel that this
would unduly extend the Panel's penalty given that the Student withdrew from his courses
upon notice of the Order.

ISSUE:
40.

That the appropriate remedy on appeal is to set aside the Panel's Order and order a
new hearing

Given our findings above, we dismiss the Student's request for a new hearing.

CONCLUSION
41.

For the foregoing reasons, the appeal is dismissed and the Order of January 11, 2021 is
affirmed in its entirety.

6

University of Toronto v. M.M. (Case 543, April 14, 2011(Appeal)) at Paragraphs 61-64.

-9Dated at Toronto, this 18th day of August, 2021.

Roslyn M. Tsao
On behalf of the Discipline Appeals Board Panel

