Case #04-05-04

   DATE: April 11, 2005
   PARTIES: University of Toronto v. Ms. Y.L.
   Hearing Date(s): March 30, 2005
   Panel Members:
   Ronald G. Slaght, Q.C., Chair
   Candace Ikeda-Douglas, Student Panel Member
   Ikuko Komuro-Lee, Faculty Panel Member
   Appearances:
   Lily Harmer, for the University of Toronto
   L., appearing on her own behalf
   Trial Division - s. B.i.1(b) of Code â unauthorized aid â possession of
   formulae relevant to subject matter of exam â Agreed Statement of Facts
   â guilty plea â Joint Submission on Penalty â second academic offence â
   second offence occurred in term immediately following first offence â
   offence committed in honour system - offence discovered by chance â
   deterrent required â grade assignment of zero for course; two-year
   suspension; two-year notation on transcript; and report issued to
   Provost
   Student charged under s. B.i.1(b), and alternatively, under s. B.i.3(b)
   of the Code. The charges related to allegations that the Student
   knowingly possessed an unauthorized aid during the writing of a final
   examination, in the form of notes of formulae relevant to the subject
   matter of the exam. The parties submitted an Agreed Statement of Facts.
   The Student pleaded guilty to the charge under s. B.i.1(b) of the Code.
   The Panel considered the physical and written evidence, the Agreed
   Statement of Facts and the relevant sections of the Code and accepted
   the Studentâs plea. The parties submitted a Joint Submission With
   Respect to Sanction. The Panel considered the Joint Submission With
   Respect to Sanction and reviewed the book of tribunal decisions
   submitted by the University. In accepting the Joint Submission With
   Respect to Sanction, the Panel found that the most important feature
   was that the offence was the Studentâs second of a similar nature and
   that the second offence occurred in the academic term immediately
   following the first offence, not withstanding a warning from the Dean.
   The Panel found that the Student had agreed to the sanctions, that the
   offence was a serious offence committed in an honour system, and that
   the discovery of the offence was a matter of chance, which required
   that there be seen to be a deterrent to others who may engage in
   similar conduct. The Panel imposed a grade of zero in the course; a
   two-year suspension; a two-year notation on the Studentâs academic
   record and transcript; and that a report be issued to the Provost.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12720
