Case #544

   DATE: September 1, 2009
   PARTIES: University of Toronto v. K.L.
   Hearing Date(s): August 17, 2009
   Panel Members:
   Mr. Clifford Lax, Chair
   Prof. Annette Sanger, Faculty Member
   Mr. James Camisso, Student Member
   Appearances:
   Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel for the University
   Mr. Danny Kastner, Counsel

   Trial Division - s. B.i.1(d) of Code â plagiarism â course work â
   hearing not attended â evidentiary burden on University â effective
   notice of hearing â essay plagiarized from published paper â finding of
   guilt â non-cooperation â no remorse â gross act of plagiarism â
   University submission on penalty accepted â grade assignment of zero
   for course; two-year suspension; three-year notation; and report to
   Provost

   Student charged under s. B.i.1(d), and alternatively, under s. B.i.3(b)
   of the Code. The charges related to allegations that the Student
   submitted an essay plagiarized from a published paper. The Student did
   not attend the Hearing and did not respond to the charges. The Panel
   considered whether the University had discharged its evidentiary burden
   of establishing that effective notice of the Hearing had been provided.
   The Panel found that in order to draw the inference that the Student
   was made aware of the charges there must be evidence that the notice
   was sent to an address, postal or electronic, that was likely to come
   to the Studentâs attention. The Panel considered the Universityâs
   attempts to contact the Student and found that the Universityâs letter
   and emails were likely received by the Student. The Panel found that
   the Student probably received effective notice, both of the charges and
   of the hearing date, but chose not to participate. The Panel considered
   a review of the Studentâs essay and the published paper and found that
   the essay was almost entirely plagiarized. The Panel found the Student
   guilty of the charge under s. B.i.1(d). The Panel found that the
   Student did not cooperate with the University, did not show remorse for
   the offence, and that the offence was a gross act of plagiarism. The
   Panel accepted the Universityâs submission on penalty and imposed a
   mark of zero in the course; a two-year suspension; a three-year
   notation on the Studentâs academic record and transcript; and that a
   report be issued to the Provost.

   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12996
