THE DNTVERSITY TRIBUNAL
THE lJNTVERSITY OF TORONTO

IN THE M--4,.TTER OF charges of academic dishonesty made on October 29, 2008;
A.ND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic
Matters, 1995;
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Act, 1971, S.O. 1971, c. 56 as amended
S.O. 1978, C. 88

BETWEEN:

THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO

- and-

REASONS FOR DECISION

Members of the Panel:
Mr. Clifford Lax, Q.C., Chair
Professor Annette Sanger, Faculty Panel Member
Mr. Jamon Camisso, Student Panel Member
Appearances:
Ms. Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland
Danny Kastner, Counsel, Paliare Roland

In Attendance:
Ms. Lucy Gaspini, Academic Affairs Officer, Office of the Dean, University of Toronto
Misissauga
Ms. Kl

w•

K • 1& the Student, did not attend

Preliminary
[1]

K-

The trial Division of the University Tribunal was convened on August 17, 2009 at 1:00
p.m., in the Boardroom, Simcoe Hall to consider the two charges laid against Ms. Kl
Wal
LI under the University of Toronto Code of Beha:viour on Academic
Matters, 1995 (the "Code") by the Vice-Provost, Professor Edith Hillan.

Proof of Service of the Notice of Hearing and the Charges
[2]

Increasingly, this Tdbunal is being asked to draw an inference that the student who does
not appear at the hearing, has received notice of the hearing and of the charges to be
decided at the hearing.

[3]

As is frequently the case, the student does not update their contact information as
required by the University Policy on Official Correspondence With Students, effective
September 1, 2006. Even though students are responsible for advising the University of a
current and valid postal address, as well as the address for a University issued electronic
mail account, experience indicates that this requirement is often ignored.

[4]

The University bears the evidentiary burden of establishing that on a balance of
probabilities, the student has received effective notice. In order to discharge that burden,
it is not enough for the University to submit that there is no evidence to support the
conclusion that the student did not receive notice, as such a submission effectively shifts
the burden of proof from the University to the student. Further, to invite the Tribunal to
draw an inference based upon a lack of evidence, does not satisfy the onus cast upon the
University of establishing that the student was more likely served than not.

[5]

We were referred to only one prior decision which dealt with the University's evidentiary
burden to establish effective service. In the decision University of Toronto and F B_, released February 15, 2007 the panel judged that the content of the notice and the
timing of its attempted service, were both reasonable. In arriving at this conclusion, that
Tribunal had regard to section 6(1) of the Statutory Powers Procedure Act which requires
that "the parties to a proceeding shall be given reasonable notice of the hearing by the
Tribunal."

[6]

The requirement that the parties receive reasonable notice relates to both the contents of
the notice and the amount of time between the date of service and the day ofhea..-ring. So
for example in an earlier case, the University of Toronto and Ms.
Ki
released June 2006, the panel was concerned whether a Notice of Hearing, dated only a
week before the hearing, was reasonable under the circumstances.

0.,.

[7]

In this case, we are not concerned with the reasonableness of the University's attempts to
serve Ms. LIi, but the effectiveness of bringing to Ms. LIi's attention both the nature of
the charges and the hearing date. Therefore, even if the University's attempts were
eminently reasonable but (with the benefit of hindsight), ineffectual, can the University
then come before the Tribunal and claim to have given reasonable notice of the charges

2

even though it could offer little positive evidence to support the inference that the student
was made aware of the charges.
[8]

It is the University's burden to submit the evidence, which can support the inference to be
drawn. The inference must be based upon evidence. So for example, a lack of response,
in itself: is not evidence that the student has ignored the notification. There must be
evidence that the notice was sent to an address, postal or electronic, th.at was likely to
come to the student's attention..

[9]

In this case, the Tribunal ultimately concluded th.at it was prepared to draw an inference
that Ms. LIi had received effective notice, both of the charges and of the hearing date. In
order to fully understand the rationale for drawing such an inference, an abbreviated
chronology of relevant facts is required.
(a)

In April 2007, Ms. LIi submitted an essay for academic credit in PHL3111H1S,
which essay was plagiarized from the published work of Michael J acovides of the
Department of Philosophy, Purdue University. Ms. La made little effort to
conceal the plagiarism other than to insert an introductory sentence preceding the
plagiarized text. Her bibliography of sources contains two references, neither of
them being Professor Jacovides' work.

(b)

'While she was required to meet with her course instructor before submitting her
essay, she did not do so.

( c)

Professor Ainslie, the course instructor attempted to communicate with Ms. La
by email but his attempts were unsuccessful as the address she had provided was
not functioning. Therefore, as a result of a telephone call, Professor Ainslie
arranged to meet with Ms. L■ on May 11, 2007 at 3 :00 p.m. to discuss his
concerns regarding the essay she had submitted to him. Ms. L■ did not attend the
meeting.

_ ( d)

Thereafter, the University made numerous attempts to communicate with Ms. 111
at her Toronto address for the purpose of convening a meeting with the Dean's
Designate in accordance with section C.I.(a)(5) of the Code. The University was
unaware that Ms. LI had returned to live in Hong Kong.

(e)

In an email dated June 27, 2007 from Robert Gardin of the Registrar's office, Ms.

La was advised that the University had been attempting to send her information
by mail and she was asked to update her address on the repository of student
information.
(f)

On July 2, 2007, Ms. LIi responded to the June 27, 2007 email providing an
address in Hong Kong and because her response was sent by email, she also
provided an email address through which she could be reached.

{g)

Ms. La's response of July 2, 2007 indicated that she knew that the University was
trying to get in touch with her and she acknowledged that she would update her

3

repository of student information record to reflect both her address and :::i.er email
account. She subsequently did update her sto.dent information.
(h)

Subsequently, by letter dated July 11, 2007 Lynn Snowden, Assistant Dea:1 at the
University of Toronto Mississauga Campus vvrote to Ms. L■ at the address which
Ms. LIi had provided in her email of July 2, 2007. Ms. Snowden's letter
explicitly refers to a concern that the research paper submitted for academic credit
may have contained plagiarized material and the student was invited to discuss the
allegation with Ms. Snowden or with Ms. Snowden's representative. Tb.ere was
no reply from Ms. LB to Ms. Snowden' s letter. However, Ms. Snowden' s letter
which went out by registered mail was not returned to the sender.

(i)

Subsequent correspondence, both by post and by email (addressed to the email
address from which KIIILI had sent her July 2, 2007 email to the University of
Toronto produced no responses.

[10]

The Tribunal concludes that it is entitled to draw the inference that Ms. Snowden's letter
of July 11, 2007 sent by registered mail and not returned., was in fact received by Ms. LIi.
Further, the Tribunal concludes that the email correspondence sent to Ms. LIi' s email
account'
@hotmail.com" likely came to Ms. LIi's attention and her refusal
to respond was a strategic decision.

[11]

Therefore we have concluded that on a balance of probabilities, it is more likely than not
that Ms. LIi did in fact receive notice of the charges and of this hearing, but has chosen to
not participate.

Hearing on the Facts
[12]

The charges dated October 29, 2008 are as follows:
1. In or about April, 2007, you knowingly represented as your own an idea or expression
of an idea or work of another in connection with an essay entitled "How does Locke
think that we acquire the Idea of Power?" ("Essay", which you submitted for
academic credit in PHL311H1S, contrary to Section B.I.l.(d) of the Code.
2. In the alternative, in or about April, 2007, you knowingly engaged in a form of
cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or misrepresentation not
otherwise described in the Code, in connection with the Essay which you submitted
for academic creditinPHL311HlS, contrary to SectionB.1.3.(b) ofthe Code.

[13]

A comparison of Ms. LIi's term paper and the published work of Michael Jacovides,
leaves no doubt that Ms. La's paper, but for the first sentence, was entirely plagiarized.

[14]

Therefore, the first charge has been made out and there is no need to consider the
alternative charge.

4

Decision of the Tribunal

[15]

The Student is guilty on Charge #1 dated October 29, 2008.

Sanction

[ 16]

The student has not cooperated with the University nor has the student shown any
remorse for the offence. As stated above, this was a gross act of plagiarism in that the
student did not even bother to inject any of her own thoughts, observations or conclusions
but simply lifted the entire paper from the text of Professor Jacovides.

[17]

Obviously, there is a need to deter others from committing a similar offence.

[18]

The University's counsel has suggested that an appropriate penalty would be for the
student to receive a grade of zero on the course in question, that she be suspended from
the University of Toronto for two years and that there be a notation on her academic
record referencing this conviction for a period of three years.

[19]

In view of all the facts set out above, this Tribunal agrees with the University's counsel
submission as to penalty. Indeed, considering all of Ms. L■' s conduct in this matter, the
Tribunal might well have accepted a penalty submission with more serious consequences
for the student. We mention this only because plagiarism appears to be an increasing
problem and even though the students are repeatedly warned about the consequences of
this academic offence, some, like Ms. LI., have decided to ignore these warnings. Nor
does it appear that the penalties imposed in the past, have had the desired deterrent effect.

[20]

The panel therefore imposes the following sanctions:
1.

That the student receive a grade of zero in PHL3 l 1Hl S.

2.

Suspension from the University for a period of two years.

3.

A three year notation on her transcript; and

4.

This matter shall be reported to the Provost for publication in the University
newspapers with the name of the student withheld.

Date: September 1, 2009

5

