Case 718 - Appeal

DATE:

   February 3, 2016

PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v O.K.

Hearing Date(s):

   November 11, 2015

Panel Members:

   Patricia D.S. Jackson, Chair
   Jenna Jacobson, Student Member
   Beth Martin, Student Member
   Elizabeth Peter, Faculty Member

Appearances:

   Rob Centa, for the Appellant, the University of Toronto

   Appeal by the University from a [1]Tribunal decision in which the
   Student was acquitted of two plagiarism charges. The University
   submitted that the Tribunal erred in concluding that plagiarism under
   s. B.i.1(d) of the Code requires an âelement of theft.â The University
   also argued that the ârule against multiple convictionsâ does not apply
   to prevent a conviction of plagiarism in respect of the same acts
   giving rise to a conviction for unauthorized assistance. The University
   did not seek any additional penalty in respect of the plagiarism
   offences. The Student did not attend the appeal hearing, and the
   Tribunal found that reasonable notice had been provided pursuant to the
   Rules of Practice and Procedure .

   The issues on appeal relate to the Studentâs submission of a partial
   essay draft and the subsequent final essay in the Course. At the Trial
   Division, the Tribunal found the Student guilty of unauthorized aid
   offences, but it declined to convict the Student of the plagiarism
   offences. In coming to that conclusion, the Tribunal noted that
   University counsel was not aware of any other cases in which a student
   had been convicted both of obtaining unauthorized assistance and of
   plagiarism in circumstances where a student submitted the work of
   another person. The Tribunal also noted that plagiarism necessarily
   includes the theft of misappropriation of the work of another; as there
   was no suggestion that the Student lacked permission from the Essay
   writer to use his idea, there was no basis upon which the Student could
   be convicted of the offence of plagiarism.

   The Board found that the University had established the offence of
   plagiarism. The Student submitted the ideas, expression of ideas and
   work of another person without attribution or any other indication that
   they were not hers. The Board disagreed with the Tribunal regarding its
   suggested requirement to establish the additional element of theft,
   noting that there is no element of theft contained in the section of
   the Code that defines the offence of plagiarism. The Board emphasized
   that the Tribunalâs interpretation of the word âpurloiningâ as found in
   the explanatory Appendix for s. B.i.1(d) is not intended to derogate or
   otherwise modify the plagiarism offence as set out in the Code . The
   Board noted that the Tribunalâs interpretation of the plagiarism
   offence is completely unworkable and undesirable in the academic
   setting; if the element of theft is required to make out the offence of
   plagiarism, then the University would be unreasonably required in every
   case to prove that the author did not consent to the studentâs use of
   his or her idea, expression or work.

   The Board found that the rule against multiple convictions prevents a
   conviction for plagiarism in respect of the same acts giving rise to a
   conviction of unauthorized assistance. The Board noted that this issue
   had not been previously addressed in decisions of the University
   Tribunal at either level. The Board cautioned against referring to
   cases that were decided on the basis of an agreed statement of facts
   and an agreement as to which charges would proceed and which would be
   withdrawn. The rule against multiple convictions is applicable where
   there is a relationship of sufficient proximity between (1) the facts
   and (2) the offences which form the basis of the two or more charges.
   The charges of plagiarism and unauthorized assistance arose from the
   same act. Rather than creating any additional or distinguishing
   elements to the offence of unauthorized assistance, the offence of
   plagiarism on the facts of this case was in effect a particular method
   of obtaining unauthorized assistance. The Panel concluded that there
   was a sufficient nexus between the offences and the facts on which they
   were based to engage the rule against multiple convictions.

   The Board found that the Tribunal erred in concluding that the evidence
   did not establish an offence of plagiarism, but that the rule against
   multiple convictions prevents a conviction for both the unauthorized
   assistance offences and plagiarism offences. Appeal dismissed.
   [2]View Case

References

   1. file:///processes/acdiscipline/Case_Summaries/University_Tribunal_Case_Summaries_Listed_by_Year__2000_-_Present_/2014-2015/Case__718.htm
   2. file:///media/13068
