Case 1320

   DATE:

   June 21, 2022

   PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v. H.K. ("the Student")

   HEARING DATE:

   April 22, 2022, via Zoom

   PANEL MEMBERS :

   Mr. Christopher Wirth, Chair
   Dr. Pascal van Lieshout, Faculty Panel Member
   Mr. Yazan Zamel, Student Panel Member

   APPEARANCES:

   Ms. Tina Lie, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg
   Rothstein LLP
   Mr. William Webb, Co-Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg Rothstein LLP

   NOT IN ATTENDANCE:

   The Student

   HEARING SECRETARY:

   Ms. Carmelle Salomon-Labbe, Associate Director, Office of Appeals,
   Discipline and Faculty Grievances

   The Student‚Øwas charged under s. B.i.1(d) of the‚ØCode of Behaviour on
   Academic Matters, 1995‚Ø(the ‚Code‚) on the basis that he knowingly
   represented as his own an idea or expression of an idea, and/or the
   work of another in a final exam. In the alternative, the Student was
   charged under s. B.i.1(b) of the Code on the basis that he knowingly
   obtained unauthorized assistance in connection with the final exam. In
   the further alternative, the Student engaged in a form of cheating,
   academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or misrepresentation in order
   to‚Øobtain academic credit or other academic advantage‚Øin connection
   with a final exam.

   The Panel adjourned the hearing for fifteen minutes for the Student to
   arrive and for counsel to attempt to obtain information as to whether
   the Student intended to attend the hearing. When the hearing resumed,
   the Student was not in attendance and counsel was able to advise the
   Panel that he has been in communication with the Student who advised
   that he was aware of the hearing but did not intend to appear. Given
   this evidence, the Panel decided to proceed with the hearing in the
   Student‚s absence.

   The hearing proceeded on the basis of an Agreed Statement of Fact
   (‚ASF‚). The ASF outlined that the Professor who taught the course for
   which the final exam in question was submitted reviewed the exams and
   found that an answer to one of the questions on the exam was posted to
   Chegg.com. Upon review of the Student‚s exam, the Professor found that
   there were substantial similarities between the Student‚s answer and
   the answer posted on Chegg.com. The ASF further outlined that the
   Student met with the Dean‚s Designate regarding the allegations and
   during the meeting, the Student admitted that he obtained unauthorized
   assistance in the exam from Chegg.com. The Panel noted that in the ASF
   the Student admitted to knowingly accessing Chegg.com during the exam,
   used answers that had been posted to Chegg.com, represented as his own
   an idea or expression of an idea or work of another in the exam,
   committed plagiarism, and obtained unauthorized assistance in the exam.
   Furthermore, the Panel noted that the Student acknowledged that he
   signed the ASF freely and voluntarily, knowing of the potentially
   consequences, and that he had been given the opportunity to seek the
   advice of counsel. Based on the evidence, the submissions of counsel
   for the University, and the ASF, the Panel found the Student guilty of
   one count of knowingly representing as his own idea or expression of an
   idea or work of another in an exam, contrary to s. B.i.1(d) of the
   Code. The University withdrew the charges made in the alternative and
   the further alternative.

   In determining sanction, the Panel received an Agreed Statement of
   Facts on Penalty (‚ASFP‚) and a Joint Submission on Penalty (‚JSP‚).
   The Panel noted that the ASFP outlined that the Student had three prior
   offences which were all resolved at the divisional level. The Panel
   considered the factors on determining sanction outlined in the
   University of Toronto v. Mr. C. (Case No. 1976/77-3, November 5, 1976)
   as well as other decisions of the Tribunal that involved similar
   misconduct. The Panel noted that by cheating on the exam, the Student
   undermined the grades-based system of evaluation and broke the honour
   code that is essential to modern learning. Furthermore, in today‚s
   online world, it is easy for students to find new ways to access
   unauthorized assistance and so any sanction must denounce cheating and
   deter others in order to protect the academic integrity of the
   University. The Panel further noted that students must understand that
   this type of misconduct will have serious repercussions in order to
   dissuade them from the temptation to cheat. The Panel was satisfied
   that the JSP was appropriate and reasonable in the circumstances. The
   Panel imposed the following sanctions: a final grade of zero in the
   course, a three-year suspension; a notation on the transcript until
   graduation, and a report to the Provost for publication.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/30605
