Case No: 1320
THE UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
IN THE MATTER OF charges of academic dishonesty filed on January 11, 2022,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic
Matters, 1995,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Act, 1971, S.O. 1971, c. 56 as
amended S.O. 1978, c. 88
B E T W E E N:
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
- AND H

K

REASONS FOR DECISION
Hearing Date: April 22, 2022, via Zoom
Panel Members:
Mr. Christopher Wirth, Chair
Dr. Pascal van Lieshout, Faculty Panel Member
Mr. Yazan Zamel, Student Panel Member
Appearances:
Ms. Tina Lie, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg Rothstein LLP
Mr. William Webb, Co-Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg Rothstein LLP
Hearing Secretary:
Ms. Carmelle Salomon-Labbé, Associate Director, Office of Appeals, Discipline and
Faculty Grievances
Not In Attendance:
Mr. H
K

Charges and Particulars
A Panel of the Trial Division of the University Tribunal was convened on April 22,
2022 by videoconference to consider charges brought by the University of Toronto
(the “University”) against H

K

(the “Student”) under the University’s Code

of Behaviour on Academic Matters, 1995 (the “Code”). The charges alleged
against the Student as filed by the Provost on January 11, 2022 are as follows:
1.

On or about December 14, 2020, you knowingly represented as your own an idea
or expression of an idea or work of another in the final exam in CHM110H5 (the
“Course”), contrary to section B.I.1(d) of the Code.

2.

In the alternative, on or about December 14, 2020, you knowingly obtained
unauthorized assistance in connection with the final exam in the Course, contrary
to section B.I.1(b) of the Code.

3.

In the further alternative, on or about December 14, 2020, you knowingly engaged
in a form of cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or
misrepresentation not otherwise described in the Code in order to obtain academic
credit or other academic advantage of any kind in connection with the final exam
in the Course, contrary to section B.I.3(b) of the Code.

The particulars related to charges 1, 2 and 3 are as follows:
1.

At all material times you were a student enrolled at the University of Toronto
Mississauga.

2.

In Fall 2020, you enrolled in CHM110H5 (Chemical Principles 1).

3.

Students in the Course were required to write a final exam, worth 24% of their final
grades. The final exam was administered online. The questions were released on
December 8, 2020 and students had until December 14, 2020 to submit their
answers. The exam was open book, but students were not permitted to access
any sources apart from the course materials.

4.

On or about December 14, 2020, you submitted your final exam in the Course.

2

5.

You submitted your final exam:
(a)

to obtain academic credit;

(b)

knowing that it contained ideas, expressions of ideas or work which were not
your own, but were the ideas, expressions of ideas or work of others,
including the author of answers that were posted on Chegg.com, which is a
website that allows subscribers to post questions on the site and to view
questions and answers posted on the site (the “Chegg Source”); and

(c)

knowing that you did not properly reference the ideas, expressions of ideas
or work that you drew from the Chegg Source or from others.

6.

You knew that the Chegg Source was not an authorized source to which you were
allowed to refer in completing the final exam.

7.

You knowingly obtained unauthorized assistance from the Chegg Source or from
others.

8.

You knowingly submitted your final exam with the intention that the University of
Toronto Mississauga rely on it as containing your own ideas or work in considering
the appropriate academic credit to be assigned to your work.

Service
The Student was not in attendance at the outset of the hearing, and as a result,
the Panel adjourned the hearing for 15 minutes to see if he would arrive in the
interim and for Co-Counsel for the University to attempt to obtain information as to
whether the Student intended to attend the hearing. When the hearing resumed,
the Student was still not in attendance but Co-Counsel advised the Panel that he
had been in communication with the Student who advised that he was aware of
the hearing and did not intend to attend. The Panel was provided with an email
exchange with the Student confirming this, which was entered into evidence as
Exhibit #2. Given this, the Panel decided to proceed with the hearing in the
Student’s absence.

3

The Evidence
The University entered into evidence an Agreed Statement of Facts which it had
agreed to with the Student which (without the tabbed documents) provides as
follows:
1.

For the purposes of this hearing under the Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters
(“Code”), the Provost of the University of Toronto and [the Student]have prepared
this Agreed Statement of Facts (“ASF”) and a Joint Book of Documents (“JBD”).
The Provost and the Student agree that:
(a)

each document contained in the JBD may be admitted into evidence before
the Tribunal for all purposes, including for the truth of the document’s
contents, without further need to prove the document; and

(b)

if a document indicates that it was sent or received by someone, that is prima
facie proof that the document was sent and received as indicated.

2.

This hearing arises out of charges of academic misconduct filed by the Provost on
January 11, 2022. A copy of the charges is included in the JBD at Tab 1.

3.

The Student acknowledges that he received a copy of the charges, waives the
reading of the charges, and pleads guilty to all charges.

4.

The Provost agrees that if the Tribunal returns a conviction on charge #1, the
Provost will withdraw charges #2, and #3.

5.

The Student accepts that he has been provided with reasonable notice of the
hearing in this matter. A copy of the notice of hearing in this proceeding is included
in the JBD at Tab 2.

A.

The Student’s academic record

6.

At all material times, the Student was a student enrolled at the University of Toronto
Mississauga. A copy of the Student’s academic record, dated January 24, 2022,
is included in the JBD at Tab 3.

B.

The Course

4

7.

In Fall 2020, the Student enrolled in CHM110H5 (Chemical Principles 1) (the
“Course”), which was taught by Professor Judith Poe. A copy of the course
syllabus is included in the JBD at Tab 4.

8.

Students were evaluated on the basis of experiments (worth 20%), quizzes (worth
15%), two term tests (worth 10% each), laboratory simulations (worth 21%), and a
final exam (worth 24%) (the “Exam”).

9.

The syllabus contained a section on Academic Integrity (on page 3), which stated,
among other things, that students were required to know the rules in the Code.

C.

The Exam

10.

The Exam was administered online. The Exam was released on December 8, 2020
and students had until December 14, 2020 to submit their answers.

11.

The Exam was open book, but students were not permitted to access any sources
apart from the course materials. The front page of the Exam explicitly warned that
use of any other sources would be considered an academic offence:
4. This is an open-book examination. All of the factual material that you need to answer
these questions is found in the textbook, the course manual, your lecture notes and
the lecture slides. Of course the key ingredient is your grey matter, used to process
that factual material.
5. ALLOWED AIDS: The only aids allowed for this exam are the Course Manual, the
course textbook, your lecture notes, the lecture slides and lecture videos, your non–
programmable calculator, and the camera feature of your phone or tablet or scanner
for taking pictures. Use of any other source of information and communication with any
other persons will be considered an academic offense. I understand that the temptation
to communicate will be strong. RESIST IT. Be sure to sign the Academic Integrity
checklist found on the last page of this document. [Emphasis added]

12.

The Exam required students to sign an academic integrity checklist, which stated:
I confirm that:
□ I have used only those aids listed on the first page of this test as allowed. I did not
communicate with anyone during the test, either in person or electronically.
□ If I used the words of another (e.g., instructor or textbook), I have acknowledged this with
quotation marks and proper citation.
□ If paraphrasing the work of others, I used my own words (not merely using synonyms or
rearranging the sentence structure) and have cited the source of the idea.

5

□ This is the final version of my test and not a draft.
□ I have kept and will continue to keep my work to myself and did not/will not share answers
or content with others, unless otherwise directed by my instructor.
□ I understand the consequences of violating the University’s academic integrity policies
as outlined in the Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters.
By signing this form I agree that the statements above are true.

13.

On December 14, 2020, the Student submitted his Exam, and signed the academic
integrity checklist (on page 17). A copy of the Student’s Exam is included in the
JBD at Tab 5.

D.

Chegg.com

14.

Chegg.com is a subscription based website that allows students to post problems
to the site (“Askers”), which are then answered by so-called “experts”. Subscribers
are also able to access the questions and answers posted by others on the site
(“Viewers”). The webpage advertises that a “Chegg Study” subscription costs
$14.95/month and will allow subscribers to “take a photo of your question and get
an answer in as little as 30 mins” from an “expert”. A copy of the chegg.com/study
webpage is included in the JBD at Tab 6.

15.

When Professor Poe reviewed the exams, they found that an answer to Question
5(c) from the Exam had been posted on Chegg.com. Professor Poe found that
there were substantial similarities between the Student’s answers to Question 5(c)
and the answer that had been posted on Chegg.com. Whereas Question 5(c) asks
for a mass calculation, the Student and Chegg.com used a volume calculation and
provided the same incorrect answer. A copy of the Chegg.com answer is included
in the JBD at Tab 7.

16.

A chart comparing the Student’s answer and the Chegg.com answer to Question
5(c) is as follows:

6

Student’s Answers (Tab 6)

Chegg.com Answer (Tab 7)

Student’s Answers (Tab 6)

Chegg.com Answer (Tab 7)

8

Student’s Answers (Tab 6)

Chegg.com Answer (Tab 7)

9

E.

Meeting with the Dean’s Designate

17.

On May 25, 2021, the Student met with Michael Georges, Dean’s Designate for
Academic Offences at the University of Toronto Mississauga. Professor Georges
read him the required warnings from the Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters.

18.

During the meeting, the Student admitted that he had obtained unauthorized
assistance in the Exam from Chegg.com. The Student stated that he was not
thinking straight during the Course.

F.

Admissions and acknowledgements

19.

The Student admits that:
(a)

he knowingly accessed Chegg.com during the Exam, and in doing so:
(i)

he paid for a Chegg.com subscription;

(ii)

he viewed answers that had been posted to Chegg.com;

(iii)

he used the answers that had been posted to Chegg.com in his
answer to Question 5(c) on the Exam;

(b)

he knowingly represented as his own an idea or expression of an idea or
work of another (the author of the Chegg.com answer) in the Exam;

20.

(c)

he committed plagiarism in the Exam; and

(d)

he obtained unauthorized assistance in the Exam.

The Student acknowledges that he is signing this ASF freely and voluntarily,
knowing of the potential consequences he faces, and that he has been given the
opportunity to seek the advice of counsel before doing so.

21.

The Student acknowledges that the Provost has made no representations to him
regarding what penalty she will seek in this proceeding.

University’s Submissions
Co-Counsel submitted that the evidence, along with the Student’s admissions,
support a finding on the balance of probabilities that the Student committed the
academic offences as alleged.
Standard of Proof
The onus is on the University to establish, based upon clear and convincing
evidence on a balance of probabilities, that the academic offences charged have
been committed.
Decision of the Tribunal
Based on the evidence, the submissions of the Co-Counsel for the University and
the Panel’s review of the Agreed Statement of Facts, the Book of Documents and
Exhibit #2, the Student was found guilty of one count of knowingly representing as
his own an idea or expression of an idea or work of another in the final exam in
CHM110H5, contrary to section B.I.1(d) of the Code as alleged in Charge 1 filed
by the Provost on January 11, 2022. Given this finding, the University withdrew
Charges 2 and 3.
Reasons for Decision
Although the Exam was open book, the Student was not permitted to access any
sources apart from the course materials. The front page of the Exam explicitly
warned that use of any other sources would be considered an academic offence
and clearly stated which aids were allowed and also contained a lengthy statement
on academic integrity which clearly instructed the students that it was an individual
Exam, and that they could not communicate with anyone during it, either in person
or electronically, which were all examples of actions which would violate academic
integrity.
The Exam also required students to sign an academic integrity checklist, which
stated:

11

I confirm that:
□ I have used only those aids listed on the first page of this test as allowed. I did
not communicate with anyone during the test, either in person or electronically.
□ If I used the words of another (e.g., instructor or textbook), I have acknowledged
this with quotation marks and proper citation.
□ If paraphrasing the work of others, I used my own words (not merely using
synonyms or rearranging the sentence structure) and have cited the source of the
idea.
□ This is the final version of my test and not a draft.
□ I have kept and will continue to keep my work to myself and did not/will not share
answers or content with others, unless otherwise directed by my instructor.
□ I understand the consequences of violating the University’s academic integrity
policies as outlined in the Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters.
By signing this form I agree that the statements above are true.

On December 14, 2020, the Student submitted his Exam, and signed the academic
integrity checklist.
Despite this, the Student admitted that:
(a)

he knowingly accessed Chegg.com during the Exam, and in doing so:
(i)

he paid for a Chegg.com subscription;

(ii)

he viewed answers that had been posted to Chegg.com;

(iii) he used the answers that had been posted to Chegg.com in his
answer to Question 5(c) on the Exam;
(b)

he knowingly represented as his own an idea or expression of an idea or
work of another (the author of the Chegg.com answer) in the Exam;

(c)

he committed plagiarism in the Exam; and

(d)

he obtained unauthorized assistance in the Exam.

12

As such, the Panel was satisfied on the balance of probabilities that the Student
committed the academic offence of knowingly representing as his own an idea or
expression of an idea or work of another in the final exam in CHM110H5, contrary
to section B.I.1(d) of the Code as alleged in Charge 1 filed by the Provost on
January 11, 2022.
Sanction
The University’s Evidence
The University and the Student entered into an Agreed Statement of Facts on
Penalty which provides as follows:
1.

For the purposes of this hearing under the Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters
(“Code”), the Provost of the University of Toronto and [the Student] have prepared
this Agreed Statement of Facts on Penalty (“ASFP”). The Provost and the Student
agree that:
(a)

each document attached to this ASFP may be admitted into evidence before
the Tribunal for all purposes, including for the truth of the document’s
contents, without further need to prove the document; and

(b)

if a document indicates that it was sent or received by someone, that is prima
facie proof that the document was sent and received as indicated.

2.

The University of Toronto Mississauga (“UTM”) maintains a database of
allegations of academic misconduct that have been made against students. There
is a Discipline Case Report for each allegation in the database, which records the
details relating to the allegation and the outcome.

A.

Prior offence 1: unauthorized assistance in MAT135H5S

3.

In Winter 2020, the Student registered in MAT135H5S (“MAT135”).

4.

On March 29, 2020, the Student submitted an assignment in MAT135, which was
worth 2% of his final grade in the course.

13

5.

On August 31, 2020, the Student admitted to the offence of obtaining unauthorized
assistance in the assignment. The admission form states: “I understand that a
subsequent allegation of academic misconduct will be treated as a second offence
and sanctioned accordingly.” A copy of the signed admission form is attached to
this ASFP at Tab 1.

6.

The case was resolved at the divisional level. The Student received a sanction of
a grade of zero on the assignment. A copy of the Discipline Case Report for this
offence is attached to this ASFP at Tab 2.

B.

Prior offence 2: unauthorized assistance in MAT135H5S

7.

In April 2020, the Student submitted his final exam in MAT135, which was worth
40% of his final grade in the course.

8.

On January 5, 2021, the Student met with the Dean’s Designate at UTM. During
the meeting, the Student admitted to obtaining unauthorized assistance to
complete the final exam in MAT135. The case was resolved at the divisional level.
The Student received a sanction of a grade of zero in the course and a transcript
notation for 12 months. A copy of the Discipline Case Report for this offence is
attached to this ASFP at Tab 3.

C.

Prior offence 3: plagiarism in CHM110H5F

9.

In Fall 2020, the Student enrolled in CHM110H5F (“CHM110”).

10.

On October 7, 2020, the Student submitted an assignment worth 10% of his final
grade in the course.

11.

On January 5, 2021, the Student met with the Dean’s Designate at UTM. During
the meeting, the Student admitted to submitting the same work in two different
courses without the approval of the instructor in connection with the assignment.
The case was resolved at the divisional level. The Student received a sanction of
a grade of zero in CHM110, an eight month suspension from May 1 to December
31, 2021 and a transcript notation for 12 months. A copy of the Discipline Case
Report for this offence is attached to this ASFP at Tab 4.

14

12.

On January 5, 2021, the Office of the Dean at UTM sent the Student a letter
confirming the sanctions imposed in connection with the final exam in MAT135 and
the assignment in CHM110. The letter stated in part:
As you are now aware, obtaining unauthorized assistance is considered a
serious offence under the Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters (Code)
and would normally be severely sanctioned. It is essential for you to know
that I reviewed the case again, including the Dean's Designate's record of
his meeting with you in which you admit you contravened the Code. I
appreciate that you were forthcoming with the truth and remorseful of your
actions. Moreover, I believe that you have learned a valuable lesson and
that there will be no repetition of similar behaviour in the future. It is
imperative that you understand that the penalty recommended by my
designate was appropriate, and more lenient than what is envisaged in the
Provost's Guidelines (Appendix "C").[…]
[…]
I trust that you have had time to reflect on the seriousness of this incident
and will not commit another academic offence. Please be advised that any
subsequent allegations of offence are usually referred directly to the
Tribunal for investigation. I hope that you will do everything in your power
to make a success of your academic career at the University of Toronto
Mississauga.

13.

A copy of the resolution letter is attached to this ASFP at Tab 5.

D.

Acknowledgements

14.

The Student acknowledges that he is signing this ASFP freely and voluntarily,
knowing of the potential consequences he faces, and that he has been given the
opportunity to seek the advice of counsel before doing so.

The University and the Student further entered into a Joint Submission on Penalty
which provides as follows:
1.

For the purposes of this hearing under the Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters
("Code"), the Provost of the University of Toronto (the "Provost") and [the Student]
have prepared this Joint Submission on Penalty ("JSP").

2.

The Provost and the Student submit that, in all the circumstances of his case, it is
appropriate that the University Tribunal impose the following sanctions on the
Student:
(a)

final grade of zero in the course CHM110H5 in Fall 2020;

15

(b)

the Student will be suspended from the University of Toronto for a period
of 3 years, commencing on May 1, 2022 and ending on April 30, 2025; and

(c)

this sanction will be recorded on the Student's academic record and
transcript from the date of the Tribunal's order until graduation.

3.

The parties agree that it is appropriate for this case to be reported to the Provost
for publication of a notice of the decision of the Tribunal and the sanction imposed
in the University of Toronto newspapers, with the name of the Student withheld.

Acknowledgements
4.

The Student acknowledges that:
(a)

the Provost has advised him of his right to obtain legal counsel and that he
has been given the opportunity to obtain such counsel; and

(b)

he is signing this JSP freely and voluntarily, knowing of the potential
consequences he faces.

The Book of Documents by the University provided to the Panel contained a
number of prior decisions of this Tribunal and a chart summarizing them.
Co-Counsel for the University reviewed with the Panel the principles relevant to
joint submissions on penalty and the chart summarizing the sanctions which have
been given to students by this Tribunal in prior similar cases.
Co-Counsel also reviewed with the Tribunal the principles relative to sanction as
set out in The University of Toronto and Mr. C. (Case No. 1976/77-3, November 5,
1976) (“Mr. C.”), namely:
(a)

The character of the Student;

(b)

The likelihood of a repetition of the offence;

(c)

The nature of the offence committed;

(d)

Any extenuating circumstances;

16

(e)

The detriment to the University caused by the misconduct; and

(f)

The need for general deterrence.

In this regard, Co-Counsel submitted that the Student’s conduct was serious and
deliberate, however, the Student had admitted his conduct at the meeting with the
Dean’s designate, had demonstrated remorse, had entered into an Agreed
Statement of Facts and Joint Submission on Penalty with the University, and his
conduct mostly occurred during the early days of the pandemic. This was the
Student’s fourth offence and so a significant sanction was warranted. It was also
highly concerning that two of those offences occurred after the Student had already
received a warning. The proposed penalty was also in the range of the sanctions
imposed by this Tribunal in similar circumstances.
Sanction Decision
After deliberations, the Panel accepted the Joint Submission on Penalty and
ordered that the following sanctions shall be imposed on the Student:
(a)

a final grade of zero in the course CHM110H5 in Fall 2020;

(b)

the Student will be suspended from the University of Toronto for a period of
3 years, commencing on May 1, 2022 and ending on April 30, 2025;

(c)

this sanction will be recorded on the Student's academic record and
transcript from the date of the Tribunal's order until graduation; and

(d)

that this case be reported to the Provost for publication of a notice of the
decision of the Tribunal and the sanction imposed in the University of
Toronto newspapers, with the name of the Student withheld.

An Order was signed at the hearing by the Panel to this effect.
Reasons for Sanction

17

The Panel considered the factors and principles relevant to sanction in Mr. C,
supra, as set out above.
In addition to these factors, the Panel considered the other decisions of this
Tribunal involving similar misconduct as contained in the University’s Book of
Documents and the sanctions imposed. However, the Panel remained cognizant
of the fact that no two cases are identical and that it is not bound by past decisions
of this Tribunal. However, the Tribunal does try to develop a consistent body of
cases so that students are treated fairly and consistently in similar circumstances.
As a result, the Panel was satisfied that the Joint Submission on Penalty was
appropriate and reasonable in the circumstances.
By cheating on the Exam, the Student undermined the grades-based system of
evaluation and broke the honour code that is essential to modern learning. In that
regard, the pandemic and the resulting required online learning provides more
opportunities for students to cheat, requiring the University to go to considerable
lengths to detect and uncover students’ misconduct.
As this Tribunal has stated in other decisions, in today’s online world, it is easy for
students to find new ways to access unauthorized assistance and so any sanction
must denounce cheating on tests and deter others in order to protect the academic
integrity of the University. Students must understand that this kind of misconduct
will have serious repercussions, so that they will be dissuaded from the temptation
to consider cheating.
Dated at Toronto, this 20th day of June 2022

Original signed by:
______________________________________
Mr. Christopher Wirth, Chair
On behalf of the Panel

18

