Case #594

   DATE: August 31, 2011
   PARTIES: University of Toronto v. B.P
   Hearing Date(s): August 12, 2010
   Panel Members:
   Roslyn M. Tsao, Chair
   Professor Paul Cooper, Faculty Panel Member
   Gillian Reiss, Student Panel Member
   Appearances:
   Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel, for the University
   B.P, the Student
   In Attendance:
   Professor John Britton, Deanâs Designate
   Professor Denis Smyth, Course Instructor
   Alexandra Lucc, Course Teaching Assistant
   Trial Division â s. B.I.1.(d); s. B.I.1(f)); s. B.I.3(b) of Code â
   plagiarism â portions copied verbatim or close to verbatim â concocted
   sources â hearing attended â Agreed Statement of Facts â guilty plea â
   Joint Submission on PenaltyÂ  â Joint Submission on Penalty accepted
   -Â  grade assignment of zero for course; two-year suspension; two-year
   notation on transcript; and report to Provost
   Student charged with three offences under s. B.I.1(d), s. B.I.1(f), and
   s. B.I.3(b)of the Code. The charges related to the allegations that the
   Student plagiarised significant portions of a paper and that the
   Student included concocted sources to give the impression that more
   sources were referred to. The matter proceeded on an Agreed Statement
   of Facts. The Student pleaded guilty to two charges under s. B.I.1.(d)
   and s. B.I.1(f) of the Code. As a result, the University withdrew the
   alternative charge of cheating as per s. B.I.3(b) of the Code. The
   Panel accepted the guilty plea based on the Agreed Statement of Facts.
   After the Student entered a guilty plea, the University withdrew the
   charge under s. B.I.3(b). The Panel further accepted the Joint
   Submission on Penalty submitted by the University and the Student. The
   Panel imposed a grade of zero in the course; a two-year suspension; a
   two-year notation on the Studentâs academic record and transcript; and
   that a report be issued to the Provost.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12754
