UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
TRIAL DIVISION
IN THE MATTER of charges of academic dishonesty made on April l 4, 20 l 0
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic
Matters, 1995,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Act, 1971, S.O. 1971, c. 56 as amended

s.o. 1978, c. 88

BETWEEN:
UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO (the "University")
- andB

p

(the "Student")

Hearing Date: August 12, 2010
Members of the Panel:
Ms. Roslyn M. Tsao, Bal'l'ister and Solicitor, Chair
Professor Paul Cooper, Faculty of Forestry, Faculty Panel Member
Ms. Gillian Reiss, Student Panel Member

Appearances:
Ms. Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Barristers
Mr. B
P
, the Sti.1dent

In Attendance:
Professoi· John Britton, Dean's Designate, Faculty of Arts and Science
Professor Denis Smyth, Course lnstrnctor
Ms. Alexandra Luce, Course Teaching Assistant
Mr. Christopher Lang, Director, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances

-2-

Reasons for Decision
Delivered hi' iWs. Roslv111W. Tsao
[I)

The Trial division of the Tribunal heard this matter on August 12, 20 I 0. The Student was
charged on April 14, 2010 of the following:
1.

On or about April 30, 2009, the Student represented as his own, an idea or
expression of an idea and/or work of another in a paper entitled "The Balkan
Causes of World War I" ("Paper") that he submitted to fulfill the comse
requirements of HIS103Yl Y ("Course"), contrary to section B.I.l(d) of the
Code.

2.

On or about April 30, 2009, the Student knowingly submitted academic
work containing a purported statement of fact or reference to a source which
was concocted, with respect to the footnotes contained in the Paper
submitted in the Course, contrary to section B.I.1 (f) of the Code.

[2]

The Student attended at the Hearing and entered a plea of guilty to the above two
charges. As a result, the University withdrew the alternative charge of cheating, contrary
to section B.I.3(b) of the Code.

I<'acts of the Case
[3)

The University S\1bmitted the following facts regarding the offence, which the student did
not dispute:
a)

The Student was registered in the Course in the 2009 Winter term.

On or

about April 30, 2009, the Student submitted the Paper to fulfill the Course
requirements.
b)

At the outset of the comse, the teaching assistant reviewed the University's
policies and protocols regarding the avoidance of plagiarism with the
students.

-3c)

A review of the Paper, when submitted by the Student for grading,
demonstrated that significant portions of the Paper were copied verbatim or
close lo verbatim from unacknowledged sources. The Paper also included
footnote citations which were fictitious and did not relate to the text of the
Paper.

The fictitious citations are presumed to have been added to give the

impression that more sources were referred to by the Student than were, in
fact.
Decision of the Tribunal
(4)

Based on the foregoing admitted facts, the Tribunal accepts the plea of guilty from the
Student.

Penalty
(5)

The Student and University submitted orally the following Joint Submission regarding
Penalty:

1.

The Student will receive final grade of zero in the Course;

2.

The Student will be suspended by the University from August 12,2010 until
August 11, 2012; and

3.

The sanction will be recorded on the Student's academic record and
transcript from August 12, 2010 until August 11, 2012 or the date the
Student graduates, whichever is earlier.

[6]

In light of the facts of this case, the admission of guilt by the Student and the Joint
Submission regarding Penalty, the Tribunal accepts the Joint Submission and imposes
such penalty.

[7]

The Tribunal shall report this decision to the Provost for publication of a Notice of this
decision and the sanction in the University newspaper, with the Student's name withheld.

[8]

An Order with the penalty was signed by the Panel at the hearing.

-4Dated al Toronto, this 3 l st day of August, 20 I 0.

(

/

ROSLYN M, TSAO, Barrister and Solicitor
Chair

