Case 1398

FILE:

   Case # 1398 (2022-2023)

DATE:

   February 13, 2023, via Zoom

PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v. T.K.P. (‚the Student‚)

HEARING DATE(S):

   February 13, 2023, via Zoom

PANEL MEMBERS:

   R.S.M. Woods, Chair

   Professor Gabriele D‚Eleuterio, Faculty Panel Member

   Missy Chareka, Student Panel Member

APPEARANCES:

   Tina Lie, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg
   Rothstein LLP

   Hillson Tse, Counsel for the Student, RGZ

   The Student

HEARING SECRETARY:

   Samanthe Huang, Quasi-Judicial Administrative Assistant, Office of
   Appeals, Discipline and Faculty of Grievances

   The Student was charged under s. B.i.1 (b) of the Code for knowingly
   obtaining unauthorized assistance in relation to an assignment. In the
   alternative, the Student was charged under s. B.i.1 (d) for knowingly
   representing as their own an idea or work of another. The Student was
   also alternatively charged under s. B.i.3 (b) for knowingly engaging in
   a form of cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or
   misrepresentation not otherwise described in the Code in order to
   obtain academic advantage in connection with an assignment.

   The assignment was distributed to students online. Students in the
   course were asked to work independently and not post the questions or
   solutions online, nor use external sources. The Student submitted his
   answers and the instructor found substantial similarities, and in
   certain sections identical answers, between the Student‚s answers and
   answers to the same questions the instructor found posted on Chegg.com.

   The Student attended the hearing and was represented by counsel. In the
   Agreed Statement of Facts, the Student denied accessing Chegg.com but
   admitted to knowingly accessing a website that they do not believe was
   Chegg.com to obtain and use solutions to questions in the assignment,
   obtaining unauthorized assistance from an external source, knowingly
   representing as his own, an idea or expression of an idea or work of
   another and committing plagiarism on the assignment. Based on the
   evidence in the Agreed Statement of Facts, the Panel accepted the
   Student‚s guilty plea and found the Student guilty of the first charge
   for knowingly obtaining unauthorized aid under s. B.i.1 (b) of the
   Code. The University withdrew the second and third charges.

   The Student and the University submitted an Agreed Statement of Facts
   on Penalty (‚ASFP‚). According to the ASFP, the Student has been
   sanctioned for three separate prior offences, each pertaining to the
   use of unauthorized assistance. The University and the Student also
   submitted a Joint Submission on Penalty (‚JSP‚), which recommended
   sanctions and required the Student to complete the Promoting Academic
   Skills for Success Program or a similar program at the University of
   Toronto Mississauga.

   The Panel considered the University‚s submission that the penalties
   proposed in the JSP fall in the range of sanctions proposed in similar
   and recent cases involving academic misconduct by students with prior
   offences. The Panel considered aggravating factors such as the
   Student‚s three prior offences. It also considered mitigating factors
   such as the Student‚s guilty plea, participation in the Tribunal
   proceedings, and agreement to take the PASS course or its equivalent.
   The Panel found that the Student‚s participation in the process and
   guilty plea developed insight into the Student‚s actions. The Panel
   found that offence was very serious with the potential to adversely
   impact other students and the University‚s reputation. The Panel found
   that there was also a real risk of the same offence being repeated
   without significant sanction. The Panel found the JSP appropriate in
   this case and accepted the proposed sanctions.

   The Panel imposed the following sanctions: a grade assignment of zero
   for the course; a three-year suspension; a notation on the Student‚s
   transcript until their graduation; and a report to Provost for
   publication with the Student‚s name withheld.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/31157
