Case 1312

   DATE:

   December 7, 2021

   PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v. H.L. ("the Student")

   HEARING DATE:

   September 8, 2021, via Zoom

   Panel Members:

   Ms. Cheryl Woodin, Chair
   Professor Ian Crandall, Faculty Panel Member
   Mr. David Allens, Student Panel Member

   Appearances:

   Mr. Robert Centa, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland
   Rosenberg Rothstein LLP

   Not in Attendance:

   The Student

   Hearing Secretary:

   Ms. Krista Kennedy, Administrative Clerk & Hearing Secretary, Office of
   Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances

   TheÂ StudentÂ was charged underÂ s. B.i.1(e) of theâ¯Code of Behaviour
   on Academic Matters, 1995â¯(the âCodeâ) on the basis
   thatÂ theÂ StudentÂ knowingly submitted, without the knowledge and
   approval of the instructor to whom it was submitted, an essay for which
   credit had previously been obtainedÂ for the same course in a different
   termÂ at theÂ University..Â TheÂ StudentÂ was also charged under s.
   B.i.1(d) of the Code on the basis thatÂ theÂ StudentÂ knowingly
   represented asÂ theirÂ own an idea or expression of an idea, and/or the
   work of another in an essay.Â In the alternativeÂ to each of
   theseÂ charges, theÂ StudentÂ was charged underÂ s.Â B.i.3(b)Â of the
   Code on the basis that theÂ StudentÂ knowingly engaged in a form of
   cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or misrepresentation
   not otherwise described in the CodeÂ in order toÂ obtain academic
   credit or other academic advantage of any kind.

   TheÂ StudentÂ was notÂ represented and did not attend the hearing.Â The
   Panel receivedÂ an Agreed Statement of Facts (âASFâ) and a Joint
   Submission on Penalty (âJSPâ).Â The Panel noted that theÂ StudentÂ both
   accepted and requested that the hearing proceed in their absence and
   waived any entitlement to further notice in respect to the proceedings.

   Regarding the charge laid under s. B.i.1(e) of the Code,Â the Panel
   noted that the ASF outlinedÂ that theÂ StudentÂ enrolled in
   JAV152H1Â (the âCourseâ)Â on two occasions. The ASF further outlined
   that theÂ StudentÂ admitted thatÂ the essay they submittedÂ for
   academic credit contained significant amount of text from an essay
   theyÂ submitted the first time they took the Course.Â Furthermore, the
   Student admittedÂ thatÂ they did not ask the Professor who taught the
   Course for permission to resubmitÂ an essay that was previously
   submitted for academic credit.Â The Panel also noted that the
   ASFÂ outlined that at the Deanâs Designate meeting
   theÂ StudentÂ admitted that theyÂ hadÂ resubmitted a prior essay for
   academic credit without the permission of the instructor.Â The Panel
   noted that theÂ StudentÂ acknowledged that they signed the ASF freely
   and voluntarily, knowing the potential consequences, and did so with
   the advice of counsel or waived the right to counsel.Â Based on the
   StudentâsÂ admission and uncontested evidence, the Panel was satisfied
   that there was clear and convincing evidenceÂ that
   theÂ StudentÂ hadÂ knowinglyÂ submitted an essay for which credit had
   previously been obtained.Â Given this finding, the University withdrew
   the charges under s.Â B.i.1(d) and s.Â B.i3(b) of the Code.

   The Panel consideredÂ the JSP submitted jointly by the Student and the
   University. The Panel noted that the JSP outlined that
   theÂ StudentÂ hadÂ two priorÂ plagiarism offences.Â In determining
   sanction, the Panel noted that a JSP should only be rejected where to
   give effect to the submission would be contrary to the public interest
   or bring the administration of justice into disrepute.Â On the basis
   ofÂ the Panelâs consideration of the evidence and guidance from similar
   cases, the PanelÂ noted thatÂ it was not concerned that the JSP would
   be contrary to the public interest or bring the administration of
   justice into disreputeÂ sinceÂ similar cases have resulted in similar
   penalties to the one that was jointly proposed by the parties.Â The
   Panel was satisfied that the proposed penalty achieves both general and
   specific deterrence, but also balances the objective of effective
   deterrence with the opportunity for rehabilitation and return to the
   University.Â Based on the forgoing, the Panel accepted theÂ JSP.Â The
   PanelÂ imposedÂ the following sanctions:Â a final grade of zero in the
   course;Â aÂ three-yearÂ suspension;Â aÂ notation on transcriptÂ until
   graduation; andÂ aÂ report to theÂ ProvostÂ for publication.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/30138
