Case No.: 925
THE UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO

IN THE MATTER OF charges of academic dishonesty filed on April 5, 2017,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters, 1995,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Act, 1971, S.O. 1971, c. 56 as am. S.O. 1978, c. 88

BETWEEN:

THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
- and -

REASONS FOR DECISION
Hearing Date: August 28, 2017
Tribunal Members:
Ms. Dena Varah, Barrister and Solicitor, Chair
Professor Michael Saini, Faculty Panel Member
Mr. Andrey Lapin, Student Panel Member
Appearances:
Mr. Robert A. Genta, Discipline Counsel
Dr. Kristi Gourlay, Manager & Academic Integrity Officer, Office of Student Academic
Integrity
Ms. Sana Kawar, Manager, University of Toronto Transcript Centre
Mr. Christopher Lang, Director, Office of Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances
Mr. Sean Lourim, IT Support, Office of the Governing Counsel
Not in Attendance:
Mr. )j
the Student

fl,

REASONS FOR DECISION

1.

The Trial Division of the University of Toronto Tribunal (the "Tribunal") was

convened on August 28, 2017 to consider charges advanced by the University of
Toronto (the "University") against

'ti Fl (the "Student") under the Code of Behaviour on

Academic Matters (the "Code").
2.

The Student did not respond to any correspondence from the University.

Although the Code provides for service at a student's university-issued email address,
the Student did not have an active university-issued email address at the time the
Notice of Hearing was issued. As a result, the University obtained a more current email
address from the Chinese Service Centre for Scholarly Exchange (the "CSCSE"),
which, as described below, provided the forged degree to Sana Kawar ("Ms. Kawar''),
the Manager of the University of Toronto Transcript Centre.
3.

Krista Osbourne of the University of Toronto Office of Appeals, Discipline and

Faculty Grievances, served the Student with the Notice of Hearing to the email address
provided by the CSCSE on May 15, 2017. She earlier sent the charges on April 5, 2017
to that same email address. The Student never responded.
4.

There was a further attempt to serve the Student with the Notice of Hearing to

the same email address on August 17, 2017. Again, the Student did not respond.
5.

Discipline Counsel asked for an order that we proceed in the absence of the

Student on the basis that valid service had been executed.

-26.

The Tribunal adjourned the hearing for five minutes to provide time for the

Student to attend.
7.

The Tribunal was satisfied that the Discipline Counsel had taken appropriate

steps to notify the Student of the hearing.
8.

The Tribunal proceeded in the absence of the Student.

PART 1 - THE CHARGES

9.

The Student is charged with two offences under the Code:
1. You knowingly forged or in any other way altered or falsified an academic
record , and/or uttered, circulated or made use of such forged, altered or
falsified record , namely, a document which purported to be a degree
certificate from the University of Toronto dated June 19, 2007 contrary to
Section B.l.3(a) of the Code.
2. In the alternative, you knowingly engaged in a form of cheating, academic
dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or misrepresentation not otherwise
described in order to obtain academic credit or other academic advantage
of any kind, contrary to Section B.l.3(b) of the Code.

10.

Discipline Counsel advised that if the Tribunal found the Student guilty of the

offence in the first charge then the University would withdraw the second charge.

-3PART 2 - THE FACTS UNDERLYING THE CHARGES
11.

The Student was registered in the Faculty of Arts, University of Toronto, for Fall

2004 to Winter 2006. He accumulated a total of 4.0 earned credits. The Student did not
graduate from the University of Toronto.
12.

As part of the Student’s application for qualification evaluation with the CSCSE,

the Student provided a document that purported to be his degree certificate from the
University of Toronto dated June 19, 2007.
13.

The University filed the Affidavit of Ms. Kawar, Manager of the University of

Toronto Transcript Centre in the Faculty of Arts and Science. Her evidence is that the
Transcript Centre provides services to students upon their request, including issuing
transcripts.

14.

On January 9, 2017, Ms. Kawar received an email from Zhu Lei (“Mr. Lei”), an

accreditations officer at CSCSE, of whom she was aware as he had previously contacted
the office seeking to verify transcripts and degrees submitted by other students.
15.

Mr. Lei indicated that he was attempting to verify a University of Toronto Bachelor

of Arts degree submitted for accreditation by the Student. Mr. Lei also provided a
declaration signed by the Student which authorized the University of Toronto to release
his personal information to the CSCSE for purposes related to the qualification, evaluation
and accreditation.
16.

Ms. Kawar indicated that she accessed the Student’s academic record through the

University database, the Repository of Student Information (“ROSI”), which contains data

-4-

16.

Ms. Kawar indicated that she accessed the Student's academic record through

the University database, the Repository of Student Information ("ROSI"), which contains
data related to the Student's admission and academic performance at the University of
Toronto. Ms. Kawar confirmed that the Student's student number and date of birth
matched the information that had been provided to her. The Student's academic record
revealed that he had never graduated from the University, had never obtained a degree
and had only successfully completed 4.0 academic credits.
17.

Ms. Kawar replied to Mr. Lei and confirmed the actual days that the Student had

been registered in the University, and that she could find no evidence that the University
of Toronto had conferred a degree on him. She then sent a copy of the text of her reply
to Mr. Lei and the relevant documents to Dr. Kristi Gourlay at the Office of Student
Academic Integrity on January 9, 2017.
18.

The University charged the Student with the offences listed above by notice

dated April 5, 2017.
PART 3 - DECISION ON CHARGES

19.

The Tribunal was satisfied that the Student was guilty of the offence in the first

charge. As a result, the University withdrew the second charge.
20.

Section B.l.3(a) of the Code provides that it is an offence to forge or alter an

academic record or to utter, circulate or make use of a forged , altered or falsified
record. It is the second half of this clause that is at issue. There was no evidence of who
forged the degree, but that is not necessary evidence to establish the offence. It is clear

- 5-

that the Student circulated and made use of the forged degree in order to obtain
accreditation in China. The Student therefore violated Section B.l.3(a) of the Code.
PART 4 - PENALTY

21.

Discipline Counsel submitted that the appropriate sanction for a forged degree is:
(a)

Immediate suspension from the University for a period of up to five years;

(b)

that the Tribunal recommend to the President of the University that the
President recommend to Governing Council that the Student be expelled
from the University; and

(c)

the Tribunal report this case to the Provost who may publish a notice of
the decision of this Tribunal with the Student's name withheld.

PART 5 - SUBMISSIONS ON PENALTY

22.

Discipline Counsel provided the Tribunal with seven cases involving forgery of an

academic record or degree. In each of those cases, the Tribunal recommended that the
student be expelled. Discipline Counsel was not aware of any cases in which there had
been a forged degree or academic record in which the Tribunal had not recommended
the student for expulsion. Even if this were not the case, the Tribunal is satisfied that
this expulsion is the appropriate disposition in this matter.
23.

As noted in the case of The University of Toronto v. F.Z. (Case No. 572, Jan. 11 ,

2010): Forgery of an academic record is one of the most serious offences set out in the
Code. Typical sanction is expulsion from the university (para. 10). Other cases put

before the Tribunal engaged similar language indicating that this is one of the most

-6serious offences under the Code as it undermines the credibility of the university and
other students who use their degrees legitimately.
PART 6 - THE DECISION ON PENALTY

24.

In this case, there are no mitigating factors as the Student did not participate or

provide any explanation with regard the use of the forged diploma. The Student was
attempting to use a forged diploma in order to obtain accreditation at an institution in
China. These actions were a deliberate attempt by the Student to obtain the benefit of a
diploma he did not earn.
25.

Forged diplomas and academic records negatively impact the entire University

community. They undermine the credibility and standing of the institution and of their
peers who are attempting to legitimately use their degrees. We agree with previous
Tribunal decisions that this is one of, if not the most, serious academic offences a
student can commit.
26.

This Tribunal is therefore satisfied that the appropriate penalty is as requested by

Discipline Counsel.
PART 7 -THE ORDER

27.

The Panel ordered as follows:
(a)

the Tribunal proceed in the absence of the Student;

(b)

the Student is immediately suspended from the University for a period of
up to five years;

-7-

(c)

the Tribunal recommend to the President of the University that the
President recommend to governing council that the Student be expelled
from the University; and

(d)

the Tribunal report this case to the Provost who may publish a notice of
the decision of this Tribunal with the Student's name withheld.

DATED at Toronto this 20-tt

Dena Varah, Co-Chair

y of /IJt!Ver..6-(r , 2017.

