Case #925

   DATE: November 20, 2017
   PARTIES: University of Toronto v. Y.R. (âthe Studentâ)
   Hearing Date(s): August 28, 2017
   Panel Members:
   Ms. Dena Varah, Barrister and Solicitor, Chair
   Professor Michael Saini, Faculty Panel Member
   Mr. Andrey Lapin, Student Panel Member Appearances:
   Mr. Robert A. Centa, Discipline Counsel
   In Attendance:
   Dr. Kristi Gourlay, Manager & Academic Integrity Officer, Office of
   Student Academic Integrity
   Ms. Sana Kawar, Manager, University of Toronto Transcript Centre
   Mr. Christopher Lang, Director, Office of Appeals, Discipline and
   Faculty Grievances
   Mr. Sean Lourim, IT Support, Office of the Governing Counsel
   Not in Attendance:
   The Student
   Trial Division - s. B.i.3(a) â forged academic record â Student not
   present â inactive UofT email account âÂ  Notice of Hearing sent to
   alternative email account provided by Student to accrediting agencyÂ
   âÂ  forged degree submitted for accreditation in another country â
   immediate suspension, recommendation of expulsion, and report to the
   Provost with the studentâs name withheld.
   The Student was charged with one charge of forging an academic record
   contrary to s. B.i.3(a) of the Code , or in the alternative, one charge
   of academic misconduct not otherwise described contrary to s.B.i.3(b)
   of the Code . The charges related to a forged degree that the Student
   had submitted in support of an application to have their degree
   accredited in China. The Studentâs UofT email address was inactive, so
   the University sent the Notice of Hearing to the email that the Student
   had provided to the accrediting agency. There was no response from the
   Student.Â  The Panel ordered that the hearing could proceed in the
   Studentâs absence.Â  Â Upon the Panel finding the Student guilty of
   forging an academic record, the University withdrew the alternative
   charge of academic dishonesty not otherwise specified. The Panel was
   referred to seven cases involving forgery of an academic record where
   the Tribunal recommended that the student be expelled. On the basis of
   these cases, along with the case University of Toronto v. F.Z. (Case
   No. 572, Jan. 11, 2010 at para 10) where the Tribunal held that the
   forgery of an academic record is one of the most serious offences set
   out in the Code and the typical sanction is expulsion, the Panel
   ordered: (a) immediate suspension from the University for a period of
   up to five years; (b)a recommendation to that the Student be expelled
   from the University; and (c) that the case be reported to the Provost
   with the Studentâs name withheld.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12961
