Case 880

DATE:

   September 12, 2017

PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v. L.L. ("the Student")

Hearing Date(s):

   June 23, 2017

Panel Members:

   Mr. Shaun Laubman, Lawyer, Chair
   Professor Kathi Wilson, Faculty Panel Member
   Ms. Amanda Nash, Student Panel Member

Appearances:

   Ms. Tina Lie, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Barristers
   Mr. Robert Sniderman, Law Student, Downtown Legal Services, for the
   Student

In Attendance:

   Ms. Krista Osbourne, Administrative Clerk and Hearing Secretary, Office
   of the Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances, University of
   Toronto
   Mr. Sean Lourim, Technology Assistant, Office of the Governing Council
   Professor Eleanor Irwin, Dean's Designate, University of Toronto
   Scarborough
   Professor Wanda Restivo, Dean's Designate, University of Toronto
   Scarborough

Not in Attendance:

   The Student

   The Student was charged with plagiarism and obtaining unauthorized
   assistance under ss. B.i.1(b) and B.i.1(d) of the Code, and
   alternatively, academic dishonesty under s. B.i.3(b) of the Code, in
   relation to a July 2016 paper, and charged with the same three offences
   in relation to a January 2017 paper in another course. In the July 2016
   paper the Student used unattributed verbatim text from various sources,
   and in the January 2017 paper the Student obtained unauthorized
   assistance with respect to content, style, and language.

   The Student did not attend the hearing but, together with the
   University, submitted an agreed statement of facts and a joint
   submission on penalty. The Student pled guilty to plagiarism with
   respect to the July 2016 paper and unauthorized assistance with respect
   to the January 2017 paper, and the University withdrew the other
   charges.

   The joint submission on penalty was that the Student should be
   suspended until April 30, 2020, receive a grade of zero in the two
   courses, and have a notation placed on their transcript until
   graduation. The Tribunal found that most of this submission was within
   the acceptable range of penalties for the relevant offences,
   considering that the Student had one prior plagiarism offence, but was
   concerned that if the Student decided not to graduate the notation on
   their record would be permanent. As a permanent notation on the
   transcript was not the parties' intention, they agreed to instead
   recommend that the notation expire on the earlier of the Student's
   graduation or April 30, 2021. Thus the joint submission was accepted
   with this modification, and the Tribunal ordered that the decision be
   published with the name of the Student withheld.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12953
