Report #284

   DATE: October 31, 2003
   PARTIES: Mr. C. (the Student) v. the Faculty of Applied Science and
   Engineering
   Hearing Date(s): September 25, 2003
   Committee Members:
   Professor Emeritus R. Scane (Chair)
   Professor P. Catton
   Ms K. Lewis
   Mr. A. Watson
   Professor J. Wedge
   Secretary:
   Mr. P. Holmes, Judicial Affairs Officer
   Appearances:
   For the Student:
   Mr. C (The Student)
   Mr. G. Tam
   For the Faculty of Applied Science and Engineering:
   Professor K. Pressnail
   Ms B. McCann
   Ms M. Paton
   Faculty of Applied Science and Engineering â request to substitute new
   marks for marks received in course assessments â grade appeal â
   extraordinary external pressures â Faculty granted retroactive
   withdrawal without academic penalty â remedy rejected â request that
   grades be raised by between 5.5 and 10 marks â remedy sought not
   afforded by Faculty and too speculative â awarding of grades is
   function of appropriate faculty â role of appeal tribunals â appeal
   dismissed
   Request to substitute new marks for the marks received in the various
   assessments in the subjects of one term. The Student failed the term.
   It was not in issue before the Committee that the Student was under
   extraordinary external pressures during the term. The Faculty granted
   retroactive withdrawal without academic penalty in all the courses
   except one. Under the relief proposed, the Student would have had clear
   standing on entering upon the repeat of the term, and therefore would
   not be at risk of academic probation. The Student rejected the remedy
   proffered. The Student claimed that but for the external pressures, the
   marks would be higher. The Student claimed that based on his own
   calculations his grades should be raised by between 5.5 and 10 marks.
   The Committee found that the remedy requested was outside the scope of
   what the Faculty affords to its students, and it was too speculative.
   The Committee stated that the awarding of grades is the function of the
   appropriate faculty appointed by the University and not a function of
   appeal tribunals. Appeal dismissed.
   [1]View Report

References

   1. file:///media/12551
