UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
TRIAL DIVISION

IN THE MATTER of the University of Toronto Act, 1971, S.O. 1971, c. 56 as amended;
AND IN THE MATTER of the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters,
1995;
AND IN THE MATTER of disciplinary charges against Mr. Aal!AIIIII.

Members of the Panel:
• Laura Trachuk, Chair
• Adil D'Sousa, Student Panel Member
• Professor Graham Trope, Faculty Panel Member

Appearances:
• Hugh Scher for Mr. ~ AIIII, the Student

•

Edward Holmes for the Intervenor Canadian Union of Public Employees Local 3902

•
•

Ms. Linda Rothstein, Discipline Counsel for the University of Toronto
Ms. Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel for the University of Toronto

PRELIMINARY DECISION

Mr. AIIIIII has raised a preliminary objection to the jurisdiction of the University Tribunal to
proceed with a hearing with respect to charges laid against him under the University of Toronto
Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters, 1995 (the "Code"). He asserts that the Tribunal has no
jurisdiction to proceed because a labour arbitrator has exclusive jurisdiction with respect to this
matter. The parties have agreed that the Canadian Union of Public Employees, Local 3902
(referred to as the "union") should be permitted to intervene with respect to this preliminary
objection.
In the alternative, Mr. AIIIII has also raised an objection with respect to being charged as a
student under the Code. He alleges that any charges against him under the Code should have
been as a member of the faculty.
The parties proceeded by way of affidavit as well as written and oral submissions.

-2-

The Facts

For the purpose of this preliminary objection, the following facts are considered to be true and
provable. AIII A1111 registered as a student at the University of Toronto (the "university") in
the fall of 2004 and was in his final term of the Bachelor of Business Administration program in
April 2008. During the fall 2007 term, Mr. Aa1 was employed as a teaching assistant in
MGTBO3H - Management Accounting. In the winter 2008 term he was employed as a teaching
assistant in MGTCO3H - Principles of Finance. As a teaching assistant, Mr. AIIII was a
member of the union's bargaining unit. The union has a collective agreement with the university.
The university alleges that in April 2008, Mr. A - was marking exams for MGTCO3H and
significantly inflated the mark on one of them, The person who had written the exam was his
brother. The university also alleges that it subsequently discovered that Mr. AIIII changed the
grade that had been given to his brother on the mid-term for MGTBO3H by falsifying a
document that had been provided to him. It alleges further that he inflated the mark on his
brother's final exam mark in MGTBO3H. Mr. A - had not disclosed to the faculty members
responsible for the courses that his brother was in the class.

AIII

The Provost has proceeded with charges against Mr.
under the Code. He has also
received a written reprimand from the Chair of the Department of Management with respect to
the allegations. Mr. A-has filed a grievance challenging the written reprimand and has also
filed a grievance with respect to the university's decision to proceed with charges under the
Code. The grievances have been forwarded to arbitration and a date has been scheduled for the
hearing in February 2009.
The following charges were laid against Mr. A. .on August 7, 2008:
CHARGES
Note: Wherever in the Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters, 1995 ("Code") an
offence is described as depending on "knowing", the offence shall likewise be deemed to
have been committed if the person ought reasonably to have known.
1. On or about April 23, 2008 you knowingly forged or in any other way altered or
falsified any document or evidence required by the University, or uttered,
circulated or made use of any such forged, altered or falsified document, whether
the document be in print or electronic form, namely the final exam submitted by
NIii
in MGTC03H-Principles of Finance, contrary to section B.I.1.(a)
of the Code.

AIII

2. In the alternative, on or about April 23, 2008, you knowingly forged or in any
other way altered or falsified any academic record or uttered, circulated or made
use of any such forged, altered or falsified record, whether the record be in print

-3-

NIii Aal in

or electronic form, namely the final exam submitted by
MGTC03H-Principles of Finance, contrary to section B.I.3.(a) of the Code.

3. In the alternative, on or about April 23, 2008, you knowingly engaged in any form
of cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or misrepresentation not
here and otherwise described, in order to obtain academic credit or other
academic advantage of any kind, in marking the final exam of N - A - in
MGTC3H-Principles of Finance, contrary to section B.I.3.(b) of the Code.

The following charges were laid against Mr.

Aal on November 21, 2008:

CHARGES
Note: Wherever in the Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters, 1995 ("Code") an
offence is described as depending on "knowing", the offence shall likewise be deemed to
have been committed if the person ought reasonably to have known.
1. On or about November 29, 2007 you knowingly forged or in any other way
altered or falsified any document or evidence required by the University, or
uttered, circulated or made use of any such forged, altered or falsified document,
whether the document be in print or electronic form, namely the marks for the
mid-term exam submitted by NIii A - in MGTB03H - Management
Accounting, contrary to section B.I.1.(a) of the Code.
2. In the alternative, on or about November 29, 2007, you knowingly forged or in
any other way altered or falsified any academic record or uttered, circulated or
made use of any such forged, altered or falsified record, whether the record be in
print or electronic form, namely the marks for the mid-term exam submitted by
in MGTB03H - Management Accounting, contrary to section
B.I.3.(a) of the Code.

NIii AIIII

3. In the alternative, on or about November 29, 2007, you knowingly engaged in any
form of cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or misrepresentation
not herein otherwise described, in order to obtain academic credit or other
academic advantage of any kind, in marking the mid-term exam of NIii A. .
in MGTB03H -Management Accounting, contrary to section B.I.3.(b) of the
Code.
4. On or about December 10, 2007 you knowingly forged or in any other way
altered or falsified any document or evidence required by the University, or
uttered, circulated or made use of any such forged, altered or falsified document,
whether the document be in print or electronic form, namely the marks for the
final exam submitted by NIii AIIII in MGTB03H - Management
Accounting, contrary to section B.I.l(a) of the Code.

-4-

N-

5. In the alternative, on or about December 10, 2007, you knowingly forged or in
any other way altered or falsified any academic record or uttered, circulated or
made use of any such forged, altered or falsified record, whether the record be in
print or electronic form, namely the marks for the final exam submitted by
Allll in MGTB03H - Management Accounting, contrary to section B.1.3.(a) of
the Code.

6. In the alternative, on or about December 10, 2007, you knowingly engaged in any
form of cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or misrepresentation
not herein otherwise described, in order to obtain academic credit or other
academic advantage of any kind, in marking the mid-term exam of NIIII AIIII
in MGTB03H -Management Accounting, contrary to section B.1.3.(b) of the
Code.
As charges were laid against Mr. AIIIII alleging that he violated the Code he has not been
permitted to graduate pursuant to Section C.l.(a)12.

Relevant Statutory Provisions

The University of Toronto Act, 1971

1. (1) In this Act,
(1) "student" means any person registered at the University for full-time or part-time study in
a program that leads to a degree or post-secondary diploma or certificate of the university or
in a program designated by the Governing Council as a program of post-secondary study of
the university;
(m) ''teaching staff' means the employees of the University, University College, the
constituent colleges and the arts and science faculties of the federated universities who hold
the academic rank of professor, associate professor, assistant professor, full-time lecturer or
part-time lecturer, unless such part-time lecturer is registered as a student, or who hold any
other rank created by the Governing Council and designated by it as an academic rank for the
purposes of this clause;
2. (14) The government, management and control of the University and of University
College and of the property, revenues, business and affairs thereof, and the powers and duties
of The Governors of the University of Toronto and of the Senate of the University under The
University of Toronto Act, 1947 as amended are vested in the Governing Council, and,
without limiting the generality of the foregoing, the Governing Council has power to,
(o) do all such acts and things as are necessary or expedient for the conduct of its affairs and
the affairs of the University and University College.
Ontario Labour Relations Act, 1995

-548(1) Arbitration provision - Every collective agreement shall provide for the final and
binding settlement by arbitration, without stoppage of work, of all differences between the
parties arising from the interpretation, application, administration or alleged violation of the
agreement, including any question as to whether a matter is arbitrable.
Statutory Powers Procedure Act
Dismissal of proceeding without hearing
4.6(1) Subject to subsections (5) and (6), a tribunal may dismiss a proceeding without a
hearing if,
a. the proceeding is frivolous, vexatious or is commenced in bad faith;
b. the proceeding relates to matters that are outside the jurisdiction of the tribunal;
Code Provisions

A. PREAMBLE
This Code is concerned, then, with the responsibilities of faculty members and students not as
they belong to administrative or professional or social groups, but as they co-operate in all
phases of the teaching and learning relationship.

B. OFFENCES
The University and its members have a responsibility to ensure that a climate which might
encourage, or conditions which might enable, cheating, misrepresentation or unfairness not be
tolerated. To this end, all must acknowledge that seeking credit or other advantages by fraud or
misrepresentation, or seeking to disadvantage others by disruptive behaviour is unacceptable, as
is dishonesty or unfairness in dealing with the work or record of a student.
Wherever in this Code an offence is described as depending on "knowing", the offence shall
likewise be deemed to have been committed if the person ought reasonably to have known.
B.I.1. It shall be an offence for a student knowingly:
a. to forge or in any other way alter or falsify any document or evidence required by the
university, or to utter, circulate or make use of any such forged, altered or falsified
document, whether the record be in print or electronic form;
3. It shall be an offence for a faculty member and a student alike knowingly:
a. to forge or in any other way alter or falsify any academic record, or to utter, circulate
or make use of any such forged, altered or falsified record, whether the record be in
print or electronic form;
b. to engage in any form of cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or
misrepresentation not herein otherwise described, in order to obtain academic credit
or other academic advantage of any kind.

-6-

INTERPRETATION
2. In this Code, unless the context otherwise requires:
(k) "faculty member" means a member of the teaching staff;
(m) "instructor" means any person who teaches or instructs or has a duty to evaluate the work
of a student or students or who evaluates or who has a duty to evaluate the work of a student
or student, and includes a faculty member, a teaching assistant and a librarian;
(o) "member" or "member of the university" means a student or a faculty member, proctor or
invigilator in the university, and includes a group;
( s) "student" means that type of member of the University who is currently or was previously
1.

11.

111.

engaged in any academic work which leads to the recording and/or issue of a
mark, grade, or statement of performance by the appropriate authority in the
university or another institution; and/or
registered in any academic course which entitles the member to the use of a
University library, library materials, library resources, computer facility or
dataset; and/or
a post-doctoral fellow.

Collective Agreement Provisions
ARTICLE 3: RESERVATION OF MANAGEMENT RIGHTS
3:01

The Union acknowledges that it is the right of the Employer to maintain order and
efficiency; hire, classify, transfer, promote, demote, layoff, discipline, suspend, or
discharge employees; establish and enforce rules and regulations not inconsistent with
the provisions of this Agreement, which govern the conduct of the employees; and
generally to manage and operate the University of Toronto. The Employer agrees to
exercise these rights in a manner which is fair, reasonable, equitable and consistent with
the provisions of this agreement.

ARTICLE 10: ACADEMIC FREEDOM
10:03

Course Instructors' employment obligations and responsibilities to the university shall
encompass teaching, which includes, without being restricted to, responsibilities as
follows:
An employee shall carry out his or her responsibility for teaching with all due attention
to the establishment of fair and ethical dealings with students, taking care to make

-7-

himself or herself accessible to students for academic consultation, to inform students
adequately regarding course formats, assign1nents, and methods of evaluation, to
maintain teaching schedules in all but exceptional circumstances, to inform students
adequately of any necessary cancellation and rescheduling of instructions and to comply
with established procedures and deadlines for determining, reporting and reviewing the
grades of his or her students.
In performance of their duties, they shall deal fairly and ethically with their colleagues,
shall avoid discrimination, shall not infringe their colleagues' academic freedom, and
shall observe appropriate principles of confidentiality.

ARTICLE 13: PROGRESSIVE DISCIPLINE
13:01

Discipline will normally follow investigation and discussion with the employee, and
will normally proceed through the following steps, with the objective of resolving the
matter and/or correcting the behaviour as early as possible:
Step 1: Oral or written warning
Step 2: Letter of reprimand, suspension (with or without pay), change in assignment
Step 3: Discharge or cancellation of subsequent appointments
Disciplinary measures shall be proportional to the seriousness of the issue and shall
increase in severity with repetition of the same or similar occurrences. An oral warning
alone shall be used only in cases that appear minor or unlikely to proceed to Steps 2 and
3 of the discipline procedure.
The Employer reserves the right in serious circumstances to bypass Steps l and 2 of the
recommended procedure.
An employee who is disciplined at Steps 2 and/or 3 shall be advised in writing of the
nature of the discipline and the reasons therefore. The Union will receive a copy of the
notification of discipline or written warning within one (1) working day (24 hours).

ARTICLE 14: GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE
Definition
14:0l(a) A grievance shall be defined as any difference ansmg out of the interpretation,
application, administration or alleged violation of the Collective Agreement.
Employment under the provisions of the Collective Agreement is a prerequisite for the
filing of a grievance, with the exception of a hiring grievance as defined in Article
14:0l(b).

-8-

15 :03

An arbitrator shall not have the authority to make any decision which is inconsistent
with the terms of the Agreement nor to add to or amend any of the terms of the
Agreement. The jurisdiction of the arbitrator shall be confined to the issue in dispute.
The decision of the arbitrator shall be final and binding on the parties.

15 :04

In the event that an arbitrator deals with a matter relating to the discharge, suspension or
disciplinary action, then the arbitrator has the authority to reinstate an employee with or
without compensation for wages and any other benefits lost, or to make any other award
he/she may deem just and reasonable which would be consistent with the terms of the
Agreement.

Unsatisfactory Performance

18:03 In the event that a supervisor forms the opinion that an employee's performance is
unsatisfactory, the supervisor shall prepare a written evaluation as prescribed in Article
18:02 without undue delay, for discussion with and comment by the employee.

Employment File

18:06 An employment file shall be maintained within each Department for each employee
employed within it, which shall be separate from the employee's academic record. The
employment file shall contain only those documents bearing the employee's signature,
acknowledging receipt only, and relating to the employee's employment.

Submissions of the parties

Aall

Mr.
submits that the dispute between himself and the university arises under the
collective agreement and that a labour arbitrator, therefore, has the exclusive jurisdiction to
determine it pursuant to section 48(1) of the Labour Relations Act, 1995.
Mr. AIIIIII argues that the conduct which is the subject of the university's allegations before the
Tribunal arises directly from his employment relationship which is governed by a collective
agreement. The dispute therefore involves the interpretation, administration, application or
alleged violation of the collective agreement. He contends that "but for" his employment
relationship he could not have engaged in the misconduct with which he is accused. Mr. AIIIIII
maintains that the nature of the dispute must be determined by examining the facts surrounding it
and is not determined according to how the legal issues have been framed. In this case, he
submits, the dispute arises from his alleged failure to properly carry out the duties of his
employment. He has been disciplined for that with a letter of reprimand and a grievance has been
filed. He asserts that the charges also relate to the manner in which he carried out his teaching

-9-

assistant duties and therefore a labour arbitrator, not the Tribunal, has jurisdiction over the
matter.

AIIIII

Mr.
submits that the scope of the collective agreement is determined by its provisions. A
dispute is within the scope of the collective agreement if it arises either explicitly or implicitly
from the interpretation, application, administration or alleged violation of the terms of the
collective agreement. In this case, he says, the collective agreement covers discipline,
unsatisfactory performance, the contents of the employment file and academic freedom and
integrity. Mr.
claims that the essential character of the university's allegations against
him relate to unsatisfactory and unethical work performance and the appropriate discipline for
that conduct. He asserts that those matters are within the scope of collective agreement.

AIIII

Mr.AIII also claims that the charges against him are frivolous, vexatious, made in bad faith
and amount to an abuse of process because he was charged under the Code even though he was
engaged in his employment duties when the alleged misconduct occurred. He contends that none
of the charges relate to his conduct as a student at the university. He maintains that the university
is proceeding against him under the Code rather than under the collective agreement because of
its belief that the collective agreement does not provide for a sufficient remedy for the alleged
misconduct. He claims that that is not a legitimate basis for laying charges under the Code.

AIIIII

Mr.
argues, in the alternative, that even if he is subject to charges under the Code when
performing his teaching assistant duties, he should be charged as a member of faculty not as a
student. A faculty member is defined under the Code as a member of the teaching staff. Mr.
AIIII claims that he was a member of the teaching staff because his primary duties were to
teach, instruct, grade and evaluate students. He contends that the university is only proceeding
against him as a student because the penalties available against students are harsher than those
against faculty members or staff. Furthermore, the remedies available to the university, if it
proceeded against him as a member of faculty or staff, are the same as the disciplinary provisions
of the collective agreement. He maintains that the charges are therefore an abuse of process.
Mr. A. . also denies that he should be considered a student under the University of Toronto
Act, 1971 (U of T Act). He claims that under the U of T Act he should be considered part of the
administrative staff. He argues that the Code does not apply to administrative staff and that
demonstrates that the definitions in the U ofT Act should not be applied to the Code. Mr.
says that he is an instructor under the Code and that instructors should be considered faculty. He
maintains that the Tribunal must distinguish between faculty, students and instructors in an
internally consistent way.

AIIII

AIII

Mr.
submits that he has not gained any personal advantage by committing the
misconduct alleged and that he has been prevented from graduating and proceeding with the next
step in his desired career as an accountant. He asks that the Tribunal find that it has no
jurisdiction to proceed with the charges or, in the alternative, order that all of the charges against
him be stayed pursuant to section 4.6(1) (a) and (b) of the Statutory Powers Procedure Act.
Mr. A. . refers to the following authorities: Bartello v. Canada Post Corp. (1987), 46 D.L.R.
(4 th) 124 (Ont. H.C.J.); Chapman v. 3M Canada Inc. [1995] O.J. No. 564 (Gen.Div. ) Affd

- 10 [1997] O.J. No. 928 (Ont. C.A.); Chapman v. 3M Canada Inc.[1997] O.J. No. 928 (Ont.C.A.);
Giorno v. Pappas (1999), 170 D.L.R. (4 th) 160 (Ont C.A.); Jadwani v. The Attorney General of
Canada (2001), 52 O.R. (3d) 660 (Ont. C.A.); Piko v. Hudson's Bay Company (1998), 167
D.L.R. (4th) 4 79 (OCA); Regina Police Association Inc. v. Regina (City) Board of Police
Commissioners [2001] l S.C.R. 360 (SCC); St. Anne-Nackawic Pulp and Paper Co. Limited v.
Canadian Paper Workers Union, Local 219, [1986} 1 S.C.R. 704 (SCC); Weber v. Ontario
Hydro, [1995] 2 S.C.R. 929 (SCC).
The union states that its interest in this matter is to protect the integrity of the collective
agreement that it executed with the Governing Council. It endorses Mr.
s position that
jurisdiction lies exclusively with the arbitrator. It contends that the university is prosecuting this
matter but that it is the same body that has agreed in the collective agreement that differences
will be addressed under the grievance arbitration process. It maintains that the particulars to the
charges provide the factual context or character of the matter and that the essential character of
the dispute is an alleged violation of the collective agreement. It compares the letter of reprimand
and the charges and claims that they are almost the same. It submits that it was impossible for
Mr. Alll's alleged transgression to have occurred without the employment relationship. He
could not have committed the transgression solely in his capacity as a student. It contends that
the duties Mr.
was performing at the relevant time were duties under the collective
agreement and that those were the duties that are captured in the letter of reprimand and in the
particulars of the charges.

AIII'

A-

The union argues that this situation is distinguishable from the professional college decisions
relied upon by the university because, in this case, the same body is involved in both the
grievance and the academic discipline process.
The union asserts as well that the Code contemplates violations committed by students actually
enrolled in courses and not transgressions such as those with which Mr.
has been
charged. The union claims that the Code does not appear to contemplate the actions of a student
holding the position of a teaching assistant.

AIII

The union also relies upon the definitions in the Code which include teaching assistant under the
definition for instructor.
The union denies that the university would be deprived of an ultimate remedy if the Code
proceeding were stayed. It notes that Mr. Aal has received a letter of reprimand and claims
that the university could also relieve him of his teaching assistant duties. It maintains that the
remedy is only required to be responsive to the transgression even if a different remedy would be
available in another forum.
The union refers to the following authorities: McFadyen v. Ontario (Mining and Lands
Commissioner), [2007] O.J. No. 4875, Ontario Superior Court of Justice, Div. Crt.; Wentworth
County Board of Education v. Wentworth Women Teachers' Assn., [1990] O.P.E.D. No. 4;
Goudie v. Ott([',,va (City), [2003] S.C.J. No. 12, Supreme Court of Ontario, Judgment: March 20,
2003;'KA. [Indexed as A.(K.) v. Ottawa (City)], 80 O.R. (3d) 161, Court of Appeal for Ontario;

- 11 -

Giorno and Pappas (supra); British Columbia (Director of Employment Standards) (Re), [2001]
B.C.E.S.T.D. No. 628, Nov. 14, 2001.
The university argues that the essential character of the dispute falls squarely within the ambit of
the Code. It asserts that labour arbitrators do not have exclusive jurisdiction in every
circumstance where the conduct in issue occurred in the course of employment. Nothing ousts
the jurisdiction of the courts or other tribunals over matters that arise in the employment context
but fall outside traditional labour law issues. It claims that other tribunals may possess
overlapping jurisdiction, concurrent jurisdiction or themselves be endowed with exclusive
jurisdiction.
The university contends that overlapping jurisdiction requires careful consideration of the
essential character of the dispute, legislative intent, the ambit of the collective agreement and the
responsiveness of the remedies provided. The university submits that the legislature, through the
U of T Act, empowered Governing Council to regulate the academic conduct of its students and
faculty and that Governing Council intended matters of academic conduct to be addressed by the
procedures under the Code. Mr. A - is a member of the university and is governed by the
Code and the process it provides for dealing with breaches of its provisions. The university
maintains that the conduct that the Tribunal is being asked to consider constitutes an egregious
breach of the provisions of the Code. The issues are fundamentally about academic misconduct,
not employment. It states that the Code is concerned with issues of academic honesty and
integrity and the remedies provided are responsive to those issues. The collective agreement does
not address allegations of cheating or academic dishonesty, nor does it provide an adequate
remedy for the conduct with which Mr. A - has been charged. The arbitrator therefore does
not, and was not intended to have, exclusive jurisdiction.
The university contends that the fact that Mr. A - was able to engage in the alleged cheating
because he held a position as an employee of the university does not change the essential
character of the dispute. The dispute involves academic misconduct and falls within the purview
of the Code. The remedies available to the Tribunal are commensurate with the academic nature
of the offences prohibited under the Code and include reduction in marks, suspension from the
university and expulsion. In contrast, the remedies available under the collective agreement do
not address the offence with which Mr. A - i s accused. The most serious discipline available
is discharge or cancellation of subsequent appointments. A labour arbitrator could not order any
sanction which could affect Mr.
s status as a student. The university claims that, if the
arbitrator has exclusive jurisdiction in this case, Mr. A-will be in a better position, due to
his status as a teaching assistant, than any other student that improperly assisted his brother to
falsely improve his grades.

AIIII'

The university compares this situation to those in which professional discipline bodies take
jurisdiction with respect to the misconduct of members even where they work in a unionized
environment. It argues that labour arbitrators do not have exclusive jurisdiction in such cases. It
claims that there is a difference in focus between the grievance procedure and the disciplinary
process of a regulatory college. Employees who engage in professional misconduct in the course
of employment may be disciplined by their employer as well as by their professional regulator.
Likewise the legislature has given the university the power to discipline and there is no

- 12 meaningful distinction between this case and those dealing with the discipline processes of
regulatory colleges.
The university denies that it has acted in bad faith by charging Mr. Aa11 as a student. It argues
that the Code states that it applies to students and faculty. It does not specifically state that it
applies to teaching assistants. Teaching assistants are included in the definition of instructors
because instructors are referred to in the Divisional Procedures section, i.e. the process prior to
the laying of charges. The university asserts that, pursuant to the rules of statutory interpretation,
the terms in the Code must be defined consistently with those of its authorizing statute, the U of
T Act. "Faculty" under the Code is defined to include "teaching staff"' and "teaching staff"' under
the U of T Act excludes part-time lecturers registered as students. Therefore, Mr. A. . could
not be a faculty member for the purposes of the Code. It maintains that there is no inconsistency
between the Code and the U of T Act because "instructor" has no bearing on who is covered by
the prohibitions of the Code. When Mr.
is acting as a teaching assistant he still has the
obligations of a student under the Code but not those of a faculty member. Mr.
has the
status of a student whether or not he is acting "in his capacity" as a student. The university
argues that the Code is about the responsibilities that attach to the status and privilege of being a
student. Therefore, a student is prohibited from assisting another student to cheat. It maintains
that it is fallacious to argue that a student who is cheating is acting "in the capacity" of a student.

AIIII

AIII

The university denies that this is a case of unsatisfactory work performance and claims that it is a
case about Mr.
obligations as a member of the university. It contends that academic
integrity is what is at stake. It submits that if the parties to the collective agreement had intended
to exclude the bargaining unit members from the purview of the Code or the jurisdiction of the
Tribunal they would have said so. The university denies that the concept of academic freedom in
the collective agreement is the same thing as the concept of academic misconduct. It denies that
any other provisions of the collective agreement apply to academic misconduct. It says that if an
arbitrator was intended to have jurisdiction over academic integrity that would have been
specifically addressed by the parties.

Al!lll's

The university asserts that the charges against Mr. A-were laid by the Provost and not by
Governing Council. It asserts that the Provost is not Mr.
employer.

Alll's

AIIII

Finally, the university argues that if Mr.
and the union are successful with this
preliminary objection there is really no remedy for Mr.
alleged offences. Mr.
had completed his last term of study and his last contract as a teaching assistant so discharging
him or barring him from further contracts would be pointless. It denies that a labour arbitrator
would have the authority to impose the academic sanctions contemplated by the Code.

Allll's

AIIII

The university refers to the following authorities: Quebec (Commission des droits de la personne
et des droits de lajeunesse) v. Quebec (Attorney General), [2004] 2 S.C.R. 185; Gaignard et al.
v. Canada (Attorney General), 2003 CanLII 40299 (ON C.A.); Bhadauria v. Ontario College of
Teachers, [2004] O.J. No. 2468 (Div. Ct.); Fox v. British Columbia College of Teachers, [2004]
B.C.J. No. 2322 (S.C.); University of Saskatchewan v. Professional Assn. of Internes and
Residents ofSaskatchewan, [2001] S.J. No. 346 (C.A.)

- 13 Mr. A - acknowledges that he is bound by the Code but denies that the Tribunal process
should be used for offences that allegedly occurred while he was working as a teaching assistant.
He argues that the U of T Act does not provide specifically for how the Code is to be established
or for the Tribunal. He asserts that it is therefore not correct that the Tribunal and the Code take
jurisdiction from the U of T Act. He claims that the Code and its processes are not an expressed
legislative scheme and that they are incidental to the university's jurisdiction under the U of T
Act. Mr. A. . . maintains that when the ambiguous jurisdiction, which the university asserts is
derived from the U of T Act, is compared with the explicit exclusive jurisdiction arbitrators
derive from section 48(1) of the Labour Relations Act, it is clear that the legislature intended that
disputes that arose under the collective agreement would be within that exclusive jurisdiction.
Mr.
also asserts that the collective agreement does include academic integrity in Articles
10.03, 13 and 18 and that it provides for a mechanism to address it. Mr. AIIIIII contends that, if
the Tribunal were to proceed, there is a risk of its results conflict_ing with those of the labour
arbitrator.

AIII

Mr. ~ maintains that the fact that he would not be a teaching assistant if he were not a
student is irrelevant. He also argues that it is not relevant whether he is better off if he committed
the offence while working as a teaching assistant because he was working under a collective
agreement. Finally, Mr. AIIIII argues that it is an abuse of process for the university to prevent
him from graduating just because of actions he allegedly committed as a teaching assistant.

Decision

Mr. A-asserts that this Tribunal should not proceed with the charges against him for two
reasons. First he asserts that the Tribunal has no jurisdiction because the offences with which he
is charged were committed in the course of his employment as a teaching assistant and,
therefore, an arbitrator has exclusive jurisdiction to determine any dispute about them. Secondly,
Mr. ~claims that even if charges could be laid against him under the Code, he should have
been charged as a member of faculty and, therefore, the charges against him were an abuse of
process and should be stayed. However, we find that the Tribunal does have the jurisdiction to
proceed with the hearing and that Mr. Alllwas properly charged as a student.

AIIIIII

Mr.
is a student of the University of Toronto because he is enrolled in a course of study.
By enrolling in the university, a student agrees to abide by the rules that apply to members of the
university community including the rules about academic integrity found in the Code. Mr.
AIIII is a student of the university whether or not he is actually attending a class or studying
for an exam because being a student of the university is his status and is not a position, like
teaching assistant, that he fills from time to time. He was therefore still a student even when he
was working as a teaching assistant. In fact, he could not have worked as a teaching assistant
unless he was a student. As a result of Mr. AIIIII' s status as a student, he is bound to his
obligations to the university community at all times including those times when he is working as
a teaching assistant. Those obligations include a commitment to academic integrity.
An arbitrator has exclusive jurisdiction over any dispute arising between the university and the
union relating to the interpretation, administration, application or violation of the collective

- 14 agreement. That is the principle for which Weber v. Ontario Hydro (supra) stands. It does not
stand for the principle that every dispute that arises in the employment context is within the
exclusive jurisdiction of an arbitrator. The charges against Mr. AIIIII are not a dispute arising
explicitly or implicitly out of the collective agreement. The essential character of the dispute is
whether Mr. A. . violated his obligations with respect to academic integrity. The charges
against Mr. AIIII arise from allegations that he fraudulently inflated his brother's marks. In
other words, he is a student who allegedly cheated. He was not relieved of the obligation he has
as a student to act with academic integrity when he stepped into the classroom as a teaching
assistant.
The issue before the Tribunal is whether Mr. AIIII violated the Code and, if so, what penalty
should be imposed. That is not an issue over which an arbitrator has jurisdiction. As noted above,
an arbitrator has jurisdiction over the interpretation, application, administration or alleged
violation of the collective agreement. However, not all issues that arise in an employment
context fall into those categories. For example in Piko v. Hudson's Bay Company (supra), the
Ontario Court of Appeal found that the court did have jurisdiction to hear a law suit against the
employer alleging malicious prosecution. The Court noted at paragraph 11 that, "Some disputes
between employers and employees may not arise under the collective agreement; others may call
for a remedy that the arbitrator has no power to grant." In Regina Police Association Ltd. (supra)
the arbitrator did not have jurisdiction over disciplinary matters because the legislature had
intended that those issues be determined through a different process. In St. Anne-Nackawic Pulp
and Paper Co. (supra), the court found that it had the jurisdiction to impose an injunction in a
labour dispute because the labour arbitration process could not provide an adequate remedy. In
Goudie v. Ottawa (supra), a claim was allowed to proceed before the court because it was found
to be about a pre-employment agreement and therefore did not arise out of the interpretation,
application, administration or alleged violation of the collective agreement. In Quebec
(Commission des droits do la personne et des droits de la jeunesses) (supra), the Supreme Court
found that the Human Rights Tribunal had jurisdiction with respect to a provision in a collective
agreement which allegedly discriminated against younger teachers because the issue in essence
was about the negotiation of the collective agreement not its interpretation, application,
administration or alleged violation. The "full factual context" of this dispute is that Mr. AIIII is
not just an employee of the university but that at the time he allegedly committed the offences he
was also a student and bound to act with academic integrity or face sanctions under the Code.
This collective agreement does not cover disputes that arise out of Mr. ~ ' s status as a
student under the Code. There are no provisions in the collective agreement that deal specifically
with academic integrity. Nothing in the collective agreement ousts the Provost's right to lay a
charge under the Code. Given the crucial importance of academic integrity to this, or any,
university, the parties to a collective agreement would have to very clearly state that students
working as teaching assistants were not subject to the Code or its procedures to oust the
jurisdiction of the Tribunal. The absence of such language indicates that that was not the parties'
intention.
The collective agreement is a labour relations scheme, but the Code is an academic integrity
scheme. The Tribunal has the power to impose academic penalties which are appropriate to the
alleged offences such as suspension from a course, program or the university for a period of time

- 15 and ordering that a student's record reflect the sanctions. Mr. ~ wishes to apply for a
course leading to the profession of accountant. It is a profession requiring trustworthiness. If he
committed the alleged offences, it may be appropriate for his records to reflect his dishonesty for
a period of time. The university's reputation that its degrees are honestly obtained is ultimately
all that it has. If Mr. ~ committed the acts with which he is accused, he has undermined his
own degree as well as those of his fellow students. He has disadvantaged those who obtained
their marks honestly by dishonestly raising his brother's marks. These are all issues which arise
because the essential characteristic of the dispute is one of academic integrity and not the
violation of the collective agreement. These are not issues which would be part of a dispute
before a labour arbitrator but are always concerns of the Tribunal. The university has an interest
in ensuring that students who graduate have acted with academic integrity as members of the
community and also in deterring students from helping each other cheat. Those are not
considerations that arise from the employment context. These considerations are similar to those
of the disciplinary body of a professional college which must take into account the public
interest. For example in Fox v. British Columbia College of Teachers (supra), the court found at
paragraph 26 that "The considerations which govern the outcome of labour arbitrations and
grievances are not identical to the concerns of a body like the College of Teachers, which must
consider the broader public interest on a province wide basis: see Young v. British Columbia
College of Teachers, [2001] B.C.J. No. 405, 2001 BCCA 164 at Paras.44 to 64."
The union has suggested that if the Tribunal were to proceed with this matter it would threaten
the collective agreement or the collective bargaining relationship. There is no real basis for that
fear. The only time the Tribunal would be involved with one of the bargaining unit members is in
a situation in which a teaching assistant is accused of violating the Code. It is a situation so rare
that neither party was able to come up with a case where it had been addressed even though
teaching assistants are unionized at many universities. The issues of academic integrity included
in the Code are not included in the collective agreement and therefore proceeding with this
dispute does not undermine any of its provisions.
Mr. AIIII also argues that he should be considered a member of faculty under the Code. The
Code is concerned ''with the responsibilities of faculty members and students". There is no
question that Mr.
was bound to the Code as a student. The only question is whether he
had a different status under the Code during those hours in which he was working as a teaching

Alllll

assistant. The words "teaching assistant" are only mentioned in the definition of "instructor" but
instructor is only mentioned in the Divisional Procedures section of the Code. "Instructor" is not
a status under the Code. Mr. A. .'s status under the Code continued to be that of student. He
was a student who was hired as a teaching assistant. He was not part of the teaching staff.
Guidance can be drawn from the U of T Act under the authority of which the Governing Council
issued the Code. The U of T Act clarifies that part-time lecturers who are also students are
excluded from the definition of "teaching staff'. Mr. A - i s a student for the purposes of the
Code because that is his status at the university. He did not stop being a student and become a
member of the faculty when he worked as a teaching assistant. His alleged offence is properly
treated as an offence committed by a person who is asking the university to confer a degree. He
should not be in a better or different position than any other student who assists another student
to cheat. Mr.
was still bound to the obligations of a student under the Code when he was

AIIII

- 16 -

'Norking as a teaching assistant and was capable of being charged as a student. The charges laid
against Mr. A-were not an abuse of process and should not be stayed.
For all of the above reasons, we find that the Tribunal has the jurisdiction to proceed with
hearing the charges against A • AIIII. Mr. A. .'s preliminary motion is therefore denied.

Dated at Toronto, January 14, 2009

Laura Trachuk, Co-Chair
Adil D'Sousa, Student Panel Member
Graham Trope, Faculty Panel Member

