Report 287

   DATE:Â December 10, 2003
   PARTIES:Â Â Ms. L. (the âStudentâ) v. University of Toronto, Faculty of
   Arts and Science

   HEARING DATES: October 8, 2003 and October 29, 2003

   Committee Members:
   Assistant Dean Jane Kidner, Chair
   Professor Pamela Catton
   Professor Phil Byer
   Professor Gretchen Kerr
   Mr. Mike Foderick

   Appearances:

   For the Student Appellant:
   Ms. L. (the âStudentâ)
   Ms. Deirdre Ann Newman, Counsel for the Student

   For the University of Toronto Faculty of Arts and Science:
   Professor David Cameron, Acting Vice-Dean, Undergraduate Education and
   Teaching
   Ms. Elaine Ishibashi, Associate Registrar
   Professor Manuela Scarci, former Undergraduate Coordinator, Department
   of Italian Studies

   Faculty of Arts and Science (âFASâ) â Student appeals FAS Academic
   Appeals Board decision denying Studentâs petition to Committee on
   Standing requesting late withdrawal without academic penalty from
   first-year Italian course â Student had diagnosed learning disability
   and medical conditions causing extreme migraines â Student experienced
   family medical emergencies and failed to withdraw from course within
   prescribed deadline â fact that Student entitled to special
   accommodation does not absolve her of responsibility to comply with
   Universityâs rules governing the dropping of courses â students
   entitled to special accommodation nevertheless have obligation to
   assess own ability within any particular course and to withdraw prior
   to deadline if they feel they cannot pass - special and unique family
   emergencies arose in this case which exacerbated learning disability -
   appeal allowed

   The Student appealed from a decision of the Academic Appeals Board of
   the Universityâs Faculty of Arts and Science denying the Studentâs
   petition to the Committee on Standing requesting late withdrawal
   without academic penalty from a first-year Italian course.

   The Student had a learning disability and was registered with the
   Universityâs Accessibility Services. The Student also had a number of
   environmental sensitivities and allergies which could cause extreme
   migraines. In the summer of 1999, the Student was enrolled in a
   first-year Italian course. Due to her experiencing migraine headaches,
   the Student was unable to write the first test in the course.
   Subsequently, the Studentâs mother became ill and was admitted to
   hospital. The Studentâs father was also seriously ill at the time and
   the Student travelled to be with her parents. As a result, the Student
   was unable to write the second test in the course. The Student again
   travelled to visit her parents later that summer and ultimately did not
   write the final exam. Due to a combination of her medical conditions
   and that of her parents, the Student decided to drop the course. At
   this point, however, the deadline to drop the course had passed.

   The Academic Appeals Committee (âAACâ) accepted that the Student was
   under an enormous amount of pressure due to family medical emergencies.
   The situation was exacerbated by the Studentâs learning disability and
   her environmental sensitivities. The AAC also noted that the University
   had made great efforts to accommodate the Student during this time,
   including by scheduling make-up tests. The AAC stated that the mere
   fact that the Student was entitled to special accommodation did not
   absolve her of the responsibility to comply with the Universityâs rules
   governing the dropping of courses. The Committee found that students
   entitled to special accommodation nevertheless have an obligation to
   assess their own ability within any particular course and to withdraw
   from a course prior to the deadline if they feel they cannot pass. In
   this particular case, however, the majority of the Panel found that the
   special and unique family medical emergencies that the Student faced,
   exacerbated by her learning disability, made it difficult for the
   Student to assess her situation properly and to withdraw from the
   course in time.

   The AAC allowed the appeal and ordered that the Student be permitted
   retroactive late withdrawal without academic penalty from the course.
   [1]View Report

References

   1. file:///media/12683
