Case 1274

FILE:

   Case # 1274 (2022-2023)

DATE:

   July 11, 2022

PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v. X.Z. (‚the Student‚)

HEARING DATE(S):

   April 19, 2022, via Zoom

PANEL MEMBERS:

   Ms. Cynthia Kuehl, Chair

   Professor Ernest Lam, Faculty Panel Member

   Ms. Saskia Van Beers, Student Panel Member

APPEARANCES:

   Ms. Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg
   Rothstein LLP

   Mr. William Webb, Co-Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg Rothstein LLP

HEARING SECRETARY:

   Ms. Nadia Bruno, Special Projects Officer, Office of Appeals,
   Discipline and Faculty Grievances

   The Student was charged under s. B.i.1(b) of the Code of Behaviour on
   Academic Matters , 1995 (the ‚ Code ‚ ) on the basis that the Student
   knowingly used or possessed an unauthorized aid or obtained
   unauthorized assistance in an assessment. In the alternative, the
   Student was charged under s. B.i.3(b) of the Code on the basis that the
   Student knowingly engaged in a form of cheating, academic dishonesty or
   misconduct, fraud or misrepresentation not otherwise described in the
   Code in order to obtain academic credit or other academic advantage in
   connection with an assessment.

   The hearing was scheduled to commence at 5:45 p.m., but the Panel
   waited until 6:00 p.m. before commencing the hearing. The Student did
   not appear. The University requested that the hearing proceed in the
   absence of the Student. The Panel noted that the jurisdiction for
   proceeding in the absence of the Student is set out in ss. 6 and 7 of
   the Statutory Powers Procedure Act (‚SPPA‚) and rule 17 of the
   University Tribunal Rules of Practice and Procedure (‚Rules‚). The
   Panel further noted that the Tribunal may proceed in the absence of a
   party provided that reasonable notice of an oral hearing has been given
   to the party in accordance with the SPPA, and when a party does not
   attend and reasonable notice was given, a party is not entitled to
   further notice. The University provided evidence that the Student was
   served with the charges, Notice of Electronic Hearing, and other
   correspondence to the Student‚s email address as recorded in the
   Repository of Student Information (‚ROSI‚). The Panel noted that
   students are responsible for maintaining in ROSI a current and valid
   mailing address and University-issued email account and are expected to
   retrieve mail and email on a frequent and consistent basis. Rule 9 of
   the Rules provides that a student may be served by sending a copy of a
   document to a student‚s email address as contained in ROSI. The Panel
   noted that the service of documents to the Student‚s email address
   contained in ROSI therefore met the requirements for service under rule
   9. The University provided evidence that they took numerous steps to
   contact the Student including by email, telephone, and courier to the
   Student‚s last known mailing address contained in ROSI. Given the
   evidence, the Panel found that notice had been given in accordance with
   the SPPA and the Rules and that there was no reason not to proceed in
   the absence of the Student in accordance with s. 7(3) of the SPPA. The
   Panel proceeded to hear the case on its merits in the absence of the
   Student.

   Regarding the charge under s.B.i.1(b) of the Code, the Panel received
   affidavit evidence of one of the professors who taught the course for
   which the assessment in question was submitted and of a member of the
   Association of Professional Language Interpreters who provided a
   translation of a poster for Easy Edu, a commercial tutoring service.
   The Professor supplemented his affidavit with testimonial evidence. The
   Professor‚s evidence outlined that after the assessment, the Professor
   was contacted by a student in the course who advised that there has
   been a review session online by a commercial tutoring service called
   Easy Edu. The review session included a copy of a student package that
   contained 22 questions. The Professor confirmed that those exact same
   22 questions had been provided to another student who subsequently
   admitted they had paid a tutor to check their answers during the
   assessment period. Another student emailed the Professor, and the
   Student Academic Integrity office, expressing concerns with the
   academic integrity of this particular assessment and attached a link to
   a YouTube video of the Easy Edu review session. Upon review of the
   YouTube video, the Professor noted that all 22 questions in the student
   package were solved, there were at least 180 attendees, and the session
   occurred during the assessment period. The Panel noted that the
   Professor testified that the student package had four different authors
   on it and that in his view, a proficient person could both modify the
   questions and develop solutions to all the questions in a one-hour
   period. The Professor further testified that although the video was in
   another language, he was able to understand the math as seen in the
   video and confirmed that the 22 questions that were solved during the
   review session were the ones he had written for the assessment.
   Furthermore, review of the rough work submitted by the Student revealed
   a number of similarities with the answers that Easy Edu provided in the
   review session. The Panel noted that the Professor confirmed that he
   was able to see the names of the attendees at the review session and
   these names included the name of the Student. The Panel was convinced,
   on a balance of probabilities, that the student whose name appeared on
   the review video was the same person as the Student who is the subject
   of these charges. The Panel further noted that there was only one
   student by that name in the course, and therefore only one student of
   that name would be motivated to attend. Furthermore, the similarities
   of the specific idiosyncratic notations between the Easy Edu answers
   and the Student‚s rough work established that the Student received and
   used unauthorized assistance to complete the assessment, contrary to s.
   B.i.1(b) of the Code. In consideration of all the evidence, the Panel
   found that the University had established the first charge. The
   University withdrew the alternative charge.

   In determining sanction, the Panel carefully considered the factors set
   out in University of Toronto v. Mr. C. (Case No. 1976/77-3, November 5,
   1976). The Panel noted that there was no evidence of the Student‚s
   character other than those in relation to the offence. The Panel noted
   that this was the Student‚s first offence, but it was unable to make
   any findings in relation to the likelihood of repetition of offence in
   the future. With respect to the nature of the offence, the Panel noted
   that the University must be able to trust that asynchronous testing
   will be completed with the same academic integrity as if the test were
   administered in person. Regarding the detriment to the University, the
   Panel accepted that the University‚s trust in the Student was harmed as
   a result of this incident and noted that the University is harmed
   whenever students participate in mass cheating incidents, as they
   potentially send a message to the broader community regarding the
   University‚s integrity. The Panel outlined that general deterrence is
   an important factor in these cases especially since it is apparent that
   the abuse of asynchronous/online testing is an ongoing issue at the
   University. The Panel noted that unauthorized assistance strikes at the
   heart of academic integrity, and it is appropriate to send a strong
   message to student that this type of misconduct will be treated very
   seriously. In determining the appropriate length of suspension, the
   Panel had particular regard for two cases provided to it by the
   University: University of Toronto and D.K. (Case No. 1119, July 21,
   2021) ( D.K.) and University of Toronto and S.C. (Case No. 1215,
   January 13, 2022) ( S.C .). The Panel agreed that where there is the
   use of a commercial provider there ought to be consequences over and
   above the typical two-year suspension for unauthorized assistance and
   conventional academic dishonesty. S.C. and D.K. are good examples of
   incremental increased in the length of suspension. Given the absence of
   any other aggravating factors and any prior misconduct, the Panel
   determined that a suspension of two-and-a-half years, representing the
   aggravation of a commercial nature of enterprise only, was appropriate.
   The Panel imposed the following sanctions: a grade of zero in the
   course; a two-and-a-half-year suspension; a three-and-a-half-year
   notation on the transcript; and a report to the Provost office for
   publication.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/30613
