Case #639

   DATE: February 27, 2012
   PARTIES: University of Toronto v. Y.L.
   Hearing Date(s): February 14, 2012
   Panel Members:
   Ms. Wendy Matheson, Chair
   Dr. Joel Kirsh, Faculty Member
   Ms. Susan Mazzatto, Student Member
   Appearances:
   Mr. Robert Centa, Assistant Discipline Counsel for the University
   Ms. Martine Garland, DLS
   In Attendance:
   Ms. Y.L., the Student
   Prof. John Britton, Dean's Designate
   Mr. Christopher Lang, Director, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty
   Grievances

   Trial Division â s. B.i.1(a) of Code â forged documents â submitted
   falsified documents in support of petition for seven courses on
   different occasions â Agreed Statement of Facts - guilty plea â finding
   of guiltÂ  â Joint Submission on Penalty â Panel would have considered
   a more severe penalty absent the joint submission â threshold to reject
   a joint submission is high - Panel accepted Joint Submission on Penalty
   with regret grade assignment of zero for course; five-year suspension;
   six-year notation on transcript; report to Provost
   Student charged under s. B.i.1(a) of the Code. The charges related to
   allegations that the Student submitted falsified documents in support
   of her petitions to defer exams or withdraw without academic penalty
   for seven different courses on different occasions. The falsified
   documents included Medical certificates, false statements that her
   father was critically ill and later, had died, and documents purporting
   to be a "critical condition notice" and a "death notice" from a
   hospital and others in China. The Student pleaded guilty to the
   charges, and the panel found the Student guilty under s. B.i.1(a).Â
   The parties submitted a Joint Submission on Penalty. The Panel stated
   that absent the joint submission, it would have considered a more
   severe penalty given that the pattern of elaborate falsehood, done
   deliberately to obtain an academic advantage, was antithetical to the
   core values expected of students as set out in the Code. However, the
   Panel recognized that to reject a joint submission, it would have to be
   of the view that accepting the joint submission would bring the
   administration of justice into disrepute, a high threshold to meet. The
   Panel found that this was not such a case and accepted the joint
   submission with regret. The Panel imposed a grade assignment of zero
   for the seven courses, a five-year suspension; a six-year notation of
   the Student's transcript; and a report be issued to the Provost.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12815
