Case #590

   DATE: August 10, 2010
   PARTIES: University of Toronto v. A.L.
   Hearing Date(s): July 13, 2010
   Panel Members:
   John Keefe, Chair
   Professor Bruno Magliocchetti, Faculty Member
   Elena Kuzmin, Student Member
   Appearances:
   Robert Centa, Assistant Discipline Counsel for the University
   In Attendance:
   Dr. Kristi Gourlay, Office of Academic Integrity
   Ms. Betty-Ann Campbell, Law Clerk for the Discipline Counsel
   A.L., the Student
   Trial Division â s. B.I.3.(a) of Code â altered or falsified academic
   record â altered unofficial transcript â forged degree certificate â
   hearing attendedÂ  â Agreed Statement of Facts â guilty plea â
   University submission on penalty accepted â recommendation that the
   Student be expelled as per s. C.ii.(b)(i) of Code; five-year suspension
   pending expulsion decision; and report to Provost
   Student charged twice under s. B.I.3(a) of the Code. Charges relate to
   the allegations that the Student circulated a falsified document
   purporting to be the Studentâs academic transcript and further
   circulated a forged degree certificate he claimed to have received from
   the University to employers. The Panel found the Student knew that the
   document purporting to be the Studentâs transcript listed courses he
   had not successfully completed, misrepresented grades earned in courses
   that he had completed, misrepresented sessional grade point averages,
   and misrepresented the Studentâs cumulative grade point average. The
   Panel was provided with an Agreed Statement of Facts signed by the
   Student and counsel for the University. In the Agreed Statement of
   Facts, the Student admitted to committing the academic offences. The
   Panel found the Student guilty of both charges. Counsel for the
   University submitted penalty recommending expulsion together with a
   five-year suspension from the University. The Panel was advised the
   Student had cooperated throughout the process, entered into an Agreed
   Statement of Facts, and that the Student showed genuine remorse. The
   Panel reviewed the previous decisions dealing with other instances of
   forged or falsified documents and found that in most cases the penalty
   imposed was expulsion, even if the Student had entered into an Agreed
   Statement of Facts or attended the hearing. The Panel concluded that to
   maintain the integrity of the Universityâs ethical rules it had no
   alternative but to recommend expulsion. The Panel accepted the
   Universityâs submission on penalty and recommended expulsion from the
   University, imposed a five-year suspension pending the Studentâs
   expulsion hearing, and held that a report to the Provost would be
   issued.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12773
