Case 512 - Appeal

DATE:

   July 27, 2006

PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v. C.Z.

Hearing Date(s):

   March 30, 2006

Panel Members:

   Patricia D.S. Jackson, Senior-Chair
   Cheryl Shook
   Jorge Sousa
   Lorraine Weinrib

Appearances:

   Ms. Lily Harmer, for the University of Toronto
   The Student
   Jennifer Kotz, for the Student

   Appeal by the University from a Tribunal decision in which the Student
   was found guilty of plagiarizing large portions of a submitted essay,
   contrary to s. B.i.1(d) of the Code. The Hearing Panel found that the
   Student had been haphazard in text citation method and submitted the
   paper in good faith and without any intention to portray the work of
   someone else but that he ought reasonably have known that he was
   committing an academic offence. Prior to the delivery of any notice of
   appeal, the University permitted the Student to graduate. The
   University claimed that the decision to allow the Student to graduate
   was made without adverting to s. C.i.(a)12 of the Code. The University
   appealed the sanction portion of the decision respecting the
   jurisdiction of the Tribunal, under s. C.ii(b) of the Code,Â  to impose
   three of the sanctions ordered; that the sanctions did not reflect the
   nature of the offence; and that the sanctions were inconsistent with
   those imposed in previous decisions involving plagiarism. The Board
   considered s. C.i.(a)12 of the Code and asked the parties to address
   the question of whether, since the Student had graduated, the decision
   of the Tribunal had not necessarily become the final disposition of the
   accusation. The Board found that as a result of the Studentâs
   graduation and the provisions of s. C.i.(a)12 of the Code, it lacked
   jurisdiction to entertain the appeal. The Board found that the
   provisions of s. B.1.4 of the Code did not detract from the conclusion
   articulated in s. C.i.(a)12 of the Code. The Board agreed with the
   Studentâs position that s. B.1.4 of the Code applied in circumstances
   in which the offence was not detected until after the Student had
   graduated. The Board found that the University sought the imposition of
   a penalty which was inconsistent with having allowed the Student to
   graduate and which was moot in light of that graduation. The Board
   found that the appropriate method to address any possible policy
   concerns that would justify allowing the University to permit a student
   to graduate without precluding an appeal with respect to convictionÂ
   was by amendment of the Code, which did not permit an appeal in such
   circumstances. The Board observed that it was in agreement with the
   Universityâs position on the seriousness of the offence of plagiarism.
   The Board stated that the difficulty of identifying plagiarism was a
   reason why sanctions imposed should reflect the seriousness of the
   offence and operate as a deterrent, both to intentional plagiarism and
   plagiarism resulting from reckless indifference to accepted citation
   standards. The Board stated that if it had the jurisdiction to do so,
   it would have allowed the appeal and imposed a more serious sanction
   drawn from the provisions of s. C.ii(b) of the Code. The Board quashed
   the appeal.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/13010
