;

i

.,

IN THE MATTER of the University Tribunal
of the University of Toronto
(Appeal Division)

.A
RECEIVED
JUL 2 7 2006
OFF•CE OF T:iE GOVEf-,,,J;•;G

Members of the Panel:
Patricia D.S. Jackson, Senior Chair
Cheryl Shook
Jorge Sousa
Lorraine Weinrib

BETWEEN:
University of Toronto
Appellant
- and-

\,\ K.v C , 2 ( iltf StlJ:DEWfJ

Respondent

COUNCIL
' 1i'l:VE!iSITY OF

•':JRDNTO

)
)
)

Lily Harmer

)
)
)
)
)
)
)

Jennifer Krotz

)
)
)
)

Heard March 30, 2006

On appeal from the decision of the University Tribunal of November 8, 2004.

6691268.1
80000-9999

-2-

REASONS FOR DECISION
This is an appeal from the sanction imposed by the University Tribunal on
November 8, 2004 and elaborated in reasons for decision issued April 14, 2005.
At the conclusion of a hearing held October 25, November 4 and November 8,
2004, the Trial Division of the University Tribunal found 'Tite '6TUO€fvfguilty of the following
charge of plagiarism:
On or about March 10, 2004, you knowingly represented as your
own, an idea or expression of an idea, and/or work of another in
connection with the form of academic work, namely, Assignment
No. 3 on the topic of Speech Application Language Tags (SALT),
an assignment that you submitted with · C. • L.
to fulfill the
course requirements of FIS-2178, contrary to Section B.I.1(d) of
the Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters, 1995 (the "Code").
Pursuant to Section B of the Code you are deemed to have acted
knowingly if you ought reasonably to have known that you
represented as your own, an idea or expression of an idea or work
of another.
The matters which are the subject of the conviction occurred in the last term of

j \H: ..sroot:rvfs two-year graduate program in the Faculty of Information Studies. He had
previously obtained a graduate degree from the University of Manitoba. He was found to have
plagiarized large portions of an essay submitted in his name in a course called "Designing
Electronic Descriptive Tools" in the Faculty of Information Studies. Much of the paper
contained direct quotes from internet sources which were not attributed. The Tribunal held that
~st"Ot{Wt' Ought reasonably to have known that he was committing an academic offence, and
entered a conviction. It four:id that ·rne .sruoovr had a "rather haphazard in text citation method",

-3-

"an incomplete understanding of the nature and conduct of citation" that was "honest and
honestly held", and that "he submitted [the paper] in good faith, and without any intention to
portray the work of someone else as his own".
At the conclusion of the hearing on November 8, 2004, following its conviction of

Tu~ .St'1JO£tvr, the Trial Division imposed the following sanctions:
(a)

an oral and written reprim@d to 1::>~clelivered by Vice-Dean Cherry of the Faculty
of Information Studies to 1~ Sfl.106.tvT

(b)

a requirement that Ttte-Sn.l06.\1resubmit the written assignment at issue in its
entirety, with proper c1tat10ns in the AP A citation style, and either footnotes or inline citations together with a properly cited bibliography;

(c)

a requirement thatilte" Si~t:av'Twrite a letter to each author whose work was
referenced in the written assignment, acknowledging the reference made of the
work of the author, with a copy delivered to Vice-Dean Cherry;

(d)

a 10% reduction of the final grade in course FIS-2178;

(e)

a nQtation of this proceeding and of the conviction on1'-tesruoevv1s transcript to
remain until he has completed 3 citation courses in the mrorum Instructional
Series offered by the Faculty (CO2, C03 and C04 or the equivalent); and

(f)

publication of the decision in its entirety with the student's name withheld.
The panel indicated that written reasons would follow its oral decision.
Following this oral decision and prior to the delivery of any notice of appeal, on

November 17, 2004 the University permittedittt?; .sro~rvTto graduate. The University explains
this by noting that but for the academic misconduct in issue, ttt~Sfl.!00,\rwould have been eligible
to graduate from the University in June of 2004, and that the course in which the plagiarism
occurred was not a course that he needed to graduate. It says that nt66rVOEJtt had been waiting a
number of months to have the allegations addressed and in these circumstances every effort had
been made to conclude the matter as quickly as possible. The University now says this decision

-4-

was made without adverting to Article C.l.(a)12 of the Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters
referred to more particularly below.
Having not yet received the written reasons for decision, the University filed a
notice of appeal on December 3, 2004 and expressly reserved its rights to file an amended notice
of appeal upon receipt of the written reasons.
On April 14, 2005 the Trial Division issued its written reasons for decision. On
May 13, 2005 the University filed an amended notice of appeal taking issue with the sanctions,
save the publication imposed, on the following bases:
(a)

the Code does not give the Tribunal jurisdiction to impose the sanctions referred
to in paragraphs (b), ( c) and (e) above and the Tribunal exceeded its jurisdiction
in so doing;

(b)

the sanctions do not reflect the serious nature of the offence ofola~iarism
including the necessity for a sanction which would deter The .St\.)()6\.ffrom reoffending and other students from committing similar offences; and

(c)

the sanctions were inconsistent with those imposed in other cases of plagiarism
with which the Tribunal has dealt.
The reason the University says the Tribunal lacked the jurisdiction to impose the

sanctions it did are the provisions of s. C. II(b) of the Code which read as follows:

Tribunal Sanctions
1.

One or more of this following sanctions may be imposed by the Tribunal
upon the conviction of any student:

(a)

an oral and/or written reprimand;

(b)

an oral and/or written reprimand and, with the permission of the instructor,
the resubmission of the piece of academic work in respect of which the
offence was committed, for evaluation. Such a sanction shall be imposed
only for minor offences and where the student has committed no previous
offence;

-5( c)

assignment of a grade of zero or a failure for the piece of academic work
in respect of which the offence was committed;

(d)

assignment of a penalty in the form of a reduction of the final grade in the
course in respect of which the offence was committed;

( e)

denial of privileges to use any facility of the University, including library
and computer facilities;

(t)

a monetary fine to cover the costs ofreplacing damaged property or
misused supplies in respect of which the offence was committed;

(g)

assignment of a grade of zero or a failure for any completed or
uncompleted course or courses in respect of which any offence was
committed;

(h)

suspension from attendance in a course or courses, a program, an
academic unit or division, or the University for such a period of time up to
five years as may be determined by the Tribunal. Where a student has not
completed a course or courses in respect of which an offence has not been
committed, withdrawal from the course or courses without academic
penalty shall be allowed;

(i)

recommendation of expulsion from the University. The Tribunal has
power only to recommend that such a penalty be imposed. In any such
case, the recommendation shall be made by the Tribunal to the President
for a recommendation by him or her to the Governing Council. Expulsion
shall mean that the student shall be denied any further registration at the
University in any program, and his or her academic record and transcript
shall record this sanction permanently. Where a student has not completed
a course or courses in respect of which an offence has not been committed,
withdrawal from the course or courses without academic penalty shall be
allowed. If a recommendation for expulsion is not adopted, the Governing
Council shall have the power to impose such lesser penalty as it sees fit;

(j)

(i)

recommendation to the Governing Council for cancellation, recall
or suspension of one or more degrees, diplomas or certificates
obtained by any graduate; or

(ii)

cancellation of academic standing or academic credits obtained by
any former student

who, while enrolled, committed any offence which if detected before the
granting of the degree, diploma, certificate, standing or credits would, in
the judgement of the Tribunal, have resulted in a conviction and the
application of a sanction sufficiently severe that the degree, diploma,
certificate, standing, credits or marks would not have been granted.

-6The University asks that the appeal be allowed and the following sanctions
substituted:

(a)

a grade of O in the course;

(b)

suspension from the University for 1 year (the University acknowledged in oral
argument that, given the student's graduation, this provision would have no
practical effect);

( c)

a record of the sanction on~sru1'.:>~-Vtr' s academic record for 2 years; and

(d)

publication with the student's name withheld.
During the course of the oral argument of the appeal, the parties referred to the

following language in section C.I.(a)12 of the Code: .

No degree, diploma or certificate of the University shall be
conferred or awarded, nor shall a student be allowed to withdraw
from a course from the time of the alleged events until the final
disposition of the accusation ....
This led the panel to ask the parties to consider the jurisdiction to proceed with
the appeal in light of these provisions. Specifically, the parties were asked to address the
question of whether, since it\eJWOel\l'fhad graduated, the decision of the trial panel had not
necessarily become the final disposition of the accusation. Ultimately, the parties were invited to
provide further written submissions on this issue, which they qid.

The University's position was thatT!tGSTUl'JEr\-T had been allowed to graduate to
avoid any unwarranted prejudice, that the section in question addressed what a student could or
could not do while an allegation of academic misconduct was under review and was not intended
to bring the proceedings to a "premature end", and that at no time did the University intend to
waive its right to appeal. It suggested its interpretation was strengthened by another portion of
the Code which permits the University to prosecute former students who have graduated for

.- 7 alleged academic offences committed while they were students (section B.I.4 of the Code).
Finally, the University said it should not be penalized for having acted quickly and in the
student's favour where it was clearly not the intention of the University to waive an appeal and
where the language of the Code does not support, or at least does not clearly support, the
existence of such a waiver in the circumstances.

Counsel for t & i ~submitted that by permitting ~ur.Jel-"ho graduate the
University had accepted the Tribunal's disposition as final, and was estopped from appealing the
sanctions imposed. She distinguished the provisions of section B.I.4 of the Code as applying in
circumstances where the University does not detect the offence until after the student has
graduated and therefore could not have taken steps under the Code that would have delayed
graduation until the final disposition of the accusation. She noted that one of the elements of the
sanction now sought by the University - the suspension for a year - had it been imposed would
have prevented'tlte;srote,rfrom graduating, thereby illustrating both the inconsistency of the
University's position and one of the reasons for the provisions of section C.I.(a) 12.

The panel has concluded that as a result of1tteSruoer.1's graduation and the
provisions of section C.I.(a)12 it lacks jurisdiction to entertain this appeal. The language of that
section is both mandatory and unambiguous. Indeed, we arrive at that conclusion for the same
reason that we would have held in favour of the University's first ground of appeal, had we had
jurisdiction to entertain it. Just as the Code is precise and comprehensive as to the penalties
which can be imposed by a Tribunal upon conviction, it is equally precise and comprehensive
about the circumstances in which student has been accused of a violation of the Code may .
graduate:

\

-8-

"No degree .. .shall be conferred or awarded ... until the final
disposition of the accusation ... " (Emphasis added.)
We do not find that the provisions of section B.I.4 of the Code detracts from this
conclusion. Rather, we agree with counsel for Ttte-SruOt111tthat on its face this provision clearly
applies in circumstances in which the offence is not detected until after the student has
graduated.

The facts of this case assist in illustrating why the provisions of section C.I.(a) 12
are appropriate. In effect, in seeking a one-year suspension, the University is seeking the
imposition of a penalty which is inconsistent with having allowed :-tll'e-Stvo~t'. to graduate, and in
any event moot in light of that graduation. Moreover, even ifthere were policy reasons which
would justify allowing the University to permit a student to graduate without precluding an
appeal with respect to conviction - and we do not say that there are - the appropriate method to
address those policy concerns is by an amendment to the Code which would permit an appeal in
such circumstances. The current Code does not.

While we have concluded we do not have jurisdiction to alter the sanctions
imposed by the trial division, we consider that it is appropriate to observe that we are in general
agreement with the University's position on the seriousness of the offence of plagiarism. As the

Code itself notes, plagiarism is both a perversion of the academic experience, and one of the
most elusive of academic infractions. Plagiarism seriously undermines the academic principles
which are the foundation of the university experience. That is why the Code penalizes not just
intentional plagiarism, but also plagiarism which results from unreasonable ignorance.
Plagiarism has always been difficult to detect, and with the widespread use of internet sources
has become more so. The difficulty of identifying plagiarism when it occurs is one of the

-9reasons why it is important that the sanctions imposed when it has been identified reflect the
seriousness of the offence and operate as a deterrent, both to intentional plagiarism, as well as
plagiarism resulting from reckless indifference to accepted citation standards. It is important to
note and to reflect in sanctions that the offence occurs not only when the student knows, but also
when the student "ought reasonably to have known" that he or she has plagiarized.

If we possessed the jurisdiction to do so, we would have allowed the appeal and
imposed a more serious sanction drawn from the provisions of section C.ii(b) of the Code.

However, llle;Sn)'~i-has graduated and this case was therefore finally disposed of

by the trial division. We have no power to change the sanctions it imposed. We therefore quash
the appeal.

We express our thanks to counsel for 'rtle &11JOB,-\T and for the University for their
extremely helpful oral and written submissions.

Jorge Sousa

Lorraine Weinrib

