Case 1408

FILE:

   Case # 1408 (2022-2023)

DATE:

   June 6, 2023

PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v. L.Y. (‚the Student‚)

HEARING DATE(S):

   March 3, 2023, via Zoom

PANEL MEMBERS:

   Shaun Laubman, Chair

   Professor Kevin Wang, Faculty Panel Member

   Ben Kitching, Student Panel Member

APPEARANCES:

   Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg
   Rothstein LLP

   Ryan Shah, Articling Student, Paliare Roland Rosenberg Rothstein LLP

HEARING SECRETARY:

   Samanthe Huang, Quasi-Judicial Administrative Assistant, Office of
   Appeals, Discipline and Faculty of Grievances

   The Student was charged with two counts under s. B.i.3(a) of the Code
   for knowingly forging or in any other way falsifying an academic record
   or uttering, circulating or making use of such forged, altered, or
   falsified record, namely a purported letter from the registrar and a
   transcript which the Student provided to Canada Border Services Agency.
   The Student was charged with knowingly representing as their own an
   idea or expression of an idea, and/or the work of another in an
   assignment (‚Assignment 3‚), contrary to s. B.i.1(d) of the Code. The
   Student was also charged under s. B.i.1(f) of the Code with knowingly
   submitting academic work containing a purported statement of fact
   and/or reference to a source which has been concocted in connection
   with Assignment 3. In addition, and in the alternative, the Student was
   charged under s. B.i.3(b) of the Code with knowingly engaging in any
   form of cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or
   misrepresentation not otherwise described, in order to obtain academic
   credit or advantage in connection with the purported registrar letter,
   transcript, and Assignment 3.

   The Student did not attend the hearing and was not represented by
   counsel. The Student did not participate in the disciplinary process at
   all. The Panel heard evidence that the University had made serious
   efforts to serve the Student with notice, both when the offences
   occurred in 2018 and again in 2022-2023 communications, via email,
   telephone, and courier. The Panel found that reasonable notice of the
   hearing was provided.

   The first incident, pertaining to Assignment 3, took place in Winter
   2019. The Student was enrolled in SOCA03Y3 (‚the Course‚). For
   Assignment 3, students were required to conduct a minimum of two short
   interviews with friends or relatives and write a paper analyzing the
   responses. Students were prohibited from approaching/interviewing
   strangers and were required to obtain informed consent forms. The
   Student‚s assignment did not adhere to the guidelines presented in the
   assignment. The Course instructor noted that the Student‚s assignment
   was in certain instances incoherent with unusual vocabulary yet used
   headings that employed advanced research concepts not taught in the
   Course. The instructor also reviewed the sources the Student cited and
   found that the information in the sources did not match or relate to
   the information and subject matter in Assignment 3.

   The Panel considered the evidence related to this incident and agreed
   with the University, finding the Student guilty under s. B.i.1(f) of
   the Code for concocting a source. The Panel disagreed with the
   University regarding the plagiarism charge, maintaining that the
   evidence did not establish plagiarism. Consequently, the Panel found
   the Student not guilty of plagiarism under s. B.i.1(d).

   The second incident occurred when the Student provided the Canada
   Border Services Agency with a falsified letter from the Registrar of
   the University of Toronto and transcript. In December 2019, the
   Canadian Border Services Agency sought authentication from the
   University regarding two documents pertaining to the Student: a letter
   stating the Student has completed the requirements for a degree (‚CBSA
   Letter‚) and a document purporting to be the Student‚s official
   University academic record (‚the CBSA Transcript‚). A comparison
   between the CBSA Transcript and the Student‚s actual transcript showed
   that almost all the information was inaccurate. Similarly, the CBSA
   Letter was falsified as the information was incorrect and purported to
   be from a staff member who had retired by the date of the letter.

   The Panel considered the evidence relating to the forged letter and
   transcript. The Panel found the Student guilty of two charges under s.
   B.i.3(a) of the Code for knowingly forging or in any other way
   falsifying an academic record or making use of such forged, altered, or
   falsified record.

   In determining the appropriate sanctions, the Panel considered similar
   cases presented by the University. The Panel found no evidence of
   extenuating circumstances or the Student‚s character as he did not
   participate in the hearing. The Panel found a significant likelihood of
   repetition given that the Student committed multiple offences. The
   Panel also found that while the offence of concocting facts or
   references would not warrant expulsion, two offences of forgery do. The
   Panel found that the falsification offences were a detriment to the
   University and needed general deterrence, which favoured the most
   significant penalty available, which is expulsion.

   For these reasons, the Panel accepted the University‚s recommendation
   and imposed the following sanctions: suspension from the University for
   a period of five years from the date of the Tribunal‚s order or until
   the Governing Council makes its decision on expulsion; a corresponding
   notation on the transcript; a recommendation that the Student be
   expelled; and a report to the Provost for publication.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/31205
