Report #271

   DATE: November 8, 2002
   PARTIES: Mr. V.T., (the Appellant) v. the Faculty of Arts and Science
   Hearing Date(s): October 30, 2002
   Committee Members:
   Professor Clare Beghtol
   Professor Sherwin Desser
   Professor Luigi Girolametto
   Mr. Colm Murphy
   Judicial Affairs Officer:
   Mr. Paul Holmes
   In Attendance:
   Mr. V.T., the Appellant
   Associate Dean Sue Howson, Faculty of Arts and Science, University of
   Toronto
   Faculty of Arts and Science ‚ late withdrawal without academic penalty
   ‚ time spent caring for ill family member and little experience with
   ways of a Canadian university ‚ the Student finished the course, passed
   the course and sought only to drop the course with lowest grade ‚
   circumstances were beyond the Student‚s control, unduly intrusive on
   the Student‚s ability to study, and became progressively and
   unexpectedly worse past drop date ‚ unlikely to seek help available due
   to focus on ill family member and newness to Canadian university ‚
   appeal allowed ‚ grade in the course vacated and replaced with WDR
   Request for late withdrawal without academic penalty from one course,
   based on compassionate grounds. The Student claimed that he spent time
   caring for his ill father, who was visiting from Russia, and by the
   time he realized that he was unable to continue in the course, it was
   too late to drop it. The Student claimed that he had little experience
   with the ways of a Canadian university, and he did not realize that he
   could petition for late withdrawal until well after having completed
   the course: The Student passed the course with a ‚D+‚ final grade. The
   Committee found the Student‚s petition for late withdrawal violated
   several key university procedures. The Student finished the course, he
   passed the course, and he only sought to drop the course in which he
   received his lowest grade. The Committee considered the exceptions to
   the drop date regime and found that the Student‚s situation was one in
   which already‚existing circumstances became significantly more severe
   and were not anticipated or easily accommodated. The Committee accepted
   the Student‚s claims that the circumstances in the relevant period were
   beyond his control, unduly intrusive on his ability to study, and
   became progressively and unexpectedly worse well past the drop date.
   The Student‚s pre‚occupation on his father, coupled with his newness to
   a Canadian university, made it unlikely he would seek the help
   available to him. Appeal allowed. The Committee ordered that the grade
   in the course be vacated and replaced with the non‚grade report WDR.
   [1]View Report

References

   1. file:///media/28406
