Case #861

   DATE: April 3, 2017
   PARTIES: University of Toronto v. R.R. ("the Student")

   Hearing Date(s): January 13, 2017

   Panel Members:
   Ms. Sara Zborovski, Barrister and Solicitor, Chair
   Professor Pascal Riendeau, Faculty Panel Member
   Mr. Chad Jankowski, Student Panel Member

   Appearances:
   Mr. Rob Genta, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland, Barristers
   Ms. Emily Home, Articling Student, Paliare Roland, Barristers
   Mr. Alex Redinger, Law Student for the Student, Downtown Legal Services

   In Attendance:
   Ms. Krista Osbourne, Administrative Assistant, Office of the Appeals,
   Discipline and Faculty Grievances

   Not in Attendance:
   The Student

   Trial Division - s. B.i.1(a) of Code - falsifying document - student
   wrote false name and student number on mid-term worth 20% - student not
   in attendance - guilty plea - finding of guilt based on agreed
   statement of facts - joint submission on penalty accepted - zero on
   course, three year suspension, four year notation , publication of the
   decision with the name of the Student withheld

   The Student was charged with one offence of falsifying evidence under
   s. B.i.1(a) of the Code, and alternatively, falsifying an academic
   record under s. B.i.3(a) of the Code, and alternatively, academic
   dishonesty under s. B.i.3(b) of the Code. The student admitted to
   writing a false name and student number on a mid-term worth 20% of the
   final grade in the course.

   The parties submitted an Agreed Statement of Facts in which the Student
   pled guilty to all three charges.Â A Joint Submission on Penalty was
   also submitted. The Panel noted that the threshold for rejecting a
   jointly-proposed sanction was not met and that the Joint Submission on
   Penalty was appropriate as measured against the often referenced
   factors relevant to sentencing considerations. The Panel noted that the
   Student had previously been sanctioned twice for academic offences
   receiving a grade of zero on an assignment one time and a grade of zero
   on a course another. The Panel ordered that the Student receive a grade
   of zero on the course, a three year suspension, a four year notation ,
   and that the decision be published with the name of the Student
   withheld.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12934
