Case #933

   DATE: October 6, 2017
   PARTIES: University of Toronto v. A.G. (âthe Studentâ)
   Hearing Date(s): July 11, 2017
   Panel Members:
   Mr. Michael Hines, Barrister and Solicitor, Chair
   Professor Dionne Aleman, Panel Member
   Mr. Harvey Lim, Student Panel Member
   Appearances:
   Ms. Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland
   Barristers
   Mr. Thomas MacKay, Director, Faculty Governance & Curriculum Services,
   Faculty of Arts and Science
   In Attendance:
   Ms. Tracey Gameiro, Associate Director, Office of Appeals, Discipline
   and Faculty Grievances
   Ms. Breese Davies, (Newly Appointed Co-Chair of the University
   Tribunal), Observer
   Mr. Sean Lourim, Technology Assistant, Office of the Governing Council
   Not in Attendance
   The Student
   Trial Division - s. B.i.1(a) â forged or falsifying documents â
   falsified transcript and resume for use in job applications âÂ  hearing
   not attended âÂ  agreed statement of facts â joint submission on
   penalty â recommendation of expulsion, five-year suspension pending
   expulsion, permanent notation on transcript, report to the provost with
   the Studentâs name withheld.
   The Student was charged with three offences of falsifying or forging an
   academic record contrary to s. B.i.3(a) of the Code with an alternative
   charge of falsifying a document required by the University contrary to
   s. B.i.1(a) of the Code ; or in the further alternative, three charges
   of academic dishonesty not specified contrary to s. B.i.3(b) of the
   Code . The charges related to two separate transcripts and a resume
   that a student had submitted in support of applications to work at the
   University, all of which contained false information about the
   Studentâs grades.Â  The Student advised Discipline Counsel that he was
   aware of the gravity of his actions and agreed to having the hearing
   proceed in his absence.Â  The Panel made an order that the hearing
   proceed without the Student. The Parties submitted an Agreed Statement
   of Facts (ASF). Based on the ASF, the Student was found guilty of the
   first two charges of forging an academic record contrary to s. B.i.3(a)
   of the Code . The University withdrew the alternative charges.
   The Parties submitted a Joint Submission on Penalty (JSP) proposing:
   (a) a recommendation to the President of the University that the
   Student be expelled; (b) a suspension of a period of up to five years
   effective immediately pending expulsion; (c) a permanent notation on
   the Studentâs transcript; and (d) that the matter be reported to the
   Provost for publication. The Panel referred to K.N. v. University of
   Toronto (Case No.899, August 21, 2017) for the proposition that the
   offences of forging and falsifying academic records demonstrate a
   serious lack of academic and personal integrity which threaten the
   reputation of the University and the students who pursue their degrees
   honestly and diligently. In the absence of any exceptional
   circumstances in this case, the Panel accepted the JSP, ordering: (a) a
   recommendation to the President of the University that the Student be
   expelled; (b) a suspension of a period of up to five years effective
   immediately pending expulsion; (c) a permanent notation on the
   Studentâs transcript; and (d) that the matter be reported to the
   Provost for publication.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12955
