Case No.: 933
THE UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
IN THE MATTER OF charges of academic dishonesty made on May 5, 2017.
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters,
1995,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto, Act, 1971, S.O. 1971, c. 56 as amended

5.0. 1978, C. 88.

BETWEEN:
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
- and-

REASONS FOR DECISION
Date of Hearing: July 11, 2017
Members of the Panel:

Mr. Michael Hines, Barrister and Solicitor, Chair
Professor Dionne Aleman, Panel Member
Mr. Harvey Lim, Student Panel Member
Appearances:
Ms. Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Barristers
Mr. Thomas MacKay, Director, Faculty Governance & Curriculum Services, Faculty of
Arts and Science
In Attendance:
Ms. Tracey Gameiro, Associate Director, Office of Appeals, Discipline and Faculty
Grievances
Ms. Breese Davies, (Newly Appointed Co-Chair of the University Tribunal), Observer
Mr. Sean Lourim, Technology Assistant, Office of the Governing Council

Not in Attendance:
Mr. ~ ~ ( t h e "Student")

-2-

Charges and Hearing

This panel of the University Tribunal held a hearing on July 11, 2017 to consider the
~~ brought by the University of Toronto (the "University'') a g a i n s t ~
~("the Student") under the Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters, 1995. 路
Procedural Issues

1.

The Student was charged with the Offences set out in Appendix A, attached.
Essentially, they relate to the alleged falsification of two academic transcripts
purportedly issued by the University, as well as another academic record, namely
a resume, concerning the Student. One transcript and the resume were
allegedly used by the Student in an attempt to gain admission to a work-study
programme offered by the University. The second transcript was allegedly
submitted by the Student in support of an application for a summer research
program.

2.

The Student did not appear at the hearing. The University requested an Order
that the Hearing proceed in his absence, relying on the fact that the Student had
signed an Agreed Statement of Facts ("ASF") and a Joint Submission on Penalty
("JSP"). Discipline Counsel advised the Panel that she had spoken personally
with the Student who had confirmed to her that he appreciated the gravity of the
charges and the contemplated penalty, and that he was content for the hearing to
proceed in his absence.

3.

Accordingly and on this basis, the Tribunal granted the requested Order. That
Order is hereby confirmed.

Evidence and Findings

4.

The University then led its evidence through the ASF, the contents of which are
set out below. Where documents are referred to in the ASF, they are not
reproduced in this Decision. However, the Panel reviewed the documents in the
course of the Hearing to be satisfied that they supported the allegations about
them agreed to in the ASF. The following facts were established to the Tribunal's
satisfaction. The material portions of the ASF read as follows::
(a)

The Student first registered at the University of Toronto in the Faculty of
Arts & Science in Fall 2013. In February, 2017 the Student had earned a
total of 13.5 academic credits, with a cumulative grade point average
(CGPA) of 2.42.

{b)

On or around May 17, 2016, the Student applied for a summer position as
an Astronomy Research Assistant for Summer 2016 with the Department
of Astronomy ("Summer Position"). In support of his application the
Student submitted the following documentation to Professor John Percy:

-3-

(i)

letter;

(ii)

resume ("Resume");

(iii)

Complete Academic History dated May 17, 2016 ("Transcript 1").

(c)

The Student's application was not considered for the Summer Position as
the position had already been filled by the time his application was
received.

(d)

In July, 2016 Professor Percy's request for a 2016-17 Work Study position
of Astronomy Research Assistant in the Department of Astronomy was
approved, and he posted the position as part of the fall/winter Work Study
Program ( Fall/Winter Position"). Students were paid $11 .40 per hour (as
of October 1, 2016) plus 4% vacation pay and 10% benefits.
11

(e)

In or around August or September, 2016, the Student applied for the
Fall/Winter Position. The Student submitted the same documentation in
support of his application to the Fall/Winter Position as he had submitted
for the Summer Position, except that his Summer Position cover letter was
addressed specifically to Professor Percy, and his Fall/Winter Position
letter was addressed to "Dear Madam/Sir":

(f)

Professor Percy was the Professor Emeritus supervising the Fall/Winter
Position. He received 21 applications for the Fall/Winter Position.

(g)

Professor Percy reviewed Transcript 1 submitted by the Student as part of
his job application which indicated that he had very high marks, all A's,
with the exception of one B+ and one 8-, and a CGPA over time of
between 3.85 and 3.69.

(h)

The Student's Resume stated: Currently hold GPA of 3.76".

(i)

Professor Percy interviewed the Student for the Fall/Winter Position on or
around September 14, 2016, after which the Student was selected for the
Fall/Winter Position to work with Professor Percy. The Student was paid
pursuant to the terms of the program for his work.

U)

A copy of the University of Toronto Work Study Program Hiring Form
dated September 15, 2016 is included in the JBD at Tab 11. Confirmation
of the Student's approval by the Fall/Winter 2016-17 Work Study program
dated September 20, 2016, and a description of the terms by which he
was employed is included in the JBD at Tab 12.

(k)

In January, 2017 the Student asked Professor Percy to write a letter in
support of his application for the upcoming 2017 Summer Undergraduate
Research Program. Professor Percy obtained an updated transcript for the

11

-4-

Student from the department's Undergraduate Coordinator so that he
could review the Student's Fall 2016 marks. ("Transcript 2").
(I)

Professor Percy reviewed Transcript 2 and noticed fewer "A"s than in
Transcript 1.

(m)

Professor Percy asked the Student to send him his current transcript. The
Student provided Professor Percy with an updated transcript by email on
January 18, 2017 ("Transcript 3"). Transcript 3 was dated January 11,
2017.

(n)

Professor Percy reviewed Transcript 3 and noticed the same
discrepancies as in Transcript 1, as well as additional discrepancies for
the Fall 2016 term which had not been included in Transcript 1.

(o)

Professor Percy compared Transcript 1 and Transcript 3 to Transcript 2
and determined that most course grades and grade point averages
(sessional, annual and cumulative) had been inflated in the transcripts
provided to him by the Student (Transcripts 1 and 3) when compared to
the transcript obtained from the Undergraduate Coordinator {Transcript 2).

(p)

Professor Percy noticed that Transcript 1 and Transcript 3 had a
watermark in the bottom right of each page which states: "Edited with Infix
PDF Editor - free for non-commercial use. To remove this notice, visit:
www.lceni.com/unlock.htm". The Iceni.com website states: "Your PDF
has been edited by the demo version of Infix PDF Editor (linfix.htm). The
demo offers all the features of the software at no costs but adds a
watermark to all edited pages.,,

(q)

Professor Percy met with the Student on January 18, 2017 to discuss the
transcripts submitted by the Student. The Student was terminated from
the Fall/Winter Position in January 2017.

(r)

Professor Percy would not have hired the Student for the Fall/Winter
Position if the Student had included a legitimate transcript of his marks
such as shown in Transcript 2 in his application for the Fall/Winter
Position.

(s)

On February 3, 2017, the Student was formally notified by Donna Wall,
Director of Financial Aid and Awards for the University of Toronto, that he
was no longer eligible to participate in the University Work/Study Program,
that a lifetime ban from the program had been imposed effective
immediately, and that his 2016-17 Work Study position would not be
included in his co-curricular record.

(t)

On February 17 1 2017, Professor Don Dewees, Dean's Designate for
Academic Integrity, sent a letter to the Student to advise him that he had
received a report alleging that he had committed an academic offence by

-5-

providing a document purporting to be a University transcript in support of
an application for a 2016-17 Work Study position, and that he had
committed a further academic offence by providing a second altered or
falsified University of Toronto transcript in response to a request for a
current transcript in January, 2017. Professor Dewees asked the Student
to attend a Dean's meeting to discuss the allegations.
(u)

The Student attended a meeting with the Dean's Designate on March 9,
2017. He admits that this meeting took place in a manner consistent with
the requirements of the Code. At that meeting the Student admitted that
he forged, falsified and altered his transcript in September 2016 and again
in January 2017.

(v)

The Student admits that he knowingly provided to Professor Percy two
forged, falsified and altered transcripts, Transcript 1 and Transcript 3,
which grossly overstated his academic achievements at the University,
and which bore no resemblance to his actual transcript, Transcript 2.

(w)

The Student further admits that he knowingly provided false information in
his Resume by claiming to have a higher CGPA than he had actually
earned.

(x)

The Student admits that, for the purpose of obtaining a position in the
2016-17 Work Study Program offered by the University, contrary to
section B.1.1 (a) and B.l.3(a) of the Code, he knowingly

(y)

5.

(i)

forged, altered and falsified Transcript 1 which purported to be his
Complete Academic History from the University of Toronto dated
May 17, 2016;

(ii)

forged, altered and falsified Transcript 3 which purported to be his
Transcript of Consolidated Academic Record dated January 11,
2017;

(iii)

falsified his Resume.

The Student acknowledges that:
(i)

the Provost of the University of Toronto has advised the Student of
his right to obtain legal counsel and that he has chosen not to
obtain legal counsel; and

(ii)

he is signing this ASF freely and voluntarily, knowing of the
potential consequences he faces, and does so without the advice of
counsel.

Based upon the ASF, the Tribunal enter~d a finding of guilty on Counts 1 and 2
of the Charges as set out in Appendix A. Those charges relate simply to the

-6-

forgery of academic records. The Tribunal declined to make a finding of guilt in
respect of Count 3, since it referred to the use of forged documents in August
2017 in an application to a 11work-study programme", rather than an application
made in August 2016 to the 112016-17 Work Study Program", as established by
the ASF. The Panel was of the view, particularly in view of the JSP, that the
outcome of the case would be the same whether or not a finding of guilt was
made in respect of Count 3.

Penalty

6.

The University sought a penalty that would include a recommendation from the
Tribunal that the Student be expelled from the University. This was set out in the
JSP that was signed by the Student. The concluding paragraph of the JSP reads
as follows:
4.
The Student admits that he is signing this JSP freely and that he
has been given the opportunity to obtain independent legal advice before
signing this JSP, and that he has chosen not to obtain legal counsel.

7.

As the Tribunal has stated in many cases, absent exceptional circumstances,
panels are expected to accept and implement joint statements on penalty. As
stated recently in the case of K.N. v. University of Toronto (Case No.899, August
21, 2017), the offences as proven demonstrate the most serious lack of
academic and personal integrity. The forgery and falsification of records of
academic achievement and their subsequent use to obtain advantage threaten
the reputation of the University and the students who pursue their degrees
honestly and diligently. We see no exceptional circumstances in this case and
are therefore in agreement with the JSP.

8.

Accordingly, at the conclusion of the hearing, the Panel issued the following
Order, which is hereby confirmed:
(a}

THAT the Student is guilty of two counts of knowingly forging, altering, or
falsifying an academic record, or uttering, circulating, or making use of
such academic record, contrary to section B.1.3(a} of the Code of
Behaviour on Academic Matters;
路

{b}

THAT the Student shall immediately be suspended from the University for
a period of up to five years;
路

(c}

THAT The Tribunal recommends to the President of the University that he
recommend to the Governing Council that the Student be expelled from
the University;

(d}

THAT a permanent notation shall be placed on the Student's academic
record and transcript; and

-7-

(e)

AND THAT this case shall be reported to the Provost for publication of a
notice of the decision of the Tribunal and the sanction or sanctions
imposed, with the name of the Student withheld.

Dated at Toronto this

Michael Hines, Chair

IP{ day of October, 2017.

APPENDIX A

,_~,

UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO

CHARGES
Note: Wherever in the Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters, 1995 ("Code") an offence is
described as depending on "knowing", the offence shall likewise be deemed to have been
committed if the person ought reasonably to have knowry.

1.

You knowingly forged or in any other way altered or falsified an academic record,

and/or uttered, circulated or made use of such forged,路 altered or falsified record, namely,
a document which purported to be your Complete Academic History from the University
of Toronto dated May 17, 2016, contrary to section B.l.3(a) of the Code.
2.

You knowingly forged or in any other way altered or falsified an academic record,

and/or uttered, circulated or made use of such forged, altered or falsified record, namely,
a document which purported to be your Transcript of Consolidated Academic Record
dated January 11, 2017, contrary to section B.l.3(a) of the Code.
3.

You knowingly forged or in any other way altered or falsified an academic record,

and/or uttered, circulated or made use of such forged, altered or falsified record, namely,
a resume which you submitted as part of your application to a work-study program in
August, 2017, contrary to section B.l.3(a) of the Code.
4.

In the alternative to parag~ph 3 above, you knowingly forged or in any other way

altered or falsified a document or evidence required by the University, or uttered,
circulated or made use of any such forged, altered or falsified document, namely, a
resume which you submitted as part of your application to a work-study program in
August, 2017, contrary to section B.1.1 (a) of the Code.

2
5.

In the alternative to paragraphs 1 through 4 above, you knowingly engaged in a

form of cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or misrepresentation not
otherwise described in order to obtain academic credit or other academic advantage of
any kind, contrary to section B.l.3(b) of the Code, in connection with:
(a)

a document which purported to be your Complete Academic History from
the University of Toronto dated May 17, 2016;

(b)

a document which purported to be your Transcript of Consolidated
Academic Record dated January 11, 2017;

(c)

a resume which you submitted as part of your application to a work-study
program in August, 2017.

Particulars of charges

1.

The particulars are as follows:
(a)

In or about August, 2017, as part of your application to the University for a
work-study position as a research assistant you provided:
(i)

a document that purported to be your Complete Academic History
from the University of Toronto dated as of May 17, 2016; and

(ii)

a resume which claimed that you currently held a cumulative grade
point average of 3. 76.

(b)

In or about January, 2017, to support an application to the University for a
summer undergraduate research program, you provided a document that

3
purported to be your Transcript of Consolidated Academic Record dated
January 11, 2017.
(c)

You forged each of the Complete Academic History dated as of May 17,
2017 and the Transcript of Consolidated Academic Record dated January
11, 2017 and falsely represented your marks, grades, sessional and annual
grade point averages, cumulative grade point averages, and academic
history and status in those documents.

(d)

You included false information about your cumulative grade point average
on the resume.

(e)

You knew that all of these documents were forged, altered, and/or falsified
when you circulated them.

(f)

You had an obligation to provide accurate and truthful information and not
to misrepresent your academic record. You had an obligation not to provide
forged or falsified documents in support of your application.

