Report 402

DATE:

   March 29, 2019

PARTIES:

   W.H. (the âStudentâ) v. the Toronto School of Theology (âTSTâ)

Hearing Date(s):

   n/a written submissions only

Committee Member:

   Professor Hamish Stewart, Senior Chair

Appearances:

For the Student Appellant:

   Mr. W.H. (the Student)
   Mr. Selwyn Pieters, Representative for the Student

For the School Theology:

   Mr. Robert A. Centa, Paliare Roland Rosenberg Rothstein LLP

   TheÂ StudentÂ sought to appeal the termination of his registration in
   the Doctor of Theology ProgramÂ (Program).Â  The Chair asked for
   written submissions from the parties as to whether the Academic Appeals
   Committee (AAC) had jurisdiction to hear the
   appeal.Â ThisÂ preliminaryÂ motion to determineÂ jurisdiction was heard
   byÂ the Chair only,Â and byÂ way of written submissions.Â  The parties
   did not attend.

   TheÂ StudentÂ was enrolledÂ in the Program at the Toronto School of
   Theology (TST). In December 2016, the Student and TST executed Minutes
   of Settlement to resolve certain issues arising out of
   theÂ StudentâsÂ performance in the Program and certain prior academic
   appeals.Â  In the process of negotiating the Minutes of Settlement,
   both parties were represented by legal counsel.Â  The Minutes of
   Settlement required theÂ StudentÂ to complete his second major
   comprehensive examination with a minimum grade of A-, otherwiseÂ his
   registration in the Program would be terminated.Â  The MinutesÂ of
   SettlementÂ further provided that theÂ StudentÂ waivedÂ any right to
   appeal any decision to terminate his registrationÂ in the Program for
   any reason. TheÂ StudentÂ completed his second major comprehensive
   examination with a grade of B- and hisÂ registrationÂ in the
   ProgramÂ was terminated by TST in accordance with the Minutes of
   Settlement.

   TST submitted that the Minutes of Settlement deprived the AAC of
   jurisdiction to hear theÂ StudentâsÂ appeal.Â  TheÂ StudentÂ submitted
   that the AAC must have jurisdiction to hear his appeal because he had
   effectively exhausted his remedies within TST.Â  TheÂ StudentÂ also
   submitted that the Minutes of Settlement were not enforceableÂ because
   he could not contract out of his appeal rights within the University.

   TheÂ Chair rejected theÂ StudentâsÂ submission on jurisdictionÂ stating
   thatÂ the AACâs jurisdiction dependsÂ on its terms ofÂ reference,
   andÂ is not created by the fact that no other University body
   hasÂ jurisdiction over a dispute between a student and a division of
   the University.Â Â Â The Chair explained thatÂ in the normal course of
   events, theÂ StudentÂ would appeal the TSTâs decision to terminate his
   registration to theÂ Graduate Studies Council Academic Appeal
   CommitteeÂ (GSCAAC); if that appeal was dismissed,Â he could then
   appeal to the AAC.Â  The Chair further explainedÂ that the AAC
   lackedÂ jurisdictionÂ to hear an appeal directly from a decision made
   at a lower level than the council of a faculty, college or
   school.Â Â Accordingly, the Chair concluded thatÂ whileÂ the AAC would
   have jurisdiction to hearÂ anÂ appeal from a decision of the GSCAAC,
   itÂ didÂ not have jurisdictionÂ to hear anÂ appeal directly from TSTâs
   decision to terminateÂ theÂ StudentâsÂ registration.

   In light ofÂ the Chairâs conclusion that the AAC had no jurisdiction to
   hear theÂ StudentâsÂ appeal,Â it was not necessary to decide
   whetherÂ characterizing the Minutes of SettlementÂ as an aspect of the
   TSTâs accommodation of theÂ StudentâsÂ disabilityÂ would giveÂ the AAC
   had jurisdictionÂ to hear the appeal.Â Nevertheless,Â the Chair
   observed that it would be quiteÂ extraordinary for a university appeal
   body to consider the merits of an agreement that had been negotiated
   between a student and a division of the university where both parties
   were legally represented.

   TheÂ StudentâsÂ appeal was quashed.
   [1]View Report

References

   1. file:///media/28387
