Case 690

DATE:

   September 5, 2013

PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v. S.F.

Hearing Date(s):

   August 6, 2013

Panel Members:

   Roslyn Tsao, Chair
   Ato Quayson, Faculty Member
   Jonathan Hsu, Student Member

Appearances:

   Robert Centa, Assistant Discipline Counsel for the University

In Attendance:

   Kristi Gourlay, Manager, Office of Academic Integrity
   Natalie Ramtahal, Coordinator, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty
   Grievances

   The Student was charged under s. B.i.1(a) of the Code with 22 charges
   relating to forging, altering, or falsifying of documents or evidence
   on 7 or 8 submissions for late withdrawal from courses in two academic
   years. The Student did not attend and the hearing proceeded by way of
   an Agreed Statement of Facts (ASF).

   The ASF set out that in two separate years the Student submitted
   petitions seeking late withdrawal from 17 courses; 10 in the first year
   because of a dying grandfather in Sri Lanka and 7 in the second because
   he was neglectful, self-destructive, and âpretty spaced outâ. Â The
   second petition was denied and the Student submitted a third petition
   seeking the same relief as the second petition, this time on account of
   a grandmotherâs death and accompanied by a death certificate. The
   Student submitted personal statements and a newspaper death notice for
   his grandmother and responded to emails intended to further mislead the
   University. The Student admits that his petition forms contained false
   and misleading information in an attempt to obtain academic advantage.

   The parties submitted a Joint Submission on Penalty (JSP) including a
   grade of a zero in the 17 courses, a suspension from the date of order
   for five years, a permanent notation be placed on his academic record,
   and that the case be reported to the Provost for publication. The
   University stressed that the ASF and admission of guilt from the
   Student saved the significant time and effort of proving the
   allegations.

   The Student had two prior incidents of plagiarism and provided no
   submissions regarding mitigation. The Panel noted that the Student had
   likely begun and completed a medical program since submitting his
   petitions. The Panel felt that the Student had disdain for the ethics
   of any academic institution, noting that after his first petition was
   accepted he submitted a second falsified one and his two counts of
   plagiarism. It shocked the conscience of the Panel that this behaviour
   could warrant anything less than expulsion. The University presented
   two similar cases in support of the JSP but the Panel distinguished
   them based on prior offense history, hearing attendance and mitigating
   factors.

   The Panel rejected the JSP said the proposed penalty would bring the
   administration of justice into disrepute. It ordered a penalty of a
   grade of zero in the 17 courses, an immediate five-year suspension, a
   recommendation of expulsion, a notation placed on his academic record
   for 7 years, and that the case be reported to the Provost for
   publication.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12811
