Case 1377

   DATE:

   February 26, 2024

   PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v. J.Y. ("the Student")

   HEARING DATE:

   July 18, 2024, via Zoom

   PANEL MEMBERS:

   Cheryl Woodin, Chair
   Dr. Pascal van Lieshout, Faculty Panel Member
   Karim Wanes, Student Panel Member

   APPEARANCES:
   Tina Lie, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg
   Rothstein LLP
   Joseph Berger, Co-Counsel,Â Paliare Roland Rosenberg Rothstein LLP

   not IN ATTENDANCE:

   The Student

   HEARING SECRETARY:

   Samanthe Huang, Coordinator and Hearing Secretary, Office of Appeals,
   Discipline and Faculty Grievances

   The Student was charged with one count under section B.i.1(d) of the
   Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters, 2019 (the âCodeâ) for knowingly
   representing as their own the idea or expression of an idea, and/or the
   work of another in connection with an essay. In the alternative to the
   charge, the Student was charged with one count under section B.i.3(b)
   for knowingly engaging in a form of cheating, academic dishonesty or
   misconduct, fraud or misrepresentation not otherwise described in the
   Code. The Student was also charged with two counts under section
   B.i.1(b) of the Code for knowingly possessing an unauthorized aid or
   obtaining unauthorized assistance in connection with an assignment and
   final examination in another course. In the alternative, the Student
   was charged with one count under section B.i.3(b) for knowingly
   engaging in a form of cheating, academic dishonesty or misconduct,
   fraud or misrepresentation not otherwise described in the Code.

   The Student was neither present nor represented at the hearing. The
   University requested that the hearing proceed in the absence of the
   Student.Â  While there was no evidence of actual notice, the Panel
   found that the University had made considerable efforts to contact the
   Student by phone, email, and by via courier to deliver notice of the
   charges and the hearing. Accordingly, the Panel found that the Student
   had reasonable notice of the hearing and the charges pursuant to the
   Statutory Powers Procedure Act and the University Tribunalâs Rules of
   Practice and Procedure, and decided to hear the case in the absence of
   the Student.

   The Panel reviewed the affidavit evidence of the Professors in both
   courses. With respect to the first course, the Student was required to
   submit a final essay. The Studentâs paper was flagged by a Teaching
   Assistant in the course and was subsequently reviewed by the Professor
   who noted that it included passages that appeared verbatim or virtually
   verbatim on three online sources which were not cited. With respect to
   the second course, the Student was required to complete, among other
   things, four written assignments and a final exam. The Studentâs first
   written assignment was flagged by a Teaching Assistant in the course
   due to its similarity to answers submitted by four other students in
   the course. The Professor subsequently determined that the degree of
   similarities between the Studentsâ answers made it unlikely the
   similarities were merely coincidental. In subsequently grading the
   Studentâs final exam, the Professor noticed similarities between some
   of the answers submitted by the Student and another student in the
   course.

   Based on the evidence provided by the University, the Panel concluded
   that there was clear and convincing evidence that the Student committed
   plagiarism and possessed an unauthorized aid or obtained unauthorized
   assistance, contrary to section B.i.1(d) and B.i.1(b) of the Code.

   The Panel was not satisfied that there was clear and convincing
   evidence in respect of the allegations of obtaining unauthorized
   assistance in connection with the assignment in the second course. The
   Panel concluded that while collaboration was expressly prohibited, the
   course outline expressly permitted discussion of assignment problems
   with other students, though students were required to write up their
   solutions independently. In this case, the Panel found that the
   Studentâs answers were not identical to those of the other students,
   and concluded that it was equally possible that the students
   collaborated and then produced similar, though not identical,
   solutions. The University withdrew the alternative charges.

   In determining the appropriate sanction, the Panel noted that while the
   Student did not have a prior offence, they committed two separate
   offences, which could have been prosecuted separately. Accordingly, the
   Panel concluded that it was appropriate to consider the case as though
   the Student had a prior offence. The Panel further considered the
   sanctioning factors in University of Toronto and Mr. C. (Case No.
   1976/77-3) and their application to a factually similar scenario in
   University of Toronto and T.W. (Case No. 721). The Panel imposed the
   following sanction: a final grade of zero both courses; a three-year
   suspension; a four-year notation on the Studentâs academic record and
   transcript; and a report to the Provost for publication.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/31530
