Report 406

DATE:

   October 2, 2019

PARTIES:

   F.K. (the âStudentâ) v. School of Graduate Studies

HEARING DATE:

   N/A (written submissions only)

Senior Chair:

   Professor Hamish Stewart

Appearances:

   Parties did not attend (written submissions only)

   The StudentÂ appealedÂ a decision of theÂ Graduate Academic Appeals
   Board (âGAABâ). The Student was successful before the GAAB but sought
   additional remedies from the Academic Appeals Committee (âAACâ). The
   Senior Chair of the AAC asked for written submissions as to whether the
   AAC had jurisdiction to hear the appeal.

   The Student was enrolled in the Ph.D. program at the Universityâs
   Department of Leadership, Higher and Adult Education and had completed
   all requirements to achieve Ph.D. candidacy except the comprehensive
   examination. The Student failed the comprehensiveÂ examination,Â and
   her registration was terminated. The Student appealed to the GAAB,
   which found that the Student had been inadequately supervised during
   the process of preparing for the examination, and that this lack of
   supervision could have contributed to the failure.Â As a remedy, the
   GAAB ordered that the Department provide her with an opportunity to
   take the examination again, with adequate supervision. The GAAB
   rejected all of the Studentâs other arguments.Â On appeal to the AAC,
   the Student sought general damages of $500,000; guaranteed transfer to
   another department; and full funding for at least two years to complete
   her Ph.D.

   The Senior Chair first noted that the GAAB had granted a remedy in
   relation to the Studentâs allegations of inadequate supervision andÂ as
   the successful party on that point, the Student could not appeal from
   that decision to the AAC. The Senior Chair further noted that the two
   cases cited by the Student in support of her position (Lam v.
   University of Western Ontario, 2019 ONCA 82; andÂ Stuart v. University
   of Western Ontario, 2017 ONSC 6980) were not relevant to the issues at
   hand.Â Both cases concerned the appropriateness of the Superior Court
   of Justice hearing a studentâs action against a university;Â the Senior
   Chair stated thatÂ neither case hadÂ any bearing on the jurisdiction of
   an internal university tribunal such as the GAAB or the AAC.Â The
   Senior Chair noted thatÂ section 2.1Â ofÂ theÂ AACâsÂ Terms
   ofÂ Reference providesÂ thatÂ theÂ AACÂ shall hear and consider appeals
   by students against decisions of faculty, college or school councils
   (or committees thereof) in the application of academic regulations and
   requirements.Â  The Senior Chair stated that the issuesÂ heard,Â and
   theÂ remedies granted by the AAC must relate to decisions concerning
   the âapplication of academic regulations and requirementsâ to students
   who are (or were) enrolled at the University; they do not extend to
   admissions decisions or to providing financial compensation.Â The AAC
   does not have the power to direct a University division to admit a
   student or the power to order the University to pay damages or to
   provide any particular level of funding to a student.Â The Senior Chair
   referred to the AACâs Report 359-1, in which two students
   soughtÂ damages and other financial remedies. The Chair in that case
   wrote that the AACâs jurisdiction does not extend to remedying all the
   consequences, whatever they may be, of a decision that the AAC does
   have jurisdiction to review. The Chair held that these words were
   equally applicable to the Studentâs appeal.

   The Studentâs appeal was quashed for want of jurisdiction.
   [1]View Report

References

   1. file:///media/28659
