THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
THE GOVERNING COUNCIL
Report #406 of the Academic Appeals Committee (Chair only)
October 2, 2019
To the Academic Board
University of Toronto
Senior Chair
Professor Hamish Stewart, Senior Chair
For the Student Appellant:
Ms. F.K. (the “Student”)
For the School of Graduate Studies:
Professor Charmaine Williams, Vice-Dean, Students, School of Graduate Studies
This appeal was conducted on the basis of written submissions in order to determine jurisdiction
as per Section 3.1.7 of the Academic Appeals Committee Terms of Reference. The parties did
not attend.
The Student seeks to appeal from a decision of the Graduate Academic Appeals Board (GAAB), dated May
8, 2019. The Student was successful at the GAAB but seeks additional remedies from your Committee.
The Senior Chair of your Committee asked the Student for written submissions as to whether your
Committee had jurisdiction to hear her appeal. Having read those submissions, the Senior Chair has
concluded that it is not necessary to receive reply submissions from the relevant university division, that
the AAC lacks jurisdiction, and that the appeal should therefore be quashed.
Background
In the Winter 2011 term, the Student enrolled in the Ph.D. program in Educational Leadership & Policy
(ELP) in the Department of Leadership, Higher and Adult Education (the Department) at the Ontario
Institute for Studies in Education. She has completed all requirements to achieve Ph.D. candidacy except
her comprehensive examination. The history of the Student’s efforts to pass the comprehensive examination
is complicated and does not need to be reviewed in detail for the purposes of this ruling. Most recently, in
July 2018, the Student took the comprehensive examination and failed. Her registration was terminated.
She appealed to the GAAB, raising a number of arguments concerning the process around her examination
and seeking a number of remedies. In a decision dated May 9, 2019, the GAAB allowed her appeal. The
GAAB found that the Student had been inadequately supervised during the process of preparing for the
comprehensive examination and that this lack of supervision “could have contributed to the failure”. As a
remedy, the GAAB ordered that the Department provide her with an opportunity to take the examination
again, with adequate supervision. The GAAB rejected all of the Student’s other arguments. The GAAB
concluded its decision as follows:

1

The remedy in this case must be another opportunity to retake the comprehensive exam. When that
takes place is a matter for negotiation between [the Student] and the department. There must also
be supervision of [the Student]'s work while she prepares for the exam. We will not say precisely
what adequate supervision would be, but it must surely involve a series of meetings to discuss [the
Student]'s work and feedback on written drafts.
We would stress that lack of supervision is the only ground of appeal in which we have found merit.
[The Student] has a right to be consulted about who the supervisors and examiners are. But this
does not extend to the right claimed in this appeal to veto any members of the ELP program as
supervisors or examiners, or to have herself transferred to another department. We have said only
that the supervision was not adequate; we have rejected any argument that ELP program faculty
were, or would be, in any way biased. The meetings and feedback referred to above, ought, we
believe, to be with and derive from the best qualified faculty members, and the best qualified faculty
members are those appointed to the ELP program. [The Student]'s exam is also best conducted by
similarly qualified faculty members. If [the Student] does not wish to work with ELP program
faculty, she has the right to withdraw and apply to another program she likes better.
On appeal to your Committee, the Student seeks the following specific remedies:




General damages of $500,000;
Guaranteed transfer to another department;
Full funding for at least two years to complete the Ph.D.

In her submissions on the jurisdiction of your Committee to grant these remedies, the Student repeats her
allegations of inadequate supervision. As noted, the GAAB has granted a remedy in relation to those
allegations and, as the successful party on that point, the Student cannot appeal from its decision to your
Committee.
The Student also suggests that “GAAB decision recommended that I withdraw and reapply to be transferred
to another department” and seeks the second and third remedies on that basis. This is a mischaracterization
of the GAAB’s decision. The GAAB made no such recommendation but merely observed that applying to
another department was a course of action open to the Student if she chose to take it.
The Student cites two cases in support of her position: Lam v. University of Western Ontario, 2019 ONCA
82; and Stuart v. University of Western Ontario, 2017 ONSC 6980. These cases are not relevant to the
issues at hand. In Lam, the Court of Appeal held that a student’s action against a university for breach of
contract and breach of fiduciary duty should not have been dismissed on a motion for summary judgment.
In Stuart, Morgan J. dismissed a university’s motion to strike a student’s action against it. Both cases are
concerned with the appropriateness of the Superior Court of Justice hearing a student’s action against a
university; both cases allowed those actions to proceed; but neither case has any bearing on the jurisdiction
of an internal university tribunal such as the GAAB or the AAC.
The Student refers a number of times to the necessity for the University to follow its own rules and
regulations. The University’s appeal procedures are designed for that purpose. Section 2.1 of your
Committee’s terms of reference provide that your Committee shall
… hear and consider appeals made by students against decisions of faculty, college or school
councils (or committees thereof) in the application of academic regulations and
requirements …

2

This provision empowers your Committee but also limits it. The issues heard and the remedies granted by
the AAC must relate to decisions concerning the “application of academic regulations and requirements”
to students who are (or were) enrolled at the University. They do not extend to admissions decisions or to
providing financial compensation. Your Committee does not have the power to direct a University division
to admit a student or the power to order the University to pay damages or to provide any particular level of
funding to a student. In your Committee’s Report 359-1, concerning an appeal in which two students sought
damages and other financial remedies, the Chair wrote:
… the Students submitted that all of the losses that the allegedly suffered flowed from the
academic decisions that they challenge … and that those losses should therefore be considered
“academic” matters. This submission has no merit. The damages sought by the Students are in the
nature of financial compensation of losses allegedly flowing from allegedly erroneous decisions
by [the relevant divisions of the University]; but these losses are not themselves academic
matters. The AAC’s jurisdiction does not extent to remedying all the consequences, whatever
they may be, of a decision that the AAC does have jurisdiction to review.

These words are equally applicable to the present appeal. The Student’s appeal to your Committee is
quashed for want of jurisdiction.

3

