Case 1292

   DATE:

   July 11, 2022

   PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v. X.L. ("the Student")

   HEARING DATE:

   March 22, 2022, via Zoom

   PANEL MEMBERS:

   Ms. Cheryl Woodin, Chair
   Professor Alexander Koo, Faculty Panel Member
   Ms. Serena Ju, Student Panel Member

   APPEARANCES:

   Mr. Robert Centa, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland
   Rosenberg Rothstein LLP
   Mr. William Webb, Co-Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg Rothstein LLP

   NOT IN ATTENDANCE:

   The Student

   HEARING SECRETARY:

   Ms. Nadia Bruno, Special Projects Officer, Office of Appeals,
   Discipline and Faculty Grievances

   The Student was charged under s. B.i.1(d) of the‚ØCode of Behaviour on
   Academic Matters, 1995‚Ø(the ‚Code‚) on the basis that the Student
   knowingly represented as their own an idea or expression of an idea,
   and/or the work of another in an essay. In the alternative, the Student
   was charged under s. B.i.3(b) of the Code on the basis that the Student
   knowingly engaged in a form of cheating, academic dishonesty or
   misconduct, fraud or misrepresentation not otherwise described in the
   Code in order to obtain academic credit or other academic advantage in
   connection with an essay.

   The hearing proceeded on the basis of an Agreed Statement of Fact
   (‚ASF‚) and a Joint Submission on Penalty (‚JSP‚). The Student was
   unrepresented and did not attend the hearing. Prior to the hearing, the
   Student accepted and requested that the hearing proceed in their
   absence and executed a Request to Proceed in the Absence of the
   Student.

   The ASF outlined that the professor who taught the course for which the
   essay in question was submitted was suspicious that the Student had not
   written the essay themselves. The professor noticed that the vocabulary
   and language used in the essay was more sophisticated than any other
   written work the Student has submitted in the course. The ASF further
   outlined that the Student met with the Dean‚s Designate for academic
   integrity on two occasions. During the first meeting, the Dean‚s
   Designate asked the Student to define and explain several terms from
   their essay. The Student was unable to do so. The first meeting was
   adjourned due to technical issues. The Dean‚s Designate and the Student
   met for a second time where the Student could not define certain terms
   in their essay and the Student stated that they had not carefully read
   or referenced several sources in the essay. The Student also admitted
   to purchasing the essay.

   The Panel noted that the ASF outlined that the Student admitted to (1)
   purchasing the essay for $150.00; (2) doing no meaningful academic work
   on the essay; (3) knowing that they were representing the ideas of
   another author, the expression of the ideas of the author, and the work
   of another author as their own; and (4) engaging in a form of cheating,
   academic dishonesty or misconduct, fraud or misrepresentation not
   otherwise described in the Code in order to obtain academic credit or
   academic advantage in connection with the essay. The Panel noted that
   the Student acknowledged that they signed the ASF freely and
   voluntarily, knowing of the potential consequences, and did so with the
   advice of counsel or having waived the right to obtain counsel. On the
   basis of both the Student‚s admissions and the evidence submitted by
   the University, the Panel was satisfied that there was clear and
   convincing evidence that the Student committed an academic offence as
   set out in the first charge.

   In determining sanction, the Panel reviewed and considered the JSP. The
   Panel noted that a joint submission should only be disregarded if it
   would be contrary to public policy or would bring the administration of
   justice into disrepute. The Panel considered the seriousness of the
   offence committed by the Student. The Panel outlined that the
   seriousness of the offence must be reflected in the penalty and that
   purchasing academic content should be deterred in the strongest
   possible terms. The Panel noted that the Student did not have a prior
   record of offences and ultimately admitted the commission of the
   offence, and that these mitigating should also be reflected in the
   penalty. The Panel was satisfied that the University pursued and
   proposed a penalty which appropriately reflects the University of
   Toronto and Mr. C. (Case No. 1976/77-3, November 5, 1976) factors
   relevant to sentencing. The Panel found that the proposed penalty was
   not contrary to public policy, would not bring the administration of
   justice into disrepute, and appropriately reflected the mitigating
   factors. The Panel accepted the JSP. The Panel imposed the following
   sanctions: a grade of zero in the course; a five-year suspension; a
   six-year notation on the transcript; and a report to the Provost for
   publication.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/30614
