Report 380

DATE:

   August 31, 2015

PARTIES:

   Ms. H.K. (the Student) v. the University of Toronto Mississauga (UTM)

Hearing Date(s):

   August 24, 2015

Committee Members:

   Professor Andrew Green, Chair
   Professor Elizabeth Smyth
   Ms. Susan Froom

Secretary:

   Mr. Christopher Lang, Director, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty
   Grievances

Appearances:

For the Student Appellant:

   Ms. H.K., the Appellant (âthe Studentâ)

For UTM:

   Professor Kelly Hannah-Moffat, Professor and Vice Dean Undergraduate,
   UTM
   Ms. Michelle Kraus, Assistant Registrar, Academic Standards and
   Petitions

   Request for late withdrawal without academic penalty from five courses.
   The Student submitted a petition for late withdrawal once she decided
   to apply for graduate school, citing health problems and her
   involvement in court cases at the time she was enrolled in the courses.
   The COS refused her petition, noting that late withdrawal without
   academic penalty could not be granted after a student shows his or her
   intent to complete a course by writing the final examination or
   assignment. The Student then appealed to the AAS, which found that the
   Student had not presented a compelling case for an exemption from UTMâs
   policies on late withdrawal and dismissed the appeal.

   The Student then appealed to the Academic Appeals Committee, arguing
   that her meeting with the Dean and waiting for the results of the
   re-grading process prevented her from pursuing withdrawal within the
   appropriate timelines. The Committee noted that the Student knew of her
   difficulties prior to the drop date and that she was aware of the drop
   date, but that she chose not to withdraw from her courses and in fact
   completed the final assignments in the courses. The Committee concluded
   that it was not unreasonable for the AAS to find that the Studentâs
   interactions with the Dean did not provide sufficient reason for the
   Student not pursuing late withdrawal within the appropriate timeline,
   and that it was not unreasonable for the AAS to find that the
   re-grading process was not unfair. Appeal dismissed.
   [1]View Report

References

   1. file:///media/12625
