Report 369

DATE:

   November 7, 2013

PARTIES:

   Ms. S.M. (the Student) v. the Faculty of Applied Science and
   Engineering

Hearing Date(s):

   October 31, 2013

Committee Members:

   Professor Andrew Green (Chair)
   Professor Hugh Gunz
   Mr. Rastko Cvekic

Secretaries:

   Mr. Chris Lang, Director, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances
   Ms. Sinead Cutt, Administrative Assistant, Appeals, Discipline and
   Faculty Grievances

In Attendance:

For the Student Appellant:

   Ms. S.M., the Appellant (‚the Student‚)
   Selwyn Pieters, Counsel for the Student

For the Faculty of Applied Science and Engineering:

   Professor Thomas Coyle, Chair of the Examinations Committee
   Professor Peter Herman, Chair of the Examinations Committee
   Ms. Barbara McCann, Faculty Registrar

   Request to re-register after not meeting the Faculty‚s required
   sessional average. The Student‚s average fell below the required
   average of 60% three times. The first time the Student was put on
   probationary status (‚PRO2‚). The second time, the 60% rule was waived
   given the fact that the Student‚s average was very close to the cut off
   and that the timing of her exam (which she had deferred for
   medical/psychological reasons) that contributed to the low average was
   during a week in which midterms were held and school was ongoing. The
   next semester the Student‚s average again fell below 60% and the
   Faculty refused further registration. The Student petitioned to be
   placed on PRO2 status again, citing her heavy workload (which she had
   been advised against taking) and anxiety/stress issues. The Faculty
   Committee denied the Student‚s petition because of its insufficient
   reasons to warrant a remedy.

   The Student then appealed the Faculty‚s decision to the Academic
   Appeals Board, providing a further description of the illness of her
   family member and her own struggles with anxiety and stress. The AAB
   dismissed the Student‚s appeal, finding that no rule, regulation,
   policy or principle was applied to the Student unfairly.

   The Student then appealed to the Academic Appeals Committee, asking
   that the 60% rule be waived and that she be reinstated in the program.
   The Committee allowed the appeal. It emphasized that the Faculty‚s
   progressive probationary program provides students with the opportunity
   to recover from a poor academic performance, and noted that a high bar
   is set to obtain such relief in order to maintain the integrity and
   standards of the Faculty. The Committee noted that the Student had
   admittedly taken on a full course load despite some advice otherwise,
   and had provided evidence of anxiety issues but had not sought
   accommodation through Accessibility Services. The Committee took into
   account the fact that the Faculty had provided relief from the 60% rule
   for the Student in the previous semester, noting that the events that
   made up the basis for relief then were the same events that were the
   basis for this appeal (the scheduling of the deferred exam during the
   academic year). The Committee also took into account evidence of the
   Student‚ severe anxiety issues and evidence from the Student‚s
   psychologist that she was progressing well, and the Student‚s
   willingness and financial ability to take a lighter course load. The
   Committee therefore found that it would have been reasonable for the
   AAB to grant relief from the 60% rule. Appeal allowed.

   The Committee recommended that the Faculty consider whether there are
   further steps it could take to aid students in the context of mental
   health concerns, especially relating to placing a statement on each
   examination relating to what to do in the event of illness or distress
   during the exam.

   The Committee granted the Faculty‚s motion to redact the names of
   Faculty staff who acted on behalf of the Faculty in the case, noting
   that though there was no direct allegation against a particular
   individual in this appeal, the sensitive nature of the appeal and the
   references to advice provided by staff to the Student warranted
   redaction (see Report #367 for an earlier decision regarding redacting
   the names of Faculty staff).
   [1]View Report

References

   1. file:///media/12684
