Case 1026

DATE:

   October 17, 2019

P ARTIES:

   University of Toronto v. Y.L.

HEARING DATE:

   July 19, 2019

Panel Members:

   Ms. Johanna Braden, Chair
   Professor Michael Evans, Faculty Member
   Ms. Alena Zelinka, Student Member

Appearances:

   Ms. Lauren Pearce, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland
   Rosenberg Rothstein LLP

In Attendance:

   Ms. Jennifer Dent, Associate Director, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty
   Grievances

Not in Attendance:

   The Student

   The Student was charged with academic misconduct under s.Â B.i.1(a)Â of
   theÂ Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters, 1995Â (the âCodeâ) on the
   basis thatÂ heÂ knowinglyÂ forged, altered, or falsified a document or
   evidenceÂ required by the University of Toronto, or
   uttered,Â circulated or made use ofÂ aÂ forgedÂ or falsifiedÂ document,
   namely,Â a University of Toronto Verification of Student Illness or
   Injury FormÂ (the âIllness Formâ).Â The Student submitted the Illness
   Form in support of his petitions for a first deferral of an unwritten
   final examination in respect of two courses.Â In the alternative, the
   Student was charged under s. B.i.3(b) of the Code on the basis that he
   knowingly engaged in a form of cheating, academic dishonesty, or
   misconduct, fraud, or misrepresentation,Â in order toÂ obtain academic
   credit or other academic advantage of any kind, in connection with
   theÂ submitted Illness Forms.

   Neither the Student nor a legal representative of the Student appeared
   at the hearing.Â The Panel noted thatÂ theÂ Policy on Official
   Correspondence with StudentsÂ makes it clear that a student is
   responsible for maintaining a current and valid University-issued email
   account. Students are also expected to monitor and retrieve their email
   on a frequent and consistent basis.Â The University provided evidence
   that the Student had been served at his ROSI-listed email address with
   theÂ chargesÂ and theÂ notice of hearing. The Panel noted that there
   was evidence that the Student had accessed his email account after
   service of theÂ charges andÂ notice of hearing. TheÂ PanelÂ was
   satisfied that the Student had been given reasonable notice of the
   hearing in compliance with the notice requirementsÂ of ss. 6 and 7Â of
   theÂ Statutory Powers Procedure ActÂ (the âActâ)Â andÂ Rules 9 and 17
   ofÂ theÂ UniversityÂ TribunalâsÂ Rules of Practice and
   ProcedureÂ (âRulesâ). TheÂ PanelÂ therefore determined it would proceed
   to hear the case on its merits in the absence of the Student.

   The University requested leave to introduce an affidavitÂ served on the
   Student four days before the hearing.Â The Panel noted thatÂ Rule 72
   requires that affidavits proposed to be tendered in evidence at a
   hearing are to be disclosed at least 10 days before the
   hearing;Â however,Â Rule 74 provides that the Tribunal may grant leave
   to introduce evidence that does not comply with Rule 72.Â The affidavit
   in question included evidence of a response from a doctor potentially
   involved with the Illness Form submitted by the Student to the
   University.Â TheÂ Tribunal granted leaveÂ to
   theÂ UniversityÂ permitting introduction of this
   affidavitÂ becauseÂ the affidavit contained information that was
   potentially significant to the merits of the hearing; the University
   had made reasonable steps to obtain the informationÂ earlier,Â butÂ had
   been unable to do so; and the Student was not present to assert any
   prejudice.

   The Student was registered at the UniversityÂ of Toronto Scarborough at
   all material times. In April 2018, the Student submitted two petitions
   for a first deferral of an unwritten examination, supported by an
   Illness Form. The Assistant Registrar of Petitions at the
   UniversityÂ gave evidence of her concerns about the Illness Form
   submitted by the Student: the doctorâs purported signature and
   registration number were hard to decipher, andÂ a call to the phone
   number on the form was connected to the hospitalâs Patient Accounts
   department. The Panel also heard evidence from an Academic Integrity
   Assistant at the University who investigated the authenticity of the
   Illness Form and confirmed with the hospital that there was no patient
   registered there matching the Studentâs name. Finally, the Panel noted
   the affidavit of a legal assistant at the Assistant Discipline
   Counselâs firm whoÂ had faxed the three doctors whose registration
   numbersÂ matched the three possible versions of the scribbled number on
   the Illness Form. All three doctors eventually responded that they had
   no record of ever seeing a patient with any of three variations of the
   Studentâs name.

   The Tribunal found the Student guilty of the charge.Â Given this
   finding, the University withdrew the alternative charge.

   The Panel noted that the Student had previously admitted to
   plagiarizing an assignment, and that it was possible that the Student
   might again resort to dishonesty to avoid his academic obligations. The
   falsification in this case was deliberate and careful and could not
   have occurred by accidentÂ or neglect. Without the Studentâs
   participation, thereÂ was no evidence of extenuating circumstances for
   the Tribunal to consider.Â The Panel also noted that falsified medical
   documentation undermines the Universityâs system of accommodation, and
   overburdens the staff charged with reviewing student petitions.Â The
   Panel stated that the need forÂ generalÂ deterrence is a significant
   concern as forgery can be difficult to detect.

   The Panel found from its review of previous cases involving falsified
   medical notesÂ and petition documentsÂ that a two-year suspension is
   the threshold sanction,Â as a general rule.Â In light ofÂ the Studentâs
   prior admitted act of plagiarism, and in the absence of any mitigating
   evidence the Student might have otherwise provided, the Tribunal found
   that the sanctions requested by the UniversityÂ were fair, proportional
   and appropriate.

   TheÂ TribunalÂ imposed the following sanctions:Â final grade of zero in
   affected courses; three-year suspension; four-year notation on
   transcript; and a report to the Provost for publication.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/28691
