Case No. 1026
THE UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
IN THE MATTER OF charges of academic dishonesty filed on May 15, 2019,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters, 1995,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Act, 1971, S.O. 1971, c. 56 as amended S.O. 1978,
c. 88

BETWEEN:
UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO

- and Y.L. (the “Student”)

REASONS FOR DECISION

Hearing Date: July 19, 2019
Members of the Panel:
Ms. Johanna Braden, Barrister and Solicitor, Chair
Professor Michael Evans, Faculty Panel Member
Ms. Alena Zelinka, Student Panel Member
Appearances:
Ms. Lauren Pearce, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg Rothstein,
LLP, Barristers
Hearing Secretary:
Ms. Jennifer Dent, Former Associate Director, Office of the Appeals, Discipline and
Faculty Grievances
Not in Attendance
The Student

1.

The Trial Division of the University Tribunal was convened on July 19, 2019, to
consider charges brought by the University of Toronto (the “University”) against the
Student under the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters,
1995 (the “Code”).

Preliminary Issue 1: Proceeding in the Absence of the Student

2.

The hearing was scheduled to begin at 9:45 am. Neither the Student, nor a
representative on behalf of the Student, were in attendance. The Tribunal waited
until 10:00 am to start the hearing. The University then requested that the Tribunal
proceed with the hearing in the Student’s absence.

3.

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the University Tribunal Rules of Practice and Procedure (the
“Rules”), notice of an oral hearing must include the date, time, place and purpose
of the hearing; a reference to the statutory authority under which the hearing will be
held; and a statement that if a person does not attend the hearing, the panel may
proceed in the person’s absence. Rule 17 provides that where reasonable notice
of an oral hearing has been given to a person and that person does not attend the
hearing, the Tribunal may proceed with the hearing in the party’s absence. The
Rules conform to sections 6 and 7 of the Statutory Powers Procedure Act (the
“SPPA”).

4.

Pursuant to Rule 9, a notice of hearing may be served on a student by various
means, including by emailing a copy of the document to the student’s email address
contained in the University’s Repository of Student Information (“ROSI”).

5.

The University’s Policy on Official Correspondence with Students expressly states
that students are responsible for maintaining on ROSI a current and valid mailing
address and University-issued email account. Students are expected to monitor
and retrieve their email on a frequent and consistent basis.

2

6.

The onus of proof is on the University to establish that it provided with Student with
reasonable notice of the hearing in accordance with these Rules.

7.

In this case, the University provided evidence that the Student had been served at
his ROSI-listed email address with the Charges dated May 15, 2019 and the Notice
of Hearing dated June 20, 2019. The Notice of Hearing was also sent to the
Student’s ROSI-listed mailing address. There was evidence that the Student’s
email account had been accessed on June 26, 2019, providing him with actual
notice of the Charges and the Notice of Hearing. Assistant Discipline Counsel
advised that the Student had not been in contact with anyone from her office.

8.

In light of the evidence and the submissions of Assistant Discipline Counsel, the
Tribunal was satisfied that the Student had been given reasonable notice of the
hearing in compliance with the notice requirements of the SPPA and the Rules.
The Tribunal determined it would proceed to hear the case on its merits in the
absence of the Student. The hearing proceeded on the basis that the Student was
deemed to deny the Charges alleged against him.

Preliminary Issue 2: Affidavit Evidence

9.

Assistant Discipline Counsel requested leave to introduce an affidavit served on the
Student four days before the hearing. Rule 72 requires that affidavits proposed to
be tendered in evidence at a hearing are to be disclosed at least 10 days before
the hearing. Rule 74 provides that a panel of the Tribunal may grant leave to
introduce evidence that does not comply with Rule 72.

10.

The affidavit at issue was the Supplementary Affidavit of Natalia Botelho, a legal
assistant working in Assistant Discipline Counsel’s office. The charges against the
Student allege that he fabricated a medical note. Ms. Botelho had made requests
for information from doctors potentially involved with the note. One of the doctors
had only responded to Ms. Botelho on Friday July 12, 2019. Ms. Botelho prepared

3

an affidavit including the new information on Monday July 15, and served the
affidavit that same day on the Student.

11.

The Tribunal granted leave permitting introduction of this affidavit for the following
reasons:

(a)

the affidavit contained information that was potentially significant to the merits
of the hearing;

(b)

The University had made reasonable steps to obtain the information earlier,
but had been unable to do so; and

(c)

The Student was not present to assert any prejudice.

The Charges

12.

Two charges were laid against the Student, as follows.

1.

On or about April 30, 2018, you knowingly forged, altered, or falsified a document
or evidence required by the University of Toronto, or uttered, circulated, or made
use of any such forged, altered, or falsified document, namely, a University of
Toronto Verification of Student Illness or Injury Form, dated April 30, 2018 (the
“Illness Form”), which you submitted in support of your petitions for a first deferral
of an unwritten final examination in GGRA03H3 and a first deferral of an unwritten
final examination in EESA06H3, contrary to section B.i.1(a) of the Code.

2.

In the alternative to the charge above, on or about April 30, 2018, you knowingly
engaged in a form of cheating, academic dishonesty, or misconduct, fraud, or
misrepresentation, in order to obtain academic credit or other academic
advantage of any kind, in connection with the Illness Form which you submitted
in support of your petitions for a first deferral of an unwritten final examination in
GGRA03H3 and a first deferral of an unwritten final examination in EESA06H3,
which violated section B.i.3(b) of the Code.

4

The particulars in support of these charges are as follows:
(a)

You were a student at the University of Toronto Scarborough at all
material times.

(b)

In the Winter 2018 academic term, you were enrolled in GGRA03H3 –
Cities and Environments and EESA06H3 – Introduction to Planet Earth.

(c)

On April 19, 2018, you submitted a a [sic] petition for a first deferral of an
unwritten examination in GGRA03H3 (“Petition #CL24535”).

(d)

On April 25, 2018, you submitted a a [sic] petition for a first deferral of an
unwritten examination in EESA06H3 (“Petition #CL24755”).

(e)

On April 30, 2018, you submitted an Illness Form dated April 30, 2018,
which was purportedly issued at the North York General Hospital. You
submitted this Illness Form, as required, in support of Petition #CL24535
and Petition #CL24755.

(f)

You knew that the Illness Form that you submitted was forged, altered, or
contained false information when you submitted.

(g)

You knowingly submitted the Illness Form described above:
(i)

understanding that the University of Toronto required evidence to
be presented in order to obtain the academic accommodation you
sought.

(ii)

with the intention that the University of Toronto rely on it in
considering whether or not to provide you with the academic
accommodations you requested; and

(iii)

in an attempt to obtain an academic advantage.

The Evidence

13.

The University’s first witness was Sherylin Biason, the Assistant Registrar of
Petitions at the University of Toronto Scarborough. For 19 years she has assessed
5

petitions from students for various accommodations, including requests to defer
exams because of illness.

14.

In 2018, petitions were submitted by students online, with original supporting
documents submitted in person. This ensures that her office can inspect the
original supporting documents to verify them. A student petitioning to defer an
exam because of illness must submit an original form entitled Verification of Student
Illness or Injury (an “Illness Form”), which is to be filled out and signed by a licensed
health care practitioner. Ms. Biason or her assistant reviews this form to see the
timing and nature of illness, the accommodation required, and the identity of the
health care practitioner.

15.

Ms. Biason identified two petitions submitted by the Student in April of 2018. The
on-line portion of the petitions show that the Student claimed to have missed two
exams (one of April 17 and one on April 23) because of illness, and asked for
permission to write deferred exams. The Student submitted an Illness Form in
support of his two petitions. The Illness Form claims that the Student visited a
healthcare practitioner on April 17, 2018, and that the Student had an illness
considered to be “Serious”, starting on April 17 and anticipated to end on April 23.
In the section for “Additional Comments”, someone seems to have written
“Influenza - rest.”

16.

Ms. Biason was concerned about the Illness Form. It was hard to decipher the
doctor’s purported signature (her best guess was “M. Chung”), and the doctor’s
purported registration number with the College of Physicians and Surgeons of
Ontario (her best guess was “77579”). The Illness Form had a business stamp from
North York General Hospital. Ms. Biason called the phone number on the stamp.
The phone number was connected to the hospital’s Patient Accounts department.
They were not able to assist. Ms. Biason called the Student’s phone number, and
received a message that the phone was not in service. Ms. Biason submitted the
matter to the Academic Integrity Office. She posted a notice to the Student through

6

the online service for petitions, advising the Student that the petitions had been
denied, the Illness Form was not valid, and the case had been reported to the
Academic Integrity Office.

A “viewed message” feature on the online service

indicates the Student (or someone with access to the Student’s online portal) read
these messages from Ms. Biason’s office on May 3, 2018.

17.

The University’s second witness was Arnold Doobay, an Academic Integrity
Assistant at the University of Toronto Scarborough. He was assigned to investigate
the authenticity of the Illness Form submitted by the Student. His evidence about
his investigation was as follows.

(a)

He was unable to reach the Student by phone, and the Student did not
respond to emails or letters from Mr. Doobay’s office.

(b)

The phone number on the business stamp affixed to the Illness Form
was for the Patient Accounts department at the North York General
Hospital, and they could not assist Mr. Doobay

(c)

The medical health records department for the North York General
Hospital confirmed that there was no patient registered with the hospital
matching the Student’s name.

(d)

Mr. Doobay tried to identify the doctor through the CPSO registration
number scribbled on the Illness Form. He tried 3 different possible
versions of the registration number. None of those doctors had privileges
at North York General Hospital. One was a pediatrician, specializing in
neurology, whose office refused over the phone to confirm or deny that
the Student had ever been a patient. One was a plastic surgeon, who
advised Mr. Doobay over the phone that they had no registered patients
with the Student’s name and date of birth. The third possible doctor was

7

a general surgeon practicing in Ajax, Scarborough and Pickering. Mr.
Doobay did not speak to him.

18.

The University’s third witness was Natalia Botelho, a legal assistant at Assistant
Discipline Counsel’s firm. Her evidence was given via affidavit. Ms. Botelho had
faxed the three doctors whose CPSO registration number matched the three
possible versions of the scribbled CPSO number on the Illness Form. All three
doctors eventually responded that they never saw patients out of North York
General Hospital, and had no record of every seeing a patient with any of three
variations of the Student’s name.

Decision of the Tribunal on the Charges

19.

The University bears the burden of proving on a balance of probabilities that the
Student knowingly forged, altered or falsified a document required by the University,
or uttered, circulated, or made use of a forged, altered or falsified document. The
evidence must be clear, cogent and convincing.

20.

The evidence in this case was clear that the Student, at a minimum, made use of a
forged or falsified Illness Form.

It does not matter if the Student forged the

document himself or had another person do it for him. The Tribunal was able to
view the Illness Form submitted by the Student in support of his two petitions for
deferred exams. The Tribunal agreed with the University’s witnesses that the
scribbled CPSO number on the Illness Form could be any of three possible
numbers. The evidence of the University’s witnesses was that these three doctors
were contacted, and none of them had treated the Student or filled out the Illness
Form. This evidence was corroborated by the printouts from the CPSO’s on-line
register, showing that none of the doctors had privileges at the North York General
Hospital. The hospital stamp on the Illness Form could not be traced to any
particular doctor, but rather was the general stamp used by the hospital’s Patient
Accounts department. The medical records department at the hospital told Mr.

8

Doobay it had no record of the Student. The University reached out to the Student
multiple times in multiple ways, seeking an explanation.

The Student never

responded.

21.

The Tribunal found that the Student is guilty of Charge 1. Charge 2 was withdrawn
by the University.

Evidence on Penalty

22.

The University called further evidence on the issue of penalty. The Student started
his University studies in the Fall of 2016. In his second term - Winter 2017 - the
Student admitted to the Dean’s Designate that he had plagiarized an assignment.
In light of the Student’s quick admission, no Tribunal hearing was necessary. The
Student received a grade of 0 on the plagiarized assignment, and a two-year
notation in his transcript indicating that the Student had been sanctioned for
academic misconduct.

Decision of the Tribunal on Penalty

23.

The University sought the following sanctions:

(a)

a final grade of zero in courses GGRA03H3 and EESA06H3, those being
the two final exams the Student had sought to defer with a fake Illness Form;

(b)

a suspension from the University for three years from the date of the
hearing, ending on July 18, 2022;

(c)

a notation of this sanction on his academic record and transcript until four
years from the date of the hearing, ending on July 18, 2023; and

(d)

a report to the Provost for publication of a notice of the decision of the
Tribunal and the sanctions imposed, with the name of the student withheld.

9

24.

The Tribunal considered the factors and principles relevant to sanction as set out
by this Tribunal in University of Toronto and Mr. C. (Case No. 1976/77-3, November
5, 1976).

(a)

The character of the Student: the Student did not attend the hearing. The
Student made no effort to respond to the multiple outreach efforts of the
University. The Tribunal has no information about the Student’s character
other than what is revealed by the nature of the offence.

(b)

The likelihood of repetition of the offence: some months after admitting to
the Dean’s Designate that he had plagiarized an assignment, the Student
then submitted a fake Illness Form to the University, claiming he had missed
two exams because of illness. There is nothing in the record to suggest
that the Student is remorseful or repentant. It is possible that the Student
might again resort to dishonesty to avoid his academic obligations.

(c)

The nature of the offence committed: this was a deliberate and careful
falsification. This falsified Illness Form could not have occurred by accident
or neglect. The Student first petitioned for a deferred exam due to illness
on April 19. He submitted the fake Illness Form on April 30. This suggests
something more serious than a panicked act of last-minute desperation.

(d)

Any extenuating circumstances: the Student declined to participate in this
hearing. There may have been exceptional, mitigating facts that might have
caused the Tribunal to make a more lenient order, however, without the
Student’s participation, there is no evidence of extenuating circumstances
for the Tribunal to consider.

(e)

The detriment to the University caused by the misconduct: the University
works hard to accommodate students who require deferrals for medical
reasons. Ms. Biason estimated her office reviewed about 1,000 petitions

10

last semester alone.

Falsified medical documentation undermines the

University’s system of accommodation, and overburdens the staff charged
with reviewing student petitions.

(f)

The need for general deterrence: this is a significant concern. The volume
of petitions received by the University is high, and forgery can be difficult to
detect.

25.

Although the Tribunal is not bound by previous cases of this Tribunal, and while
each case must be decided on its own facts, it is useful for like cases to be treated
alike so that all parties can come to hearings with a reasonable expectation of what
kind of penalty they can expect based upon the findings. The Tribunal reviewed six
cases involving falsified medical notes and petition documents.

In all cases,

students received a grade of zero for the affected courses, as a direct and
appropriate consequence of the misconduct. In all cases, students received a term
of suspension. This ranged from two years to five, depending on the severity of the
misconduct and whether there were prior offences.

26.

A two-year suspension is, as a general rule, the threshold sanction for an act of
deliberate dishonesty such as plagiarism or falsified medical documents. In light of
the Student’s prior, admitted act of plagiarism, and in the absence of any mitigating
evidence the Student might have otherwise provided, the Tribunal found that the
sanctions requested by the University were fair, proportional and appropriate.

The Tribunal’s Order

27.

The Tribunal made an order as follows.

1.

THAT the hearing may proceed in the absence of the Student;

2.

THAT the Affidavit of Natalia Bothelo, sworn on July 15, 2019, may be

11

introduced as evidence at the hearing;
3.

THAT the Student is guilty of one count of knowingly forging, altering, or

falsifying, a document or evidence required by the University, or uttering,
circulating, or making use of any such forged, altered, or falsified document,
contrary to section B.i.1(a) of the Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters;
4.

THAT the following sanctions shall be imposed on the Student:
(a)

a final grade of zero in the courses GGRA03H3 and EESA06H3;

(b)

a suspension from the University of Toronto for three years from the
date of this Order, ending on July 18, 2022; and

(c)

a notation of this sanction on his academic record and transcript
until four years from the date of this Order, ending on July 18, 2023;

5.

THAT this case shall be reported to the Provost for publication of a notice

of the decision of the Tribunal and the sanctions imposed, with the name of the
student withheld.

12

