Report 279

DATE:

   May 6, 2003

PARTIES:

   Mr. M.T. (the Appellant) v. the Faculty of Arts and Sciences

Hearing Date(s):

   April 7, 2003

Committee Members:

   Assistant Dean Bonnie Goldberg, Chair
   Professor Sherwin Desser
   Professor Luigi Girolametto
   Professor Gretchen Kerr
   Mr. Chris Ramsaroop

Judicial Affairs Officer:

   Mr. Paul Holmes

In Attendance:

   Mr. M.T., the Appellant
   Professor William Michelson, formerly Associate Dean, Social Sciences,
   Faculty of Arts and Science, University of Toronto

   Request for late withdrawal without academic penalty from one course.
   The Student failed the course. The Student undertook the appeal twelve
   years after receiving the failing grade. The Student claimed that his
   performance in the course was negatively affected by illness. The
   Student claimed that, given his subsequent academic achievement, the
   course grade could unfairly restrict his opportunity to pursue an
   academic career or further academic study. The Student requested that
   the Committee not require proof that his future career prospects could
   be negatively impacted by his failure in the course. The Committee
   found that only partial information about the Studentâs performance in
   the course was available for review and thus it was not possible to
   accumulate sufficient documentary evidence as to how the Studentâs
   performance in the course was affected by illness. The Committee found
   that the medical evidence presented as to the severity, nature, and
   impact of the Studentâs illness was insufficient and that the medical
   documentation was not created at the time the petition was made. The
   Committee found that the Student had sought late withdrawal from other
   courses during the relevant period, and was thus familiar with the
   Universityâs procedures and could have addressed the impact of his
   illness on his academic performance at that time. The Committee
   observed that the Student was seeking relief for a perceived
   detrimental effect that could not be proved or disproved, but would, if
   granted, set a precedent of removing grades from transcripts, well past
   deadlines, well past reasonable time frames, and without sufficient
   supporting documentation. A minority of the Committee found that the
   circumstances of the Studentâs medical condition prevented him from
   seeking assistance at the time the problems occurred and that the
   medical documentation, with the Studentâs oral evidence, substantiated
   his claim of illness. Appeal dismissed.
   [1]View Report

References

   1. file:///media/12550
