UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
GOVERNING COUNCIL
REPORT NUMBER 279 OF THE ACADEMIC APPEALS COMMITTEE
Your Committee reports that it held a hearing on Monday April 7, 2003, at which the
following were present:
Assistant Dean Bonnie Goldberg, Chair
Professor Sherwin Desser
Professor Luigi Girolametto
Professor Gretchen Kerr
Mr. Chris Ramsaroop
Mr. Paul Holmes, Judicial Affairs Officer
In Attendance:
Mr. M.T., the Appellant
Professor William Michelson, formerly Associate Dean, Social Sciences
Faculty of Arts and Science, University of Toronto
The student appeals from a decision of the Academic Appeals Board of the Faculty of
Arts and Science, dated November 26, 2001, denying his appeal for late withdrawal
without academic penalty from BOT210Y (the “course”) taken in the academic session
1988-1989. The student was appealing a decision of the Committee on Standing (dated
June 1, 2001) denying his request for late withdrawal without academic penalty from the
course. This was an appeal of a petition the appellant made which was also denied (dated
February 2, 2001).
The appellant began the hearing by presenting your committee with a letter from Dr W.
McIntyre Burnham, Professor of Pharmacology, and the appellant’s Ph.D. thesis
supervisor. Professor Burnham wrote that he had intended to be present at the hearing to
act as the appellant’s “informal representative”, but had been quarantined as a result of
the severe acute respiratory syndrome (“SARS”) outbreak in Toronto. This caused the
appellant to consider the issue of whether he wanted to request an adjournment. The
appellant clarified that Professor Burnham would be informally assisting him, and that
the appellant himself would be speaking to his own case. The appellant was given time,
both inside the hearing room and outside the hearing room, to consider whether he
wished to proceed without his informal representative in attendance. Your committee
took time to explain to the appellant the final nature of this appeal, and how the hearing
would proceed. Ultimately, the appellant chose to continue with the hearing.

Report Number 279 of the Academic Appeals Committee
The student seeks late withdrawal without academic penalty from BOT210Y taken in the
1988-1989 academic year. The student seeks this extraordinary remedy on medical
grounds. The appellant received a failing grade of 40% in the course.
The appellant undertook this appeal twelve years after receiving the failing grade because
he believes that the grade, caused in his opinion as a result of illness, could restrict his
opportunities in pursuing postdoctoral studies or applying to professional schools such as
law or medicine. After a poor performance in first and second year at the University of
Toronto, the appellant transferred to the University of Guelph, earning a B.Sc. with
excellent grades. Following that, he completed a M.Sc. in Pharmacology at the University
of Toronto, and is currently a Ph.D. candidate and recipient of a three-year Canadian
Institutes of Health Doctoral Research Award. He argues that a consolidated transcript
that includes a failed course may unfairly restrict his opportunity to pursue an academic
career given the extenuating circumstances that existed at the time of the failure, and his
subsequent academic achievement. He chose to re-open the matter because it is only now
that he realizes the detrimental affect a failure could have on his future. The appellant
asks that the Committee not require proof that his future career prospects could be
negatively impacted by his failure in the course, nor can he offer any proof.
The appellant relies on two pieces of medical evidence. The first is a University of
Toronto Student Medical Certificate, dated December 18th, 2000. This certificate states
that psychiatric services were provided to the appellant in November and December
1989, as a result of emotional difficulties. The Director of the Psychiatric Services, Dr
Victor Likwornik, reviewed the appellant’s files and wrote that the appellant’s emotional
difficulties were disruptive of his academic work and that he supports his request for a
reappraisal of his performance during the 1988-1989 academic year. The doctor who
treated the appellant is no longer at the Service. A letter dated December 1, 2000 from Dr
Likwornik summarizes the information in the certificate.
The appellant also submitted a letter from Professor John R. Coleman, Chair of the
Department of Botany at the University of Toronto, dated November 26, 2001,
supporting his request for late withdrawal without academic penalty. Professor Coleman
notes that although the academic records are incomplete, the appellant’s performance in
first term was a passing grade. This letter was not available at the first three
considerations of this matter.
The University takes issue with the reasons supplied by the appellant for the more than
ten-year delay in seeking relief. The University contends that the appellant is asking for
selective removal of a course from a transcript that has been circulating for over a decade.
The University argues that to selectively remove a failure, twelve years after the fact,
based on insufficient academic and medical records, would set a dangerous precedent for
the University and open up the floodgates to potential appeals and petitions. There is also
currently no ability to obtain an accurate picture of the appellant’s performance
throughout the entire course. This position is consistent with findings of previous
hearings of this matter. The Committee on Standing refused to grant the appellant relief
on selective basis for a failed course, and one with insufficient academic records. The

Page 2 of 4

Report Number 279 of the Academic Appeals Committee
Academic Appeal Board affirmed this decision and expressed optimism that the
appellant’s future career would not be detrimentally affected by his undergraduate
transcript.
At the time that the appellant was enrolled in the course, the Faculty of Arts and Science
offered students a drop date for withdrawing from the course without academic penalty.
This date was, and still is, the middle of February for a full year course. There was no
deadline in place twelve years ago limiting the time in which a student could
subsequently bring a petition for late withdrawal without academic penalty. The deadline
is now approximately six months later, or mid-November.
Even without the deadline in existence, there are compelling arguments for placing limits
on the length of time in which a student can petition to have a failure removed. First, only
partial information about the appellant’s performance in the course was available for
review. There is thus no ability to accumulate sufficient documentary evidence from the
Faculty as to the appellant’s performance in the course, and specifically how it was
affected by illness during the period in question. Second, the Faculty requires that
medical documentation supporting such petitions be created at the time that the petition is
made. The appellant is offering medical document written in December 2000 that is
based on information obtained in the fall of 1989 regarding the appellant’s medical
problems in the spring of 1989. The physician saw the appellant six months after the
course in question ended.
While your committee is sympathetic to the fact that the appellant was experiencing
problems during the 1988-1989 academic terms, the University offers ample opportunity
for students who experience unforeseen or worsening problems to withdraw from
courses, both prior to and post, its stated deadlines. In fact, the appellant had sought late
withdrawal from other courses during the 1990-1991 academic year, and was thus
familiar with the University’s procedures. Although chronic illnesses do manifest
themselves over time and one is not always able to deal with problems concurrent with
their onset, this appellant could have addressed the impact of his illness on his academic
performance during the 1988-1989 academic year or even in the subsequent year. Instead,
he chose to complete this course, and others, and did not seek treatment until the
following fall. The result is that a decade later, upon seeking a re-appraisal of his
performance, the appellant cannot obtain complete course information or detailed
medical documentation to support this claim. Ultimately, your Committee cannot satisfy
itself on the medical evidence presented as to the severity, nature, and impact of the
appellant’s illness during the winter term of 1989.
The appellant is seeking relief for a perceived detrimental effect that cannot be proven or
disproven, but would, if granted, set a precedent of removing grades from transcripts,
well past deadlines, well past reasonable time frames, and without sufficient supporting
documentation.
Our decision is not unanimous. A minority of the Committee would allow the appeal
based on compelling grounds for going outside the normal course of procedure for the

Page 3 of 4

Report Number 279 of the Academic Appeals Committee
University. The minority believes that the circumstances of the appellant’s medical
condition prevented him from seeking assistance at the time the problems occurred, and
is sympathetic to the appellant’s current concerns about being held back by a problem
that occurred twelve years ago and for which he since sought treatment. The minority is
comfortable with the medical documentation provided and the oral evidence received as
to the nature of the appellant’s illness during the time in question.
The decision of the Committee is by a majority decision, and therefore, the appeal should
be dismissed.
May 6, 2003

Paul Holmes, Secretary
Judicial Affairs Officer

Bonnie Goldberg, Chair
Assistant Dean, Faculty of Law

#26048 v4

Page 4 of 4

