Case #770

   DATE: May 19, 2015
   PARTIES: University of Toronto v D.H.
   Hearing Date(s): April 8, 2015
   Panel Members:
   Bernard Fishbein, Chair
   Bruno Magliocchetti, Faculty Member
   Alberta Tam, Student Member
   Appearances:
   Tina Lie, Assistant Discipline Counsel
   Glenroy Bastien, Counsel for the Student
   Horim Lee, the Studentâs former roommate
   The Student
   In Attendance:
   Kristi Gourlay, Manager, Office of Student Academic Integrity
   Anwar Kazimi, Assistant Secretary, Governing Council
   The Studentâs Mother
   Christopher Lang, Director, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances
   Trial Division â s. B.i.3(a) of the Code â altered academic record â
   transcript altered in employment application â ASF â admission of guilt
   - attempt to mislead University â prior offence â mitigating
   circumstances â three-year suspension; four-year transcript notation;
   case reported to Provost for publication
   The Student was charged with circulating an altered transcript contrary
   to s. B.i.3(a) of the Code . The charge related to a transcript
   submitted to an employer (CAA) that omitted two semesters.
   The matter proceeded by way of an Agreed Statement of Facts (ASF) in
   which the Student pleaded guilty to the charge. It stated that the
   Director of Career Services at Rotman Commerce, upon looking into a
   concern of a second employer, noticed that the Studentâs CAA
   application omitted two semesters of information. Â The matter was
   reported to the Office of Student Academic Integrity and the Student
   met with the Deanâs Designate were he admitted to knowingly having
   altered his transcript to conceal a grade and annotation. He made this
   admission after first denying the charge, claiming the omission had
   been in error as he was rushed. In his confession he advised that he
   was under familial stress and had learned his lesson from a prior
   academic incident. He advised the Designate that he had sent a letter
   of apology to the employer and that they responded that they
   appreciated his being forthcoming. At the time of the meeting however,
   he had not sent the letter of apology. The manager at the Office of
   Student Academic Integrity requested a copy of the letter and response
   from CAA and the Student replied with an email containing several
   documents. The Student admits that none of these were from CAA and that
   he knew them to be misleading. The Student had a prior offence
   involving an altered test resubmitted for remarking. He had admitted
   his actions and expressed remorse and received a more lenient sanction
   than usual, including an notation on his transcript for two years, and
   a warning against future misconduct. The Student sent an email to the
   Vice-Provost requesting reconsideration of the penalty imposed for the
   first offence. This request was dismissed. The Student was also removed
   from all courses in the Fall 2014 semester as he had deferred four
   exams and had not yet written them.
   The University proposed a sanction of a three-year suspension, a
   four-year transcript notation, and that the case be reported to the
   Provost for publication. The Student submitted a penalty of a two-year
   suspension and a two to three-year transcript notation. The Student
   testified on his own behalf and called a witness in addition to the
   ASF. He testified that he had come to Canada from a difficult
   background in Korea with only his mother and sister. He was under
   financial pressure and stressed by a drive for success. He was
   overwrought with guilt by the first academic offence. He had been in an
   abusive relationship, ending with his partner being prohibited from
   seeing him by way of a peace bond. Additionally, to explain why he
   omitted the semesters from his transcript, he explained that he had
   been advised at a seminar to present himself to employers in the best
   light possible and the importance of getting a foot in the door. The
   Student indicated that this was what he was trying to do in presenting
   an incomplete transcript to CAA and that he did not understand the
   request to be for an official transcript. He further testified that he
   had handwritten a letter to CAA but had procrastinated sending it. The
   Student provided evidence that he had sought medical assistance and was
   diagnosed with depression and anxiety. The Studentâs former roommate
   testified that the Studentâs mental health had deteriorated throughout
   the year and that he believed the Student regretted his actions.
   The University asserted that the Panel should look to the Code, the Mr.
   C case, and other Tribunal jurisprudence for guidance. Appendix C of
   the Code states that the recommended sanction for a second offence
   ranges from a two-year suspension to expulsion but is only guidance and
   is not binding. The University referred the Panel to the penalty
   factors from the Mr. C case, specifically the Studentâs character and
   high likelihood for repetition. The University also highlighted the
   seriousness of the offence, need for deterrence, and detriment to the
   University. The University admitted that there were some mitigating
   circumstances but that these had already been factored into the lesser
   sanction the University sought. The Panel was referred to a number of
   previous cases, though they were all first offences with no agreed
   penalty. The Student stressed his difficult circumstances and referred
   the Panel to a Supreme Court of Canada decision for the proposition of
   individual proportionality with respect to sentencing. The Student also
   referred to the Mr. C factors focusing on mitigating circumstances and
   noting that, as the conduct was not public, the Universityâs reputation
   was not sullied.
   The Panel, noting the difficulty of the decision, determined that the
   penalty would depend on the wisdom of the Tribunal to fine tune a
   sanction. The Panel found the sanctions were not hugely different and
   that the penalty sought by the University was not disproportionate
   given the Studentâs situation. The Panel found that there was no case
   it was referred to in which a two-year suspension was imposed for this
   type of offence. The Panel imposed a suspension of three years, a
   notation on his academic record for four years, and that the case be
   reported to the Provost for publication.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12939
