Case #1018

   DATE: November 26, 2019

   PARTIES: University of Toronto v. J.R.

   HEARING DATE: August 27, 2019

   Panel Members:
   Mr. R.S.M. Woods, Chair
   Dr. Ian Crandall, Faculty Member
   Ms. Madison Bruno, Student Member

   Appearances:
   Mr. Robert Centa, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland
   Rosenberg Rothstein LLP

   In Attendance:
   Ms. Krista Osbourne, Administrative Clerk and Hearing Secretary, Office
   of Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances

   Not in Attendance:
   The Student

   The Student was charged with academic misconduct under s. B.i.3(a) of
   the Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters, 1995 (the â Code â) on the
   basis that he knowingly falsified, circulated or made use of a forged
   academic record, namely, a document purporting to be a degree
   certificate from the University.

   Neither the Student nor a legal representative of the Student appeared
   at the hearing. Based on the evidence provided by the University of
   service of the charges and notice of the hearing on the Student to the
   Studentâs email and mailing addresses in the Repository of Student
   Information (ROSI), the Tribunal was satisfied that the Student had
   been given adequate notice of the hearing in compliance with the
   University Tribunal Rules of Practice and Procedure .

   The University tendered an affidavit from the Director of the
   Universityâs Office of Convocation, stating that a third party had
   submitted a confirmation of degree request to the Office in respect of
   the Student through the Universityâs Confirmation of Degree website.
   The third party submitted a copy of the diploma provided by the
   Student. The Directorâs evidence was that the University had not
   granted the Student a degree. This was corroborated by the Studentâs
   academic record which showed that while the Student had attended the
   University and completed some courses towards a degree, no degree had
   been granted. The Tribunal was satisfied based on the evidence that the
   University had discharged its burden to establish that the academic
   offence charged had been committed by the Student. While it had no
   direct evidence that the Student personally forged the degree
   certificate, the Panel stated that in the absence of any evidence to
   the contrary, it was prepared to draw the inference from the evidence
   that the Student had knowingly forged the degree certificate and
   supplied it to the third party.

   The Panel stated that there can be no question that forging and
   circulating a degree certificate is an extremely serious offence.
   Forged certificates damage the Universityâs reputation, undermine the
   trust prospective employers and other academic institutions have in the
   University and its students, and harm students who have earned their
   degrees by forcing them to compete for positions against students who
   have not earned the qualifications they claim to hold. There was no
   evidence before the Tribunal of any factor mitigating against the
   imposition of a penalty consistent with the penalties imposed by the
   Tribunal in similar cases.

   The Tribunal imposed the following sanctions: immediate suspension for
   a period of five years; recommendation of expulsion from the
   University; and publication by the Provost of a notice of the decision
   and sanctions imposed with the Studentâs name withheld.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/28803
