THE UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
IN THE MATTER OF charges of academic dishonesty made on August 26, 2014,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic
Matters, 1995,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Act, 1971, S.O. 1971, c. 56 as
amended S.O. 1978, c. 88
BETWEEN:
UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO

- and -

REASONS FOR DECISION

Hearing Date: Friday, May 15, 2015
Members of the Panel:
Mr. Paul Schabas, Lawyer, Chair
Dr. Chris Koenig-Woodyard, Department of English, Faculty Panel Member
Ms. Yusra Qazi, Student Panel Member
Appearances:
Ms. Tina Lie, Assistant Discipline Counsel, for the University of Toronto
Mr. N - ~ • the Student
Mr. ~ ~ t h e Student's Father
In Attendance:

Professor Eleanor ltwin, Dean's Designate, University of Toronto Scarborough
Ms. Natalie Ramtahal, Coordinator, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances

I.

Agreed Facts and Finding of Guilt
[1]

This matter proceeded by way of an Agreed Statement of Facts. In short, after
writing an exam on April 17, 2014, in course BIOC14, Mr.
attempted to
break into an office at UT Scarborough where he knew the exams were stored
in order to alter his exam paper. This occurred late on Saturday evening, April
19, 2014 over the Easter long weekend. He was apprehended by campus
police, and the Toronto Police Service was also called, who charged him
under the Criminal Code. Although Mr.
initially claimed he was there for
another purpose, he admitted his reason for attempting to break in to the office
when he met with the Dean's Designate on July 16, 2014.

F9I

F9I

F9I

[2]

The police charges were withdrawn on July 10, 2014. Mr.
agreed to
perform 30 hours of community service, write a letter of apology and attend
counselling.

[3]

Mr.
admitted all these facts and the Panel made a finding of guilt on the
first count that, with intent to commit an offence under section B.1.1.(a) of the
Code of Behaviour in Academic Matters, 1995, he did something for the
purpose of carrying out the intention contrary to section B.I1.2 of the Code.
The second count, under the so-called "basket clause" in section B.l.3(b) was
then withdrawn.

[4]

The sole issue remaining is the appropriate penalty. The University seeks a
recommendation of expulsion, while Mr.
urges us to order a suspension.
Important in our consideration is the fact on January 30, 2014, just weeks
before attempting the break in, Mr.
had admitted earlier academic
misconduct - also involving premeditated dishonest activity on several
occasions (described as a "sophisticated scheme" by the Panel)- and had
been ordered suspended for four years, commencing on May 1, 2014. The
delay in commencing the suspension allowed him to complete his course
work. Accordingly, when Mr.
committed the offence before us he was
already facing a lengthy suspension and was the beneficiary of an indulgence
of the Tribunal in being permitted to complete his courses, including BIOC14.

F9I

F9I

F9I

F9I

[5]

Counsel for the University directed us to the well-known and accepted
considerations for determining penalty set out by Mr. Sopinka in the ~
case (Case No. 1976/77-3; November 5, 1976), at page 12, as well as other
more recent cases in order to support the request for recommendation of
expulsion.
2

II.

The Student's Conduct and Seriousness of the Offence
[6]

Mr. ~ • s attempt to break in was organized and premeditated. He decided
earlier that day to try it, and went home to construct a break-in tool. A
surveillance video of the actual break-in showed that he had constructed a
wire rod mechanism to slip under the door and, using rope and wire, he was
able to manipulate it to unlock the door from the inside. He came to the office
with his notes and other papers to help him change his answers before the
exams were graded.

[7]

This misconduct is extremely serious. It was planned and deliberate. Although
the criminal charge was withdrawn, he admitted to the Dean's Designate that
he was attempting, in a carefully thought out way, to change his exam
answers. This is dishonest conduct that cannot be treated as an impulsive
act, and goes to the heart of the integrity of the University.

Ill.

Character of the Accused and Likelihood of Repetition

PIii

[8]

We know little about Mr.
other than his misconduct is not an isolated
event. Rather, he has now committed a series of dishonest acts directed
towards falsifying his academic record at the University. The fact that he was
already facing a suspension when he attempted the break-in, demonstrates
more than a likelihood of repetition.

[9]

Although a student here since 2010, we can glean little from his academic
record, which was filed, doing well in some courses and poorly in others. Mr.
~ made brief submissions to us, asserting he was having a "really rough
year" in 2013-2014, and had trouble controlling his impulses and was getting
help. However, he filed no evidence about this. He only produced a one
sentence letter, not even on letterhead, from someone describing herself as
having an M.Ed., dated July 4 2014, stating that Mr. ~ had seen her for
counselling on July 3, 2014, and had booked an appointment for a second
session on July 17, 2014. Mr.~ told us he got some counselling, but that it
was expensive. He said he then got a job and has been working in a medical
lab. Mr. ~ apologized to the Panel, and urged us to impose a suspension,
even a further suspen~ion, rather than recommend expulsion, because he was
"really close to graduating".

3

IV.

Mr.
father also addressed us briefly, but provided no insights into his
son's character that would assist us. He apologized on his son's behalf and
urged us to give him one more chance.

[11]

The prior misconduct is a strong aggravating factor. A lengthy suspension
order did not deter Mr.
from attempting another premeditated act of
academic dishonesty. We have been presented with no evidence of any
impulsive disorder or other mitigating factors.

PIii

General Deterrence and Denunciation
[12]

V.

PIii's

[1 0]

General deterrence and the need for the University to denounce such conduct
is an important consideration. Standing alone, Mr.
misconduct would
require a serious sanction. It challenges the integrity of the University's
evaluation process and its academic standards. His actions are not only
dishonest but can have an impact on the other students who do not cheat.
Academic institutions need to be vigilant in sending a strong message to
students that such misconduct cannot be tolerated or condoned. A very
serious sanction is warranted.

PIii's

Other Cases
[13]

Counsel for the University cited other cases that involved students breaking
and entering in order to cheat - either to gain access to exams or to falsify
records. In one, ~ (March 15, 1994), the Tribunal Appeals Board
overturned a suspension order and recommended expulsion, noting that
"students must be alerted to the fact that criminal conduct will not be
tolerated."[page 5] In that case there was no indication of previous discipline
history, as there was here. In two other cases, that appear to be linked, B and
K (June 4, 2003), students were given lengthy suspensions, but had no prior
discipline record. On the other hand, in cases such a s ~ (Case No.
450; December 10, 2009) and J9(Case No. 614; May 19, 2011), students
with prior discipline records were recommended for expulsion in cases
involving falsifying documents and plagiarism.

4

VI.

Conclusion
[14]

Fii

As counsel for the University put it, Mr.
"reoffended in a very big way".
And he did so while a suspension was pending, just weeks after his hearing in
January 2014. In our view, a further suspension is not appropriate. Mr.
is already serving a lengthy suspension, which did not deter him from
committing a further offence - one which was very serious. Adding on more
years to the four years already imposed makes no sense as any sentence that
might be appropriate would be at the high end of the range, leading to a
suspension for 8 or 9 years. In any event, the Panel is of the view, having
regard to the factors in ~ and reviewed above, that the appropriate
penalty here is to recommend expulsion. The seriousness of the offence, the
planned and deliberate manner in which it was attempted, especially following
the recent imposition of a lengthy suspension which is a serious aggravating
factor, and the lack of any mitigating factors that would explain his conduct, all
compel this conclusion.

FIi

[15]

Accordingly, we recommend to the President that he recommend to the
Governing Council that Mr.
be expelled from the University. We also
make the following order respecting Mr.

FIi

FIi:

(a) That he receive a final grade of zero in the course BIOC14;
(b) That he be suspended for 5 years, commencing at the end of his
current 4 year suspension, or until the Governing Council makes a
decision to expel him;
(c) That this sanction be recorded on Mr. ~
transcript until graduation; and,

·s academic record and

(d) That this case be reported to the Provost, with Mr. ~
•s name
withheld, for publication of a notice of the decision of the Tribunal and
the sanction imposed.

(

/(

c__

day of May, 2015

5

