Case #773

   DATE: May 21, 2015
   PARTIES: University of Toronto v N.P.
   Hearing Date(s): May, 15 2015
   Panel Members:
   Paul Schabas, Chair
   Chris Koenig-Woodyard, Faculty Member
   Yusra Qazi, Student Member
   Appearances:
   Tina Lie, Assistant Discipline Counsel
   The Student
   The Studentâs father
   In Attendance:
   Eleanor Irwin, Deanâs Designate, UTS
   Natalie Ramtahal, Coordinator, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty
   Grievances
   Trial Division â s. B.i.1(a) and s. B.ii.2 of the Code â breaking and
   entering â attempting to alter exam â ASF â admission of guiltâ prior
   offence â Mr. C factors â recommendation of expulsion; five-year
   suspension; transcript notation until graduation; case reported to
   Provost for publication
   The Matter proceeded by way of an Agreed Statement of Facts (ASF) which
   stated that the Student attempted to break into an office at UTS to
   alter an exam he had written. He was apprehended by campus police and
   the Toronto Police Service were involved and the Student was charged
   under the Criminal Code . After denying his purpose for attempting to
   break in, the Student admitted his intentions. The police charges were
   withdrawn and the Student agreed to perform community service.
   The Panel found the Student guilty of intent to commit an offence under
   s. B.i.1(a) and that he did something for the purpose carrying out that
   intention contrary to s. B.ii.2 of the Code .
   The University sought expulsion as penalty while the Student sought a
   suspension. The Student had been suspended for four years on a prior
   offence and there was a period of the delay in commencing the penalty
   (which was at the Studentâs request) which allowed him to complete the
   course. The Studentâs offence was premeditated and extremely serious
   and the little the Panel knew about the Studentâs character pointed to
   a high likelihood of repetition. The Student apologized and urged
   suspension as he was âreally close to graduatingâ and his father urged
   the Panel to give his son one more chance. The Panel also noted the
   need for general deterrence. The University cited like cases of
   breaking and entering where expulsion was the penalty and those that
   received lengthy suspensions instead of expulsion were cases with no
   prior record.
   The Panel found the fact that the Student reoffended during the grace
   period offered by the Panel for the Studentâs first offense was
   egregious.
   The Panel recommended expulsion and ordered that the Student receive a
   zero in the course, Â imposed a suspension of five years commencing at
   the end of his current four-year suspension or until the Governing
   Council makes a decision on expulsion, a notation on his academic
   record until graduation, and that the case be reported to the Provost
   for publication.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12880
