UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
Discipline Appeals Board
Members of the Panel:
Janet. E. Minor, Co-Chair
Professor John Browne, Faculty member
Ms Francoise Ko, student member
Mr. Jorge Sousa, student member
IN THE MATTER
amended;

of the University of T oronto Act, 1971,

S.O. 1971, c. 56, as

AND IN T HE MATTER of the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic
Matters, 1995;
AND IN THE MATTER of disciplinary charges against The Student
The Student, in person
Lily I. Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel, for the University
________________________________________________________________________
A Panel of t he Discipline Appeals Board was convened on June 21, 2005 to consider an
appeal brought forward by the Student.
The Student appeals from a decision of th e University Tribunal dated April 16, 2004.
The Panel accepted a plea of guilty from The Student on the following charges:
1. THAT on or about April 10, 2001, you knowi ngly forged, or in any other way
altered or falsified any docum ent or evidence required by the University, or
uttered, circulated or m ade use of any such forged, altered or falsified
document, whether the record be in pr
int or electronic form contrary to
Section B.I.1.(a) of the Code. In particular, you provi ded a forged, or in any
other way altered or falsified letter to Professor Perum alla in support of your
request to be permitted to write a make-up lab final test in PSL 374.
2. THAT on or about April 7, 2001, you knowi ngly forged, or in any other wa y
altered or falsified any docum ent or evidence required by the University, or
uttered, circulated or m ade use of a ny suc h forged, altered or falsified
document, whether the record be in pr
int o r elec tronic f orm contrar y to
Section B.I.1.(a) of the Code. In particular, you provi ded a forged, or in any
other way altered or falsified Motor Vehicle Accident Report (‘MVAR’) to
Professor Perumalla in support of your request to be permitted to write a make
up lab final test in PSL 374.

37008 v3

2

3. THAT on or about May 3, 2001, you knowi ngly forged, or in any other way
altered or falsified any docum ent or evidence required by the University, or
uttered, circulated or m ade use of a ny suc h forged, altered or falsified
document, whether the record be in pr
int o r elec tronic f orm contrar y to
Section B.I.1.(a) of the Code. In particular, you provi ded a forged, or in any
other way altered or falsified letter
purporting to be from Sergeant John
Stevenson of the York Regional Police to Professor Perum alla in support of
your request to be permitted to write a make up lab final test in PSL 374.
4. THAT on or about April 10, 2001, you knowingly engaged in any form
of
cheating, academic dishonesty or misc onduct, fraud or m isrepresentation not
otherwise described in the Code in order to o btain ac ademic credit or any
other academic advantage of any kind contrary to a. B.I.3.(b) of the Code. In
particular, you provided a forged or in any other way altered or falsified letter
to Professor Perum alla in support of your request to be perm itted to write a
make-up lab final test in PSL 374.
5. THAT on or about April 7, 2001, you know ingly engaged in any form of
cheating, academic dishonesty or misc onduct, fraud or m isrepresentation not
otherwise described in the Code in order to o btain ac ademic credit or any
other academic advantage of any ki nd contrary to s. B.I.3.(b) of the Code. In
particular, you provided a forged or in
any other way altered or falsified
MVAR to Professor Perum alla in support of your request to be per mitted to
write a make up lab final test in PSL 374.
6. THAT on or about May 3, 2001, you knowi
ngly engaged in any form of
cheating, academic dishonesty or misc onduct, fraud or m isrepresentation not
otherwise described in the Code, in order to obtain academ ic credit or any
other academic advantage of any ki nd contrary to s. B.I.3.(b) of the Code. In
particular, you provided Professor Perum alla with a forged or in any other
way altered or falsified letter purport ing to be from Sergeant John Stevenson
of the York Regional Police to Professo r Perumala in support of your request
to be permitted to write a make up lab final test in PSL 374.
7. THAT on or about March 2, 2001, you know ingly forged or in any other way
altered o r f alsified a d ocument or eviden ce r equired by the Unive rsity, o r
uttered, circulated or m ade use of a ny suc h forged, altered or falsified
document, whether the record be in pr
int o r elec tronic f orm contrar y to
Section B.1.1.(a) of the Code. In particular, you knowingly provided false
information regarding the reason for your absence from the term exam in PSL
303 on W ednesday, February 28, 2001, to Professor Milton Charlton in
support of your request, you told Prof essor Charlton the following things,
which are untrue:

37008 v3

3
a. That you sent him an e-m ail on Febr uary 27, 2001, to explain that you
would be absent from the exam;
b. That you were unable to write the exam ination on February 28, 2001,
because you attended the funeral in Detroit of your friend or cousin Chris
Petrescu, a police officer, who had been killed in the line of duty.
8. THAT on or about April 8 or 9, 2001, you knowingly forged or in any other
way altered or falsified a docum ent or evidence required by the University, or
uttered, circulated or m ade use of a ny suc h forged, altered or falsified
document, whether the record be in pr
int o r elec tronic f orm contrar y to
Section B.I.1.(a) of the Code. Specifically, you provide d a forged, or in any
other way altered or falsified, handwritten fax, which you claimed was written
by your aunt, to Professor Milton C harlton. You wrote that fax, or in any
event gave this fax, which you knew cont ained false information, to Professor
Charlton in support of your request to write a make-up test in PSL 303.
9. THAT on or about March 2, 2001, you know ingly engaged in any form of
cheating, academic dishonesty or misc onduct, fraud or m isrepresentation not
otherwise described in the Code, in order to obtain academ ic credit or any
other academ ic advantage of any kind contrary to s. B.I.3.(b) of the Code.
Specifically, you knowingly provided Prof essor Milton Charlton with false
information regarding the reason for your absence from the term exam in PSL
303 on W ednesday, February 28, 2001. In support of your request for
permission to write a make-up exam, you told Prof. Charlton the following
things which are untrue:
a. That you sent him an e-mail on February 27 to explain that you would be
absent from the exam;
b. That you were unable to write the exam ination on February 28, 2001,
because you attended the funeral in Detroit of your friend or cousin Chris
Petrescu, a police officer, who had been killed in the line of duty.
10. THAT on or about April 8 or 9, 2001, you knowingly engaged in any form of
cheating, academic dishonesty or misc onduct, fraud or m isrepresentation not
otherwise described in the Code, in order to obtain academ ic credit or any
other academ ic advantage of any kind contrary to s. B.I.3.(b) of the Code.
Specifically, you provided a forged, or in any other way altered or falsified,
handwritten fax, which you claim ed was written by your aunt, to Professor
Milton Charlton. You wrote that fax, or in any event gave this fax, which you
knew contained false infor mation, to Professor Charlton in support of your
request to write a make-up test in PSL 303.
After entering a guilty verdict, The Panel ordered

37008 v3

4
(a) That The Student receiv e a mark of “0” in each of PSL 374 and PSL 303,
and;
(b) That this case be reported to the Provost for purposes of publication.
The Panel further recommended to the Presiden t that The Student be expelled from the
University.
The Student appeals only th
e penalty portion of the decision respecting the
recommendation of expulsion. He does not cha llenge the orders with respect to the mark
of “0” for the courses or that the case
be reported to the Provost for purposes of
publication.
At the outset of the appeal, The S tudent brought a m otion for the adm ission of new
evidence before the appeal tribunal. The proposed new evidence relates to
communication between the University and
The Student and is directed towards
responding to an affidavit of Ms. Betty Ann Ca mpbell, filed at the tr ibunal hearing. The
Student explained that h e wished to subm it the evidence to s upport his position that any
difficulties experienced by the University in communicating with him were not the result
of his attempting to avoid serv ice a nd that some of the sta tements in Ms. Cam pbell’s
affidavit were erroneous. He submitted that he did not receive the affidavit until the final
Tribunal Hearing on March 31, 2004, and was able to deal with it only through crossexamination.
Provision E. 8. under the Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters provides that:
An appeal shall not be a trial de
novo, but in circum stances which is
considers to be exceptio nal, the Dis cipline Appeals Board m ay allow the
introduction of further evidence on appeal which was not available or was
not adduced at trial, in such m anner and upon such term s as the m embers
of the Board hearing the appeal may direct.
The rule do es not res trict th e adm ission of new evidence to m aterial which was not
available at trial. The evidence pro posed for consideration relates to incidents before the
Panel hearing. Nonethe less the rule permits the admission of evidence in the discretion
of the board hearing the appeal. In our vi
ew, the discretion of the board should be
exercised after taking into account whether th e evidence was available, and if so, why it
was not called, whether the evidence would ha ve been probative, and also whether its
admission would be prejudicial to the opposite party.
There were no findings by the Hearing Panel on the issue of comm unication with the
University or any conclusions that The Stude nt was attem pting to avo id service. There
was no reference in their reasons to that issue.
We do not consider the proposed evidence
either relevant or probative to our
consideration of penalty. Therefore we will not admit the proposed further evidence.

37008 v3

5

The hearing Panel accepted th e U niversity’s subm ission that a reco mmendation for
expulsion along with marks of “0” and publication were appropriate in this case.
They found The Student’s credibility doubtful, and as a result, his testim ony
unreliable. They noted that his
conduct was deliberate and extrem
ely
ad lied, forg ed docum ents, and im plicated other
reprehensible. He h
organizations. They noted that the explan ation for some of his stress ex perienced
in March would not explain his conduct in February of 2001. They observed
when The Student was initially conf ronted, he h ad adm itted wrongdoing to his
Dean, but continued to lie about another incident. The P anel also took into
account the im pact of The Student’s c onduct on the University, his relationship
with the faculty and the Panel’s view of what dif ficulties would ar ise if he wer e
permitted to return. Th e Panel concluded tha t he did no t appear to r ecognize the
impact of his behaviour on either professors or students. He had not been a model
student in past.
We have reviewed the transcrip t of th e proceedings before the Panel and heard
submissions from The Student and counsel for the University.
In the m atter of the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour appeal by Howard
Chelin, November 1976, the Appeal Panel discussed the purpose of sanctions, and
the approp riate cons iderations for d etermining them . The sanction for student
misconduct is not intended to be retributi on. It m ust contain the elem ents of
reformation, deterrence and protection
of the public. When determ
ining a
sanction, a panel should take into account the character of the person charged, the
likelihood of repetition of the offence, th e natu re of th e offence comm itted, and
extenuating circum stances surrounding th e comm ission of the offence, the
detriment to the University occasioned by the offence and the need to deter others
from committing a similar offence.
We have reviewed the decis ions su bmitted to us in which students ha ve been
expelled from the University:
University of Toronto and
University of Toronto and
University of Toronto and
University of Toronto and
University of Toronto and
University of Toronto and

37008 v3

-

, June 15, 1979
February 10, 1984
, May 8, 1992
January 27, 1997
, July 31, 1998
March 24, 2002

6
In a number of the cases the students denied that the acts wer e committed and/or
had expressed no remorse for their conduct.
We note th at in all cases the dish onesty involved the cha nging of a grade or
misrepresentation of achievem ent by m isrepresenting grades or a transcript in
order to secure advantage - the ability to rely on a higher mark or grades than had
actually been receiv ed. However, there is n o requirem ent that exp ulsion be
recommended only for this type of misconduct.
We concur with the Panel’s finding th at The Student’s conduct was extrem ely
reprehensible and can in no way be
condoned. However we note that his
dishonesty, which was directed at a
dvancing his position, stopped short of
conduct which would have perm itted him to rely on m isrepresentation of his
achievements. Rather th e dishonesty would have perm itted him to have a second
chance at w riting two tests. The m arks obtained would still have been based on
his performance. This conduct was not
consistent with the values of the
University. A dishonest c ourse of conduct, which resu lts in an advantage to a
student over his peers, is harmful to them and to the integrity of the University.
We accept that The Student was under seve re personal stress during the bulk of
the period in which the conduct occurred.
The Student pleaded guilty at the hearing and had agreed to a Statement of Fact to
be submitted. At the hearing before the Panel he indicated remorse and shame for
what he had done. He s tated that he was ashamed of what he had done and noted
that at the tim e it was not his intention to hurt anyone or to harm the University.
At the hearing of the appeal, T
he St udent repeated these sen timents an d
apologized to the Univ ersity. W e accept th at the rem orse and apology are
genuine.
Taking all of these factors into account, we would stop short of imposing the most
extreme sanction – a recomm endation of expulsion. Instead, we would i mpose a
suspension of 5 years from the University.
We therefore allow The Student’s appeal and order:
(a) That The Student receive a mark of “0” in each of PSL 374 and PSL 303, and;
(b) That this case be reported to the Provost for the purposes of publication;
(c) That The Student be suspended from
commencing on April 16, 2004, the date
rendered its decision to the Student.
August 21, 2006

37008 v3

the University for five years
on w hich the University T ribunal

