Case 513 - Appeal

DATE:

   August 21, 2006

PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v. The Student

Hearing Date(s):

   June 21, 2005

Panel Members:

   Janet. E. Minor, Co-Chair
   Professor John Browne, Faculty member
   Ms Francoise Ko, student member
   Mr. Jorge Sousa, student member

Appearances:

   Ms. Lily Harmer, Assistant Discipline Counsel, for the University
   The Student, in person
   Appeal by the Student from a Tribunal decision in which the Student was
   found guilty of ten offences related to allegations that the Student
   submitted forged documents and provided false information in order to
   gain permission to write a final test and a term exam in two separate
   courses, contrary to s. B.i.1(a) and s. B.i.3(b) of the Code. The
   Student appealed the penalty potion of the decision respecting the
   recommendation of expulsion. The Student brought a motion for the
   admission of new evidence related to communication between the
   University and the Student directed towards responding to an affidavit
   filed at the Tribunal hearing. The Board considered Provision E.8 under
   the Code and the findings by the Hearing Panel and found that the
   proposed evidence was not relevant or probative to its consideration of
   penalty and it did not admit the proposed further evidence. The Board
   considered previous Tribunal decisions in which students had been
   expelled, and found that the cases involved the changing of a grade or
   misrepresentation of achievement by misrepresenting grades or a
   transcript in order to rely on a higher mark or grades than had
   actually been received. The Board found that the Studentâs dishonesty
   stopped short of conduct which would have permitted him to rely on
   misrepresentation of his achievements, butÂ Â  rather the dishonesty
   would have permitted him to have a second chance at writing two tests
   and the marks obtained would still have been based on his performance.
   The Board found that the Student was under severe personal stress
   during most of the period in which the conduct occurred and accepted
   that his remorse and apology were genuine. The Board allowed the
   Studentâs appeal and ordered that the Student receive a mark of zero in
   the two courses; a five-year suspension, commencing on the date that
   the University Tribunal rendered its decision; and that a report be
   issued to the Provost.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12769
