THE UNIVERSITY TRIBUNAL
THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
TRIAL DIVISION

IN THE MATTER OF charges of academic dishonesty filed on April 4, 2014,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters,
1995,
AND IN THE MATTER OF the University of Toronto Act, 1971 , S.O. 1971 , c.56 as amended
S. O. 1978, C. 88

BE T WEEN :

THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
-AND-

Hearing Date: June 13, 2014
Members of the Panel:
Ms. Sana Halwani , Barrister and Solicitor, Chair
Prof. Pascal Van Lieshout, Faculty Panel Member
Ms. Saneea Tanvir, Student Panel Member
Appearances:
Mr. Robert Centa, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Barristers
Prof. Eleanor Irwin, Dean 's Designate
Dr. Brett Kingsbury, Sessional Instructor for VPMA69: Chamber Music
In Attendance:
Ms. Sinead Cutt, Adm inistrative Assistant, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty Grievances
Not in Attendance :
Ms.
~

Cl Yi

f-1, the Student

I.
1.

Charges
The Trial Division of the Tribunal held a hearing on June 13, 2014 to address the following
charges brought by the University of Toronto (the "University") against

Cl YI ~ ~

(the "Student") under the Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters (the "Code"):
1) On or about August 8, 2012, you knowingly represented the ideas of another, or
the expressions of the ideas of another as your own works in an essay (the
"Essay") that you submitted in partial completion of the course requirements of
VPMA69, contrary to section B.1. 1(d) of the Code.
2) In the alternative, on or about August 8, 2012, by submitting the Essay, you
knowingly engaged in a form of cheating , academic dishonesty or misconduct,
fraud or misrepresentation not otherwise described in the Code to obtain
academic credit or other academic advantage of any kind , contrary to section
B.l.3(b) of the Code.

II.
2.

Notice to the Student of the Hearing
The Hearing was called for 9:45am and the Student did not appear at that time. The
Tribunal therefore recessed for approximately 25 minutes to allow for a late arrival by the
Student.

3.

The Panel was satisfied that the Student had been properly served, had received notice of
the hearing, and that it had the j urisdiction to proceed without the Student in attendance
for the following reasons:
a. the University has a clear policy on official correspondence that places the onus
on students to maintain and advise the University on the University information
system (ROSI) of a current and valid postal address, as well as email address;
b. the charges and notices of hearing were emailed to the Student at the email
address listed on ROS I; and
c. Prof. Irwin, the Dean's Designate, testified that her office had made several
attempts to reach the Student and invite her to make an appointment to discuss
the alleged plagiarism, including a phone message left with her mother and a
1

letter sent to the Student's address on ROSI by registered mail, without receiving
any response from the Student.

Ill.

4.

Summary of Facts

The Panel heard from Dr. Kingsbury, the Sessional Instructor for VPMA69: Chamber
Music (the "Course").

5.

Dr. Kingsbury testified that the Course was a performance course that included written
assignments, including a final paper of five to six pages worth 15% of the final mark, which
had to include a research component.

6.

The syllabus for the Course produced by Dr. Kingsbury included an "Academic Integrity
Statement", which warned students that using someone else's ideas or words in papers or
assignments without appropriate acknowledgment was an academic offence. The Panel
was also told that Dr. Kingsbury gave a lecture to the students in the Course on the
difficulties of writing about music and highlighted issues of plagiarism and academic
dishonesty in that lecture.

7.

Dr. Kingsbury further testified that he graded the papers in August 2012 once they were
submitted and noticed some stylistic discrepancies in the Student's paper in the form of
some polish of prose, and some details about the music, that were not expected.
Because of these discrepancies, Dr. Kingsbury copied and pasted a sentence from the
paper into Google and discovered verbatim sources that were not cited by the Student in
her paper.

8.

The Panel was provided with a highlighted version of the Student's paper that showed that
almost the entirety of the paper (at least 80%) was stitched together from internet sources.
The text taken from these sources was verbatim or near verbatim but was not marked by
quotation marks, and many of these sources were not cited in the paper.

9.

On August 31, 2012, Dr. Kingsbury emailed the Student to ask her to come in for a
meeting to discuss her paper.

He did not hear back from her for some time and so

submitted a report on the suspected plagiarism to the Chair of the Music Department.

As

is set out above, the Dean's Designate made numerous attempts to schedule a meeting
with the Student to discuss the alleged offence, but the Student never responded. The
matter has therefore come before the Panel.
2

IV.

10.

Finding on Charges

Following deliberation and based on the testimony of Dr. Kingsbury and the facts in the
Book of Documents, the Panel concluded that charge 1 had been proven.

Given that

finding of guilt the University withdrew charge 2.

V.

11.

Penalty

Counsel for the University submitted that a final grade of zero on the Course, a
suspension of two years and a notation on the Student's transcript until graduation was an
appropriate penalty.

12.

Counsel focussed on the following characteristics of the Student's circumstances as
relevant to penalty:
a. The Student had no prior academic offences;
b. The Student had only committed one act of dishonesty; however that one act
constituted extensive plagiarism; and
c. The Student refused to attend a meeting with the Dean's designate.

13.

Counsel acknowledged that this was a relatively routine case of plagiarism and that, had
the Student attended a meeting with the Dean's designate, she would not have faced a
suspension and would likely have only received a mark of zero on the course.

14.

Counsel for the University then took the Panel to the case of The University of Toronto
and Mr. C (Case No. 741; March 20 2014), which had similar circumstances and in which
case a two-year suspension was ordered.

15.

Counsel provided submissions that - although not binding on the Panel - a suspension of
two years was "normal" for a first offence, unless mitigating or aggravating factors were
present.

16.

Counsel for the University also took the Panel to the case of The University of Toronto and
Mr. S, (Case No. 697; August 8, 2013), in which a three year suspension was ordered in
the case of a student's first offence because of aggravating circumstances, namely
misconduct during the hearing and intent to mislead the Tribunal. Counsel contrasted Mr.

3

S. to th is case in which no aggravating circumstances existed beyond the Student's lack
of attendance.
17.

The Panel therefore saw fit to impose a suspension of two years as sought by the
University.

VI.

18.

Decision of the Panel

At the conclusion of the hearing, the Panel conferred and made the following order:
a. the hearing may proceed in the absence of the Student;
b. the Student is found guilty of one count of the academic offence of plagiarism ,
contrary to section B.1. 1(d) of the Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters;
c. the following sanctions shall be imposed on the Student:
i. she shall receive a final grade of zero in VPMA69;
ii. she shall be suspended from the University for a period of two years, from
June 13, 2014 until June 13, 2016; and
iii. a notation shal l be placed on her academic record and transcript until the
day she graduates from the University of Toronto;
iv. this case shall be reported to the Provost for publication of a notice of the
decision of the Tribunal and the sanctions imposed, with the name of the
student withheld.
DATED at Toronto, July~

2014

'
Sana Halwani, Co-Chair

4

