Case #759

   DATE: July 30, 2014
   PARTIES: University of Toronto v D.H.
   Hearing Date(s): June 13, 2014
   Panel Members:
   Sana Halwani, Chair
   Pascal Van Lieshout, Faculty Member
   Saneea Tanvir, Student Member
   Appearances:
   Robert Centa, Assistant Discipline Counsel
   Eleanor Irwin, Deanâs Designate
   Brett Kingsbury, Course Instructor
   In Attendance:
   Sinead Cutt, Administrative Assistant, Appeals, Discipline and Faculty
   Grievances
   Not in Attendance:
   The Student
   Trial Division â Student not at hearing â s. B.i.1(d) of the Code â
   plagiarism â uncited material in paper â Student does not respond to
   messages â Â finding of guilt â grade of zero in the course; two-year
   suspension; academic record notation until graduation; report to
   Provost for publication
   The Student did not attend the hearing and the Panel addressed whether
   to proceed in the Studentsâ absence. The Panel was satisfied that the
   Student had reasonable notice of the hearing and had been served, by
   letter, email, and phone message left with the Studentâs mother in
   accordance with the Rules of Practice and Procedure of the University
   Tribunal. The matter proceeded in the Studentâs absence.
   The Student was charged with knowingly representing anotherâs ideas as
   her own contrary to s. B.i.1(d) , Â and Â in the alternative, academic
   misconduct not otherwise described in the Code contrary to s. B.i.3(b)
   of the Code . The charges related to a research paper which the Student
   submitted per course requirements.
   The course instructor testified that he had included an Academic
   Integrity Statement in the course syllabus as well as a lecture
   highlighting the issues of plagiarism. He testified that while marking
   the Studentâs paper he became suspicious based on some of the material
   and conducted a google search finding that approximately 80% of the
   paper was plagiarized from various internet sources and was uncited.
   The instructor and Deanâs Designate tried unsuccessfully to make
   contact with the Student to discuss the allegations. The Panel found
   the Student guilty on the first charge and the University withdrew the
   alternative charge.
   The University sought a grade of zero in the course, a suspension of
   two years, and a notation on the Studentâs transcript until graduation
   as penalty. The relevant characteristics to the University submission
   were the Studentâs clean academic history, one act of extensive
   dishonesty, and the Studentâs refusal to meet with the Deanâs
   Designate. The University acknowledged that if the Student had met with
   the Deanâs Designate she would not have faced a suspension. The
   University brought like cases describing that a suspension of two years
   was normal for a first offence absent mitigating circumstances.
   The Panel imposed a grade of zero in the course, a suspension of two
   years, a notation on the Studentâs transcript until graduation, and
   ordered that the case be reported to the Provost for publication.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/12855
