Case 1462

FILE:

   Case # 1462 (2022-2023)

DATE:

   April 15, 2023

PARTIES:

   University of Toronto v. N.K. (âthe Studentâ)

HEARING DATE(S):

   February 1, 2023, via Zoom

PANEL MEMBERS:

   Ira Parghi, Chair

   Professor Glen Jones, Faculty Panel Member

   Matthaeus Ware, Student Panel Member

APPEARANCES:

   Tina Lie, Assistant Discipline Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg
   Rothstein LLP

   Lauren Rainsford, Co-Counsel, Paliare Roland Rosenberg Rothstein LLP

HEARING SECRETARY:

   Nusaiba Khan, Quasi-Judicial Administrative Assistant, Office of
   Appeals, Discipline and Faculty of Grievances

   The Student was charged under s. B.i.1(a) of the Code. The charge
   pertained to allegations that the Student knowingly forged an academic
   record, specifically a degree certificate from the University of
   Toronto for an Honours Bachelor of Science and made use of the
   falsified record by providing it to Hire Right, a background screening
   company. Following the 2013 Fall term, the Student completed an
   academic suspension for a low GPA, after which the Student did not
   return to the University. At the time of submission, the Student had
   not graduated from the University of Toronto.Â  The Student did not
   attend the hearing and was not represented by counsel. The Student and
   the Provost of the University submitted a Joint Book of Documents. In
   the Agreed Statement of Facts, the Student acknowledged receipt of the
   notice of electronic hearing and admitted that she had submitted the
   degree certificate to Hire Right and she had not graduated from the
   University. The Student admitted that the degree was forged and that
   she knowingly made use of the falsified record. The Student did not
   wish to participate in the Tribunal proceeding and requested that the
   University continue in her absence. The Panel accepted the Studentâs
   guilty plea to the charge under s. B.i.1(a) upon reviewing the Agreed
   Statement of Facts and attached documents. As part of the Joint Book of
   Documents, the Provost and the Student filed a Joint Submission on
   Penalty signed by the Student.

   In determining the appropriate sanction, the Panel found that the
   nature of the offence was very serious and the detriment to the
   University occasioned by the offence was severe due to the Tribunalâs
   observance that forged certificates damage the Universityâs reputation.
   The Panel found that there was a strong need to deter others from
   committing a similar offence because the offence threatens the
   Universityâs integrity. The Panel found that there was no evidence
   about the character of the Student nor extenuating circumstances
   because she had not participated in the proceedings. The Panel found
   that though the Student had no prior offences, she had engaged in
   deliberate dishonesty by forging and using the degree
   certificate.Â Counsel for the University directed the Tribunal to
   multiple prior decisions in which students who had forged degree
   certificates were recommended for expulsion, including cases where the
   student had no prior academic offences.

   The Panel imposed the following sanctions: immediate suspension from
   the University for a period of five years from the date of the
   Tribunalâs order or until the Governing Council makes its decision on
   expulsion; a corresponding notion on the transcript; a recommendation
   that the Student be expelled; and a report to the Provost for
   publication.
   [1]View Case

References

   1. file:///media/31062
